          MS 2750/348/52 [added by hand] 
  
  
  
  
     PR/MS                                                  4th June, 1952. 
     
     Dear Mr. Rosset,
     
          Thank you for your letters of the 27th and 28th May.  I was very interested
     in your reflections on the Zodiac Books.   We ourselves have always found that
     the Trollope titles proved the most popular largely because our market, as yours,
     is fairly well saturated with Jane Austen.   I was very interested too in your
     advertising piece.
     
          With regard to your second letter, there seems to be no objection to handling
     SADO in the States.   I am not quite clear whether you would like to import bound
     copies or our actual edition.   We have plenty of sheets of this title and could
     let you have what you required, but perhaps you could let me know whether you
     would like our edition bound, flat sheets, or a special edition for yourselves
     with your own print on them.
     
          The Stendhal and the Proust are, I am afraid, in the hands of American
     publishers and we know before we start that it would be hopeless to get permission
     to import our editions.   The Hayward anthologies are however available to the 
     States and the same remarks apply to these as to SADO.   I am sending sample copies
     of all three.   If you would let me know the form in which you would like them, I
     can quote you a price.
     
          I am sending you two complete sets of Proust and the handbooks although we
     are not supposed to send these books to American, but as I presume they are for
     your personal use, I do not think the American publishers will mind.
     
                                       Yours sincerely, 
                                       
                           
                           
                                       
                                       
     Barney Rossett, Esq., 
     The Grove Press, 
     59 West 9th Street,
     New York City ll,
     N.Y.,  U.S.A.
          
          
  
  
