
ex
library
enter
543
750
Tot
THE LIBRARY
OF
THE
EGENTS
UNIVERSITY
OMNIBUS
กา กรA INพ ARTIBUS
OF
MINNESOTA
CLASS 019.57
BOOK Ar65f
thislittle
book
is sent
to
Sarah
B. Arnold
, in
the
hope
that
it
will
be
read
by
her
with
interest
. if onlyfor
the
reason
that
it
was
writer
by
loving
nephew
October,1898.
her
W.H.Amold
.



FIRST REPORT
OF A BOOK-COLLECTOR.


Bernard Quaritch,
London,
May,
1897 actatis
78
FIRST REPORT
OF A
BOOK - COLLECTOR;
Comprising:
A Brief Answer to the frequent question
"WHY FIRST EDITIONS? ”
With Some Remarks on the common supposition that
mere scarcity is a reason for collecting them ;
and
Five Egotistical Chapters of
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE
addressed to the beginner in book- collecting ; -
Followed by An Account of
BOOK- WORMS.
By
WILLIAM HARRIS ARNOLD.
NEW-YORK :
DODD, MEAD AND COMPANY.
1898.
UNIVERSITY OF
MINNESOTA
LIBRARY
Copyright, 1898, by WILLIAM HARRIS ARNOLD.
OCT 30'45 .
675 piled Goods
019,57
A+65f
ΤΟ
MY WIFE,
WHO SHARES WITH ME THE
INTEREST AND PLEASURE OF BOOK- COLLECTING,
THIS VOLUME IS
DEDICATED.
1102590

FOREWORD.
'Why first editions? " Not finding a
quite satisfactory answer in print, I have
tried to make one.
I hope the chapters of Anecdote and
Advice will aid beginners in book- collecting, and perhaps excite interest in
strangers to the pursuit.
In the Account of Book- worms is
presented, with the expert aid of Professor J. H. Comstock, some reliable
information about these tiny creatures,
of which much has been written and
but little has been known. No attempt
has been made to describe any of the
various species with such detail as
would aid in the identification of specimens. The list of references following
2 ix
X FOREWORD.
the account may be recommended to
those who wish to study the subject.
With the exception of Enid and
Nimuë, in the British Museum, the
originals of the facsimiles are in my
collection.
December, 1897.
W. H. A.
CONTENTS.
A Brief Answer to the frequent
question "Why First Editions ? "
With Some Remarks on the common supposition that mere scarcity
is a reason for collecting them •
Five Egotistical Chapters of Anecdote and Advice, addressed to the
Beginner in Book- Collecting :
I. Catalogues. The scope of a collection. Collating. Errors in cataloguing.
II. Some early finds :, Dinsmoor's
Incidental Poems. Peter Parley's
Universal History. Miscellaneous
Poems selected from the United
States Literary Gazette. Dr.
Johnson's A Journey to the
Western Islands of Scotland. . .
PAGE
19
29
49
xi
xii CONTENTS.
III. What books to begin with. Original bindings. Large-paper copies.
"Uncut" and " cut." "Perfect."
"Inlaying." " Foxing. "
IV. Bernard Quaritch. Auctions.
Auction prices. Placing bids.
Unlimited bids. Bangs's Auction-Rooms. Sotheby's. The
Crampon Sale. Mr. Bowden.
V. Autograph inscriptions. Letters.
Distinguished ownership, printing, and binding. Proofs. Manuscripts. Idylls ofthe Hearth. The
True and the False.
An Account of Book-worms
A List of Insects that are known
to infest books
62
·
75
99
• 117
·
139
ILLUSTRATIONS IN THIS BOOK.
I Bernard Quaritch
ON OR OPPOSITE PAGE
Frontispiece
Collotype portrait, by Bierstadt's process.
2 Tennyson's Morte d'Arthur, Dora
and Other Poems, 1842
Facsimile of title- page.
· · 41
3 Tennyson's The Sailor Boy, 1861 43
Facsimile of title-page.
4 Tennyson's The Last Tournament,
1871 . ·
Facsimile of title- page.
5 Tennyson's The Promise of May,
1882 . •
Facsimile of title- page.
45
47
6 Dinsmoor's Incidental Poems, 1828 51
Facsimile of title- page.
7-8 Hawthorne's Peter Parley's Universal History, 2 vols. , 1837 55-57
Facsimiles of title- pages.
xiii
xiv ILLUSTRATIONS.
ON OR
OPPOSITE PAGE
9 Miscellaneous Poems Selected from
the United States Literary Gazette, 1826 ·
Facsimile of title- page.
10 Bangs's Auction- Rooms
Collotype, by Bierstadt's process, of the
Sewall sale.
11-12 Catalogue of the Crampon
Sale
Facsimile of title- page, with Sotheby's " Conditions of Sale " on verso.
59
86
87
13 Keats's Poems, 1817 •
Facsimile of title-page, with the poet's
autograph inscription.
14 Donne's Poems, 1669
98
• • • 102
Lamb's copy. Facsimile of a page, with
notes in the handwriting of Coleridge.
15 Keats's The Cap and Bells • ·
Facsimile of a page of the original manuscript, with a stanza of the poem, and eight
lines of hitherto unpublished blank verse,
also in Keats's handwriting, that have no relation to the poem.
105
ILLUSTRATIONS. XV
ON OR OPPOSITE PAGE
16 Tennyson's Idylls of the Hearth,
1864 · 108
Facsimile of a page of a proof copy, with
corrections in the poet's handwriting.
17-18-19 Tennyson's Enid and
Nimue, 1857, The True and
the False, 1859, Idylls of the
King, 1859 .
Facsimiles of title- pages.
20 Worm-drilled leaf
Collotype facsimile, by Bierstadt's pro- cess, of part of a leaf from a copy of Froissart's Chronicles, 1525.
21 Book-worm
Collotypes, by Bierstadt's process, direct
from specimen, natural size and magnified
thirty-six diameters.
II 2
•
132
•
135

A Brief Answer to the frequent question
"WHY FIRST EDITIONS ? ”
With Some Remarks
On the common supposition that
mere scarcity is a reason for
collecting them.
3
Why first editions ? Why not tenth editions ? They're
much scarcer.
Attributed to Charles Lamb.
WHY FIRST EDITIONS?
It is obviously true that the original
manuscript of any book, in the handwriting of the author, affords to the
student what is usually the closest possible approach to the mind of the writer ;
and next in importance must be the
pages printed from type set with this
manuscript as copy. Barring proofs,
these printed pages, made into books,
are the first edition.
Sometimes, to be sure, the second,
third, or fourth edition may have been
supplied by the author with additional
matter that heightens its value beyond
even that of the first as a manifestation
of the writer's mind ; but such instances
19
20 WHY FIRST EDITIONS?
are rare. It is always true that the first
edition, incomplete as it may be, carries
with it a pristine freshness ; and even
though the text be afterward changed
by the author himself, it is, after the
manuscript and proofs, the first material
expression of his thought. The first edition of the first book of a writer is
especially interesting, as it affords a first
view of the man as an author ; and the
first editions of his subsequent writings
give the first views of his progress as an
author. The importance of the first edition is, therefore, almost always greater
than that of any other edition ; and the
importance of the second and following
editions is usually of the same kind, differing merely in degree.
Notable examples of the superior interest of first editions are found in the
three books of Keats published during
WHY FIRST EDITIONS? 21
his lifetime. No second edition of any
of the three was issued until after Keats's
death. From his letters, and from the
written reminiscences of his friends, we
know what hopes and fears were joined
to these books ; and numerous as have
been the succeeding editions, what one
of them, sumptuous though it be, would
the possessor of the three books in their
original simple form accept in exchange
for any of these that bring us so close to
the author himself?
The paper, print, and binding of first
editions, showing as they do the condition of the art of book-making of the
time, reveal many of the circumstances
that influenced the authors and the people among whom they lived. So true is
this that in the absence of any interest
in its writer the historical interest alone
saves many an early volume from de-
22 WHY FIRST EDITIONS?
struction. To realize the actual conditions of life in a past age is never easy,
and any characteristic production of that
age is an aid to the imagination ; hence
first editions of certain books, because
they are genuine expressions of their
times, carry our thoughts back to the
conditions of those times to a degree
quite impossible in the case of succeeding editions, issued long after.
In many instances reference to the
original text becomes necessary to a full
understanding of the writer's meaning ;
and as original manuscripts are very rare,
and in most cases do not exist, the importance of the first edition can scarcely
be overstated. Often, for example, the
student of Milton must turn to the first
edition of Paradise Lost to determine the
wording of a disputed line, or to elucidate the meaning of a doubtful phrase.
WHY FIRST EDITIONS? 23
It is commonly supposed that the collector's controlling motive is the desire
to possess what is scarce. Certainly if
a book of literary, artistic, or historical
value is rare then it is important to
seek and preserve it. First editions of
a writer's first productions are usually
small ; and often, from lack of early appreciation, they almost entirely disappear
before the genius or ability of the writer
is recognized. The element of scarcity
becomes therefore very important, and
helps give to many first editions their
remarkable commercial value.
Perhaps not more than twenty copies
of the first edition of Hawthorne's Fanshawe exist, and probably there are ten
times as many collectors of Hawthorne's
books who want it. As the number of
Hawthorne collectors has increased the
price has advanced, until now even an
24 WHY FIRST EDITIONS?
indifferent copy of this plain little volume, originally published at 75 cents, is
worth as many dollars. The British
Museum paid £40 for a copy in good
condition. If the first edition of The
Scarlet Letter were as scarce, there can
be no doubt that, because of its higher
literary value, it would have a much
higher commercial value than Fanshawe ;
but because it is not so uncommon as to
be rare, its commercial value is comparatively small. To the collector, however, The Scarlet Letter is as necessary as
Fanshawe.
A copy of the first folio edition of
Shakspere is regarded as an indispensable
possession of every great library, and
there are not enough to supply all ; so
that the price has advanced and advanced, until even imperfect copies are
sold for thousands of dollars.
WHY FIRST EDITIONS? 25
It is scarcity, then, combined with
literary, artistic, historical, or other important interest, that gives unusual commercial value. Not all scarce books
command high prices ; but no book
commands an unusual price unless it is
scarce. If a book is scarce and also
possesses some notable quality of interest, its commercial value advances far
beyond its original price. But if a book
has no peculiar quality but scarcity, its
commercial value is slight. It is not
sought for ; it will find no place in any
collection. It is evident, therefore, that
scarcity, as a quality by itself, does not
constitute a reason for collecting.
Scarcity, however, occasions much of
the amusement of collecting. One
must have the rare first editions of his
favorite authors as well as those more
easily obtained ; and as a large part of
4
26 WHY FIRST EDITIONS?
the fun with first editions is in gathering them, so the best of that fun is in
hunting for the rarest volumes. To get
the first edition of a book is often as
easy as getting any other edition. It is
in the hunt for the books not easy to
get that the collector's powers are tried ;
and great indeed is his joy when the
search, sometimes continued with patience and persistence for years, is rewarded by a find that fills a hitherto
almost hopeless gap.
Five Egotistical Chapters of
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE
Addressed to the Beginner
in Book- Collecting.
Books are not absolutely dead things, but doe contain a
potencie of life in them to be as active as that soule was
whose progeny they are ; nay they do preserve as in a
violl the purest efficacie and extraction of that living intellect that bred them.
Milton.
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
I.
Catalogues. The scope of a collection.
Collating. Errors in cataloguing.
To the experienced collector of books
catalogues of old-book auctions and of
old-book dealers are as absorbing as a
novel. With pencil in hand, he marks
any item that comes within the scope
of his particular interest, and afterwards,
by recollection or reference, decides
whether he wants it enough to bid for
it or order it.
Both veteran and novice find in catalogues information that is not otherwise
easily obtainable, as the descriptions and
the notes of the various items give bits
29
30 ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
of the compiler's knowledge -knowledge assimilated by years of experience.
For a small sum paid yearly auctioneers
are glad to send to any one the catalogues of sales ; and dealers' lists, with
occasional exceptions, are to be had for
the asking. Since 1887 a volume has
been issued every year under the title
of Book-Prices Current, which includes
titles, descriptions, and prices of all
books of consequence sold at important
London auctions. A rival publication
issued annually since 1895 is called Book
Sales. Beginning also with 1895 a
similar volume has been published
yearly called American Book- Prices Current, which gives a like record of the
auction sales in New York, Philadelphia, and Boston. These three records
are the fullest printed lists of auction
prices. Several of the earlier volumes
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 31
of Book-Prices Current are out of print,
and bring advanced prices ; and the
whole edition of the American book
for 1895 was sold within a few weeks
after publication.
It is just as well not to be hasty in
buying what is easily found ; take only
the choicest. On the other hand, secure
rare books even though in only average
condition. If later you find better examples it will not be difficult to dispose
of those you have, as there is always a
market for all the rarer volumes of authors whose books are sought by collectors.
The beginning collector of first editions must soon decide whether he will
include in his selection books written
only in part by any of the authors
whose writings he is collecting ; and
also whether his range shall extend to
32 ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
magazines and newspapers in which
productions of any of these authors
made their first appearance in print.
My rule is to take any book in which
first appears, in that form, any writing
by an author whose writings I am collecting, and to exclude all magazines
and newspapers except those that may
have been edited by him. Thus in the
case of Hawthorne I omit the magazines in which some of his stories first
appeared, but secure those numbers of
The American Magazine that were published during the seven months when
he was the unwilling editor of that
periodical.
There are generally many books
written by persons related so closely in
one way or another to an author that
they are quite properly added to a collection of his writings. Thus The
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 33
Poems of Maria Lowell, edited and privately printed by James Russell Lowell,
is an interesting book for the Lowell
collector, though unfortunately so few
copies remain that an opportunity seldom occurs to obtain one. Likewise
the owner of the first editions of the
writings of Samuel Johnson would regard a copy of the first edition of
Boswell's Life of the autocratic Doctor
as an indispensable acquisition.
Collate each book as soon as you get
it ; or, if practicable, do so before you
buy. To "collate " a volume is to make
such an examination as will determine its
points of agreement and disagreement
with other copies of the same book.
When collating a volume with a view
to purchase, it is sufficient to compare
the printed marks usually found at the
bottom of the first page of each sheet
5
34 ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
with the same marks in a copy of the
same book known to be complete ;
or to compare them with a list of
marks prepared for the purpose of such
comparison. These marks are called
signatures, and are made by the printer
to enable the binder to gather sheets in
their proper order. Nearly all books
except those of a few modern publishers
have these marks. They have no relation to the page numbers usually found
at the top of each leaf.
The early printers followed the custom of the scribes of the time, who
after writing on sheets of vellum or paper folded several of them into one section, just as our blank writing-paper of
to-day is folded into sections. The
number of sheets put into a section was
three or more, and each section was
called a ternion, quaternion, quinter-
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 35
nion, etc., according to the number of
sheets contained. Such an arrangement
brings the signatures in direct succession
on the leaves of the first half of each
section. Of course in a ternion there
are twelve pages, with a signature on
each of the first, third, and fifth pages.
It is obvious that the first and twelfth
pages are on one side and the second
and eleventh pages are on the other
side of the outer sheet. The separate
letters of the alphabet suffixed with the
Roman numerals j , ij , iij , iiij , etc. , were
most frequently used for signatures by
the early printers. Thus the signatures
of the first section if a ternion would be
Aj, Aij, Aiij, and of the second section
Bj, Bij , Biij . If there were more sections than the letters of the alphabet
the signatures were continued by repeating the letters twice, -AAj, AAij,
36 ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
AAiij, etc. The original method of
folding was not long continued. Larger sheets were used, and each sheet,
unless the book were a folio, was folded twice or more, making four leaves
(4to), eight leaves ( 8 vo) , twelve leaves
( 12 mo ) , or more, according to the
number of times the sheet was folded.
The sizes indicated by the terms 4to,
8vo, etc., were never uniform, because
of the variation in the sizes of the
sheets ; and in modern times the sheets
used are sometimes so large that to
make the leaves of the size originally
expressed by any one of these terms the
sheets must be folded more times than
the term indicates. In such cases the
terms are still retained, as custom applies them to the sizes regardless of the
number of leaves into which the sheet
may be folded. Thus if the sheets are
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 37
folded into sixteen leaves of the size of
the original 12 mo leaves the book is
called 12 mo. The style of signatures
was gradually changed by the substitution of the Arabic numerals 1 , 2, 3 , 4,
as suffixes. Signatures now commonly
appear only on the first pages of the
folded sheets, so that one or more leaves
come between each two signatures.
Numerals alone or letters alone are
most used; but any mark may be arbitrarily adopted for a signature, as the
fancy of the printer may suggest.
There are several bibliographies that
state the order of the signatures of the
volumes they treat of. For noteworthy
books in early English literature the
Catalogue of Original and Early Editions
of English Writers, published by the
Grolier Club, the Bibliotheca AngloPoetica, and Hazlitt's Bibliographical
38 ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
Collections and Notes are extremely useful. Lowndes's Bibliographer's Manual
covers a much wider field, but gives the
collations of only a small portion of
the books it enumerates. The books of
several of the later English writers are
described minutely in Slater's Early Editions, but there are many inaccuracies
in the incidental statements. Catalogues
of private libraries that give collations,
such as those of Huth, Corser, LockerLampson, and Gosse, are worth having.
There are several bibliographies each of
which is devoted to the productions of
a single writer or group of writers. Increased attention has been given of late
to bibliography in general, and the appreciative reception already given to the
publication of such work will doubtless be followed by the issue of much
more.
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 39
Errors are inevitable, and no list is
without them. For instance, both Dr.
Henry van Dyke's and Mr. Richard
Herne Shepherd's bibliographies of
Tennyson omit the titles of several
books of which a few copies are known
to exist. The title-pages of four of
these are reproduced on the leaves following this. So little known are these
rare Tennyson books that until 1896
none of them has ever been mentioned
in any bibliography or catalogue.
Again, in the sale catalogue of the
Foote collection of English literature,
which doubtless was made with careful
supervision, the date of issue of the first
edition of Goldsmith's Essays is given
as 1775, and the publishers as J. and J.
Rivington ; but the fact is that there
were at least three editions prior to that
of 1775 : two were issued in 1765 and
40 ANECDOTE
AND ADVICE
.
one in 1766, and all three were published by W. Griffin.
In the Boston Miscellany of Literature
and Fashion for May, 1842, appeared a
story by Lowell called " My First Client,
with Incidental Good Precepts for Incipient Attorneys. " Among the books
of Lowell recorded in Leon's Catalogue
of First Editions of American Authors is
one called My First Client, with the
statement that it was published in 1840
and that its value is $ 12.50. Stone's
First Editions of American Authors repeats
the title and date. No such book ever
existed. Some imaginative mind has
twisted the magazine story of 1842 into
the figment of a book dated two years
earlier. After such an entry it is remarkable that neither of these bibliographies of American authors mentions
Lowell's well known Fireside Travels
published in 1864.
MORTE D'ARTHUR;
DORA ;
AND OTHER IDYLS.
BY
ALFRED TENNYSON.
LONDON:
EDWARD MOXON, DOVER STREET.
MDCCCXLII.
6

THE SAILOR BOY.
BY
ALFRED TENNYSON, D.C.L.
POET LAUREATE.
Non nobis solum.
LONDON :
EMILY FAITHFULL & CO. , VICTORIA PRESS.
1861.

THE
LAST TOURNAMENT
BY ALFRED TENNYSON, D.C.L.
POET LAUREATE
STRAHAN & CO.
56, LUDGATE HILL, LONDON
1871
[All rights reserved. ]

THE
PROMISE OF MAY
LONDON : PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR : 1882

ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 49
The publication this year of Foley's
American Authors makes available a
much fuller list than that of either
Leon or Stone, but it is not a satisfactory bibliography of first editions of
American writers ; -that is still to be
made.
II.
Some early finds : Dinsmoor's Incidental Poems. Peter
Parley's Universal History. Miscellaneous Poems selected from the United States Literary Gazette. Dr.
Johnson's A Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland.
The old-book cataloguer and the oldbook salesman are often careless or
ignorant, and do not always bring to
their business the attention and judgment it deserves ; many a treasure,
therefore, goes through their hands unrecognized. Constant vigilance on the
part of the collector will occasionally
7
50 ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
be rewarded by a find that thus has
escaped their practised eyes.
At the Montgomery sale of first editions of American authors in May,
1895, was sold for $35 a copy of the
first book in which any poem of Whittier appeared. The volume is called
Incidental Poems, by Robert Dinsmoor,
the "Rustic Bard. " The Bard was a
Scotchman who lived in Whittier's native town of Haverhill, Massachusetts,
and to the volume Whittier contributed
a poem of eleven stanzas in the Scotch
dialect, which has never been reprinted.
The book is very rare ; not more than
nine or ten copies are known, and at
least two of these are imperfect. A few
weeks after the Montgomery sale I
found a copy of this book in an auction
catalogue of Charles F. Libbie & Co.,
Boston, grouped with twelve other
INCIDENTAL POEMS,
ACCOMPANIED WITH
LETTERS,
AND A FEW SELECT PIECES, MOSTLY ORIGINAL,
FOR THEIR ILLUSTRATION,
TOGETHER WITH A
PREFACE,
AND
Sketch of the Author's Life.
BY ROBERT DINSMOOR,
66 THE RUSTIC BARD. "
HAVERHILL……..A. W. THAYER, PRINTER.
1828.

ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 53
books in one lot. I bought the lot of
thirteen books for $9.75, and sold to a
dealer the twelve I did not want for
$ 10. This copy was perfect, and in
much better condition than the one sold
for $35. The drab volume had simply
been overlooked, buried as it was among
books of little interest.
In August of the same year— my
first year of book- collecting -I bought
at Burnham's, in the basement of the
Old South Church of Boston, for
$ 17.50, a copy, in the original cloth
covers, of one of the scarcest of all the
first editions of later American authors,
namely, Peter Parley's Universal History, which, as is well known, was written by Nathaniel Hawthorne. The first
issue of this two-volume book is dated
1837, and is so rare that many a Hawthorne collector has yet to see a copy.
54 ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
At the Foote sale of books of American
authors, in November, 1894, a rebound
copy sold for $35. On the same day I
found, thick with dust on the floor of a
dimly lighted aisle of the same shop,
two copies of Miscellaneous Poems selected from the United States Literary
Gazette, both in the original board
covers with paper title-labels. Fourteen
of Longfellow's poems, written while
he was a student at Bowdoin College,
are collected in this book, with verses
by Bryant, Percival, and other contributors to the columns of the Gazette, and
are the first of Longfellow's productions
to appear in a book. I paid $2.50 for
each copy, and retaining one, I soon
parted with the other for $ 20, which
was a rather low price, as a few months
later a copy of this scarce volume of
American poetry was sold by auction at
Libbie's for $35.
PETER PARLEY'S
UNIVERSAL HISTORY,
ON THE BASIS OF
GEOGRAPHY.
FOR THE USE OF FAMILIES.
ILLUSTRATED BY MAPS AND ENGRAVINGS.
VOL. I.
BOSTON:
AMERICAN STATIONERS' COMPANY.
JOHN B. RUSSELL.
1837.

PETER PARLEY'S
UNIVERSAL HISTORY,
ON THE BASIS OF
GEOGRAPHY .
FOR THE USE OF FAMILIES .
ILLUSTRATED BY MAPS AND ENGRAVINGS.
VOL. II .
BOSTON:
AMERICAN STATIONERS COMPANY.
JOHN B. RUSSELL.
1837.
8

MISCELLANEOUS POEMS
SELECTED FROM THE
United States Literary Gazette.
BOSTON :
CUMMINGS, HILLIARD AND COMPANY,
AND HARRISON GRAY.
1826.
▸
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 61
It was also in this first year that I
wrote to an English country bookseller
for a copy of the first edition of Dr.
Johnson's A Journey to the Western
Islands of Scotland, which was entered
without full description in his catalogue.
It was priced ten shillings, which is
about the usual price of an ordinary
copy. At the sale of the Young library
at Sotheby's auction rooms in London
in December, 1896, an uncut copy on
large paper which had been rebound
brought five guineas. Another rebound
copy has been priced by a London
dealer at £10. My copy happens to
be uncut, and on large paper, and, what
is more unusual, is in the original
board covers ; so that it is safe to say
I unwittingly obtained for ten shillings
a book worth more than ten times as
much.
62 ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
I could fill a book with similar anecdotes out of my own short experience -
every collector has such tales to tell.
Enough are related here to show the
beginner that, notwithstanding the increasing number of book- collectors,
there are still scarce books to be rescued, at low prices, from unappreciative hands.
III.
What books to begin with.
Original bindings. Large-paper copies. "Uncut " and
66 cut. " Perfect. " " Inlaying. " "Foxing. "
""
Start a collection of first editions with
the books of a contemporary author,
because such are usually the most easily
obtained, and knowledge and experience
are not so necessary as for the books of
earlier writers. Moreover, the mistakes
the beginner is sure to make will not
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 63
be serious if he seeks only modern
books.
My rule with the books of the later
writers is to wait indefinitely rather
than buy one from which the original
covers have been removed. With the
older books one cannot be so exacting.
Eighteenth-century books can often be
found in original covers, but most of
the books of the fifteenth, sixteenth,
and seventeenth centuries have been rebound, some of them many times over.
Whether original covers be of the
dignified heavily embossed leather which
the English printer-binders put on the
big folios they made for the little libraries of the days of the last two Henrys ;
whether they be the plain, smooth,
somber sheep of the first edition of
Milton's Paradise Lost ; whether they
be the heavy paper-boards put over the
64 ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
uncut leaves of the early copies of Boswell's Johnson ; whether they be the
marbled paper of Wordsworth's An
Evening Walk; or whether they be the
true-blue sheet that wraps the print
from Didot's types of Shelley's Adonais
-in any form whatever they are
always to be preferred.
Does not the first binding possess to
a degree the same sort of value and interest that belong to the paper and print
of the first edition ? Some collectors, in
rebinding books that have original covers, preserve the old binding within the
new. It is my preference never to attach new covers so long as the original
covers hold together. It seems to me
better to resort to a case of leather or
cloth, and preserve the book in the
state in which it made its first appearance in the world.
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 65
It is not uncommon to print a few
copies of an edition on larger sheets
than those used for the ordinary issue ;
and this has been done since the early
days of printing. First editions on large
paper are much prized by collectors,
and invariably bring higher prices than
those on paper of the common size.
Sometimes a few copies -in rare instances whole editions -are printed on
vellum ; these are valued much more
than those printed on paper.
Of the books printed before the present century comparatively few are now
in their original uncut state ; "uncut
meaning, in book parlance, not unopened edges, but untrimmed edges. If
a book is trimmed so much that the
print is cut into, it is said to have been
"bled." Many of the old binders were
reckless in cutting off margins, some9
66 ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
times merely to make one volume
match another of smaller size ; sometimes, it is said, even for the sake of the
cuttings as material for paper-making.
Many examples of this sort of vandalism are to be seen in every old- book
shop. In rebinding it is usually necessary to resew the leaves, and with a
book of which the leaves have been cut
this cannot be done so as to have the
edges present as smooth a surface as before ; therefore rather than cut down
the book never so little the best modern
binders prefer to put the leaves together
as evenly as possible and then "gild on
the rough," as the phrase goes. This is
why so many treasured volumes that
have been rebound present uneven
edges. It is a safe rule never to allow
the binder's knife to touch any valued
book, but to let it retain its early beauty,
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 67
or, if it has already been shorn, let it
be preserved from further injury.
The difference between the commercial value of an uncut copy of a book,
especially if in its original binding, and
that of a cut copy of the same book
is in some cases very remarkable. Of
course this is only when the book is
much scarcer in uncut than in cut condition. A cut copy of Shelley's Adonais
is worth from $ 50 to $ 100. An uncut
copy, that lacked the original covers,
was sold at the Frederickson sale in
New York, in May, 1897, for $ 335.
On this basis an uncut copy with the
original covers would probably bring
from $400 to $500. The incident
cited is unusual, but it is always true
that an uncut copy of a book will bring
a larger price than one that has had its
leaves cut.
68 ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
it
The term "perfect," as technically
applied to old books, does not signify a
book that preserves unchanged its original state. It may have had its covers
many times renewed ; its margins may
have been trimmed again and again ; it
may have been stained by carelessness,
or discolored by age ; its owner may
have used the margins for memoranda
or notes ; its leaves may be torn ; -yet
may still be "perfect. " The technical meaning of the term is that every
page has the original print in its entirety. If a single word, or letter, or
numeral, or even part of a border is
gone, the book is no longer "perfect. "
The reader of old-book catalogues soon
becomes familiar with many other terms
used in description. Such are " really
sound, ” “ beautifully crisp, " " exceptionally large," "tall, " "broad, " "thick,”
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 69
"exceedingly fine," "absolutely spotless, " " excessively rare, " "practically
uncut, " as well as the absurd phrase
"almost unique. " These expressions
are used with such latitude that it is
best to test all descriptions by an actual
examination of the volume itself. Many
a book described to me as in most desirable condition has been found unworthy, notwithstanding the superlative
terms applied to it.
Many books now highly prized were
neglected only a generation or two ago.
Some have stood on the shelves of the
libraries of old houses for a century or
more, with no visitors but book-worms.
Exposed to damp and worse, they have
almost rotted as they stood. No wonder
that there are now ten damaged old
books to one good copy.
The importance of giving attention
70 ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
to condition cannot be too strongly expressed. Catalogues often note some
defects, but serious blemishes may go
unmentioned. There must be close
scrutiny on the part of the collector,
because, even with the best intentions,
the cataloguer may overlook imperfections.
At one of the most important of recent auction sales a very rare volume
was offered and sold without mention
that the title-page was " inlaid. " That
is, all of the margin about the print had
been replaced ; and so well had it been
done that only an expert would have
noticed the substitution.
66 Inlaying " is the joining of a leaf to
a frame of paper by beveling with a
stiff sharp blade the edges that are to be
united, and then moistening them until
the fibers are softened ; starch paste is
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 71
then applied to the edges, which are
next put one over the other, so that
under pressure they unite, and the leaf
and the frame become almost as one.
Of course, a missing part of the margin
of a leaf may be supplied in the same
way. Whether a leaf has been subjected
to this process can generally be determined by holding it between the eyes
and a light. But if the inner margin of
a leaf has been joined the union will
often escape detection, as the new part
may be almost lost to sight by binding
the leaves so tightly that the book cannot be fully opened. When a portion
of the printed part of a page is missing
it is customary to mend the leaf and
replace the lacking print by facsimile ;
and sometimes when a whole leaf is
gone it is supplied by a facsimile on old
paper, or on paper made to look old,
72 ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
deceiving even the experienced. First
and last pages are most frequently wanting, because when the cover is worn
out they are the most exposed to injury
or loss. A worn and tender leaf that
has print on one side only may be rebacked or "laid down" by having a
sheet of the same size pasted to the
blank side to give needed strength.
When this is done carefully, with paper that resembles the original leaf,
close scrutiny is necessary to detect the
addition.
On the leaves of old books, especially
those printed during the first half of the
present century, often appear reddishbrown stains, caused by certain chemicals imperfectly used in the manufacture
of paper. As the color of these stains
resembles that of the red fox, the leaves
on which they occur are called "foxed. "
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 73
Foxing is a blemish, and when there is
much of it the book-cleaner should be
resorted to. He will bathe the leaves
first in clear water, to remove dust and
to soften the paper ; then in Javelle
water, which is made from one hundred parts of carbonate of potash, eighty
parts of chloride of lime, and one
thousand parts of water. With this second immersion the spots soon disappear.
Then follows another bath in clear water to wash out the Javelle water, which
if allowed to remain would destroy the
paper. The sheets are then laid out to
dry, and are finally put under pressure
to smooth them.
Discoloration of many sorts can be
washed out by an expert ; but in the
process the surface of the paper is affected, and the print often loses some
of its strength. Moreover, to receive
IO
74 ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
treatment the book must usually be
taken from its binding and the stitches
removed, so that the sheets may be
worked at separately. When this is
done to a book in original binding it
cannot of course be restored exactly to
its former condition ; and in any case,
though its general appearance may be
improved, it must lose some of its individuality.
The removal of book-plates can be
regarded as nothing short of sinful.
Neither the names of former owners
nor manuscript notes of any sort should
be erased. Is it fair to the book, or
to those who have used and cherished
it, to destroy these evidences of its
history ?
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 75
IV.
Bernard Quaritch. Auctions. Auction prices.
Placing bids. Unlimited bids. Bangs's Auction-Rooms.
Sotheby's. The Crampon Sale. Mr. Bowden.
Born in
Easily at the head of all the old-book
trade is Bernard Quaritch.
Prussia in 1819, he came to England
at the age of twenty-three, and for just
fifty years has been in business in London under his own name. The Quaritch catalogues, frequently issued, are
most systematic, and are kept for reference in all important old-book shops.
In Our Hundred Days in Europe Doctor Holmes describes a brief call on
Mr. Quaritch made in the summer of
1886. Among other things the appreciative doctor says : " I know the luxury of good book-catalogues, and such
76 ANECDOTE
AND ADVICE
.
are those of Mr. Quaritch. I should
like to deal with him ; for, if he wants
a handsome price for what he sells, he
knows its value, and does not offer the
refuse of old libraries ; but, on the other
hand, all that is most precious in them
is pretty sure to pass through his hands
sooner or later. " The collotype portrait
of Mr. Quaritch which is the frontispiece of the volume you are reading
was made from the original negative
taken in January, 1897, at my request,
by Messrs. Martin and Sallnow of London, specially for this book. The signature is a facsimile of the original,
which was written to accompany the
portrait.
It is generally safer to buy of a bookseller than at auction. To be sure, if
asked to do so shortly after the sale the
auctioneer will usually take back any
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 77
book that has imperfections previously
unmentioned or not fully described ; but,
as he acts for others, he cannot extend
the privilege indefinitely. The bookseller of good repute, however, guarantees the mention of all serious defects ;
and if any newly discovered faults are
found, he is, according to my experience, willing to take back the volume
at any time.
In the old-book trade, as in other
branches of business, the prices realized
at public auction, as a rule, are the basis
of the prices of private sale. Therefore
the dispersion of a valuable library at
auction is followed by a revision of
dealers' prices whenever the changes in
commercial values made evident by the
sale are considerable. The significance
of auction prices is often mentioned
and emphasized by dealers in making
78 ANECDOTE
AND ADVICE.
their quotations, when they show advances over previous sales. In America,
since the Foote sales of 1894 and 1895,
every intending purchaser of early editions of English and American books
has been reminded again and again of
the prices for which various items of
that notable collection were sold. As it
needs the competition of but two bidders to produce a most unexpected result, and as no two copies of any old
book are exactly alike in condition,
strict adherence to the precedent of
public sale is unjustifiable ; but, because
of the lack of any other easily available
standard, auction prices have been, are,
and will continue to be the common
measure of value for old books.
Bids for books to be offered at auction can be placed with an auctionagent or book-dealer, who will himself
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 79
be present, or be represented, at the sale.
For the execution of bids the ordinary
commission is ten per cent. on the
amount of the purchases. Bids may
also be left with the auctioneers, who
make no charge to the buyer for their
services. The advantage of placing bids
with an agent or a dealer is that he
will, if you desire, make an examination
of the books you want, and give you
the benefit of his knowledge and experience. The amount you name is
your limit ; an attempt will always be
made to buy for a smaller sum. In
England books are sold at auction by
the lot ; in America by the volume.
Thus in England, when a bid of £2
secures a lot of ten volumes, a payment
of £2 covers all ; in America, when a
bid of $ 10 secures a lot of ten volumes, the payment is $ 100. It is more
80 ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
fun to attend the auction yourself, and
make your own bids ; but unless you
are well acquainted with editions and
prices, and have had considerable practice in collecting, you had better depend
upon an agent or dealer.
The auction is a great source of supply for dealers in second- hand books of
all grades ; but a customer's order to
buy has preference over the dealer's
wish to purchase a book for his own
stock. That is, he will not bid against
his customer. In the Frederickson sale
was a copy of Chapman's The Whole
Works of Homer. It happens to be of
special interest, as it once belonged to
Coleridge, and has notes in his handwriting on the verso of the leaf of
dedication and on the margins of several of the pages. On the recto of the
leaf of dedication is this inscription :
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 81
"S. T. Coleridge, given by him to his
friend Miss S. Hutch'nson." Inserted
in the volume is the original letter that
Coleridge sent with it to Miss Hutchinson, in which he dilates on the beauties of Chapman's translation. Miss
Hutchinson was the sister of Wordsworth's wife, and the volume was eventually added to Wordsworth's library.
I gave Dodd, Mead & Company, of
New York, an order to buy the book
for me, naming a limit of $ 100. The
volume was sold at the auction for just
the amount of my limit ; so that, with
the usual commission added, it cost me
$110. Immediately after the sale Mr.
Livingston, who is with Dodd, Mead
& Company, told me that they would
have paid several times that amount for
the book to add it to their stock ; and
that Mr. Robert H. Dodd regarded it
II
82 ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
as the most desirable item of the whole
collection.
It seems superfluous to caution the
novice against the danger of placing an
unlimited bid ; yet I have known an old
collector to indulge in this recklessness.
In justification he may plead that he
wants the book as much as anybody
else, and is willing to pay as much for
it as anybody else. But if two bids of
this sort are made by different persons
for the same lot it needs no argument
to show the danger of the practice.
There have been several such occurences. Naturally one of the bidders
finally disregards instructions and ceases
to bid, but usually not until a price has
been reached beyond all precedent. An
unlimited bid was once sent to Bangs's
auction-rooms for a copy of the first
edition of Martin's History of Louisiana,
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 83
which when in average condition is
worth about $20. An agent who also
had an unlimited bid for the book
was present at the sale. The bidding
passed $20, and crept up and up, until
at $225 the agent gave way, and the
book was knocked down to the person
who had sent the bid to the auctioneers. The money for payment not being available, the unlucky purchaser
sent a good portion of his library to be
sold by the same auctioneers to pay for
the History of Louisiana.
Mr. Bangs often cautions intending
bidders to set a limit ; but notwithstanding this advice such instances as
the one just cited are not uncommon in
his experience. One frequent buyer at
Bangs's, who has abandoned the practice after once paying ten times the
value of a book, has now adopted this
84
ANECDOTE
AND
ADVICE
.
method : he decides how much he is
willing to pay as a maximum, then
doubles the sum for his limit.
Nearly every American collector of
books is acquainted with Bangs & Co.'s
auction-rooms, 93 Fifth Avenue, New
York, with their staff of efficient workers. Their earliest sale catalogue that
now remains is dated 1832. Mr. Bangs
believes that the business was begun a
year or two earlier, but has not been
able to determine exactly. Sales are
held almost every week-day, except in
summer, when they are discontinued
entirely for about two months.
In these rooms, at half-past three
o'clock on Thursday afternoon, November 12, 1896, while the sale of the
Sewall library was in progress, a loud
report resembling that of a bursting
bomb broke in on the monotonous
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 85
voice of the auctioneer and turned the
head of every buyer. Through a mass
of smoke could be distinguished three
men, and two cameras with their appurtenances. Two flash-light pictures
had been taken by the veteran photographer Mr. George G. Rockwood and
his assistants. A collotype from one
of the negatives follows this leaf. The
whole force of Mr. Bangs's establishment, with one exception, was present
at the moment the pictures were taken.
Mr. Fletcher H. Bangs, the proprietor,
is behind the lower counter ; the auctioneer and cataloguer, Mr. Andrew
Merwin, who has been with the house
for more than forty years, is the most
prominent figure facing the buyers ; and
on his right is the recorder of sales,
Mr. George W. Cogan. At Mr. Merwin's left is the distributor of books as
86 ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
sold, Mr. George W. Kirkpatrick, and
further to the left the assistant cataloguer and cashier, Mr. Richard Cogan,
both old-time workers in the auctionrooms. The bill-maker, Mr. Christian
Gerhart, is unfortunately out of view
behind Mr. Merwin. The absentee is
Mr. George H. Clayton, who alternates
with Mr. Merwin as auctioneer. The
buyers, seated in arm-chairs that have
seen service for many a year, are mostly
dealers who are to be found at nearly
every sale in these rooms. Behind the
buyers, and out of the range of the
cameras, are long narrow tables filled
with books in close rows, backs up,
ready for inspection.
"Here are big books, little books, books new
and books old,
All awaiting the morrow their turn to be sold."
There is nothing unusual in the scene ;


any subsequent volume, supplement appendixor plates. All the manuscripts, autographs all magazines and reviews bookin lots, andall tractsin lo or volumes, will be with sold all faults, imperfections, and errors of description. any sale The illustrated book, of lot prints or drawings, is notbeto set aside on account of any errorin the enumerationf numbers stated, or erro of description.
VIII. NO IMPERFECT BOOK will be taken back, unlessa note accompanies each book, stating its imperfections with the numberlot of and dateof the salat which same was purchased.
IX. To prevent inaccuracyin the delivery, and inconveniencein settlement the of the purchases, onnolot ay account canbe removed during the timof sale.
X. Upon failure of complying wth the abov conditions, money required and depositedin part of payment shall be forfeited; andif loss anyi sustainedin ther- selling of such lots as not are cleared or paid for, all charges on suchre- sale shlbe good madeby the defaultersat sale this.
Gentlemen who attend cannot the may sle their have Commissions faithfully executed by their humble servants,
SOTHEBY, WILKINSON& HODGE
13 Wellington Street, Strand London.
CONDITIONSOF SALE.
I. The highest bidderto be th buyer; andify dispute arise between
bidders, the lot so disputed shall be immediately put up again,
provided the Auctioneer canot decide said dispute.
II. No personto advance less than1;. above five pounds, 2s. 6d; and
onsoin proportion.
III. In the casof lots upn which thereisa reserve, the Auctioneer shall have th rightto bidon behalfo the Seller.
IV. The purchasersto givein ther names and placesof abode, to
pay down10s. in the pound, if requiredin part paymentof the
purchase- money; in defaultof which the lot or lots purchasedto be
immediately put up again andre- sold.
V. The lotsto be taken away, at the buyer's expense immediately after
the conclusionf sale; in default of which Messrs. SOTHEBY, WILKINSON& HODGE will not hold themselves responsibleif
lost, stolen damagedor otherwise destroyed but they will be leftat the sole riskof purchaser. If, at the expirationof ONE
WEEK after the conclusionof sale, booksor othe property
are not clearedor pai for, they will thenbe catalogued for immediate sl, and the expense samasif re- sold, will be addedto the amountat which books were bought. Messrs SOTHEBY,
WILKINSON& HODGE will have the optionfre- selling the lots
uncleared either by publicor private sl without any
given
notice being
to the defaulter.
VI. the All books are presumedto be perfect, unless otherwise expressed;
butif, upon collating any should prove defective th purchaser will
beat liberty to takeor reject them, provided thy are returned within ONE WEEK after the conclusionof sale, when purchase- money will be returned.
VII. The saleof any bookor booksis not beto set aside on accountof
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 87
yet in this bare room, with an average
attendance no greater than the little
group shown in the picture, there are
more books sold at auction than anywhere else in the western world.
In England, the house now familiarly
known as Sotheby's, which has been in
continuous existence for more than one
hundred and fifty years, disposes of more
valuable books by auction than any
other firm in the whole world. One of
the most important recent auctions of
early editions was held at Sotheby's in
June, 1896. On the leaf that precedes
this are facsimiles of the first two pages
of its catalogue. The recto of the leaf
is the title-page, and the verso gives the
conditions of sale.
The beginner will take a more than
passing interest in the following list of
prices realized at this auction. The
88 ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
limits of the present book do not admit of enumeration beyond the few
items mentioned on the title- page.
Browning's Pauline, 1833, with manuscript note of high interest on fly-leaf,
£145.
Byron's Poems on Various Occasions,
1807, £45.
Byron's English Bards and Scotch Reviewers, 1811 , Boswell's copy, with
his manuscript note on fly-leaf, £29.
Byron's The Waltz, 1813, £55.
Chapman's Homer, 1616, £15.
Chaucer's Works, 1542, £15 105.
Daniel's Civil Wars, 1609, with Allen
Cunningham's Poems, 1847, £11 155.
DeFoe's Robinson Crusoe, 3 volumes,
1719-20, £75.
Drayton's Poly-Olbion, 1613, damaged,
£4 125.
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 89
Drayton's Battle of Agincourt, 1627,
£ 11 55.
Drayton's Muses Elizium, 1630,
£7 155.
Gay's Fables, 1727-28, £12 10S.
Goldsmith's Vicar of Wakefield, 1766,
£65.
Goldsmith's Deserted Village ( 8vo),
1770, £25.
Gower's De Confessione Amantis, 1532,
£ 12 105.
Hallam's Poems, 1830, presentation
copy, with author's inscription, £36.
Herrick's Hesperides, 1648, £38.
James I's Dæmonologie, 1603 , and Poetical Exercises at Vacant Hours, 1591,
with a third volume of little value, together, £25.
Milton's Paradise Lost, 1667, £90.
Milton's Paradise Regained, 1671 ,
£ 11 115.
1
12
90 ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
Mirrourfor Magistrates, 1610, £5 5s.
Shakspere's Comedies, Histories, Tragedies, 1685 (the fourth folio edition) ,
£42.
Shakspere's Two Noble Kinsmen, 1634,
£955.
Shelley's Zastrozzi, 1810, £ 10 IOS.
Shelley's St. Irvyne, 1811 , £ 10 5S.
Shelley's Address to the Irish People,
1812, £42.
Shelley's Queen Mab, 1813 , withdrawn.
Shelley's Edipus Tyrannus, 1810, £ 130.
Shelley's Adonais, 1821 , £42.
Spenser's Faerie Queene, 2 vols. , 1590-
96, £85.
Spenser's Complaints, 1591 , £27.
Spenser's Colin Clouts Come Home Againe,
1595, £21 10S.
Tennyson's Poems by Two Brothers,
1827, large-paper, £22.
Tennyson's The Window, 1867, £52.
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 91
Tennyson's The Victim, 1867, £75.
Wordsworth's Grace Darling, 1838,
presentation copy with author's inscription, £32.
If the beginner is alarmed by these
prices, let him remember that such are
paid only for well known and highly
prized rarities. The world of rare
books is vast, notwithstanding their
rarity, and no collector can hope to
gather examples of all its flowers of literature. He must choose a field or two
in which to wander, and not be discouraged because some of the choicest
blossoms are beyond his reach. If his
means of attainment are limited he
should not fail to examine the stubble,
where many a hidden or neglected
flower will surely reward his search ;
and he will have more pleasure in find-
92 ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
ing such than do those who simply buy
what others have gathered.
A great deal is to be learned in conversation with the veterans of the trade,
for they have endless stores of information that are highly interesting and
valuable to the collector. The bestinformed old-book dealer of my acquaintance, with one exception, is
Alfred James Bowden, who after a long
business experience in England came to
New York in 1889. Mr. Bowden is
not only full of old-book knowledge,
but quick to scent a bargain. The
library of the Earl of Aylesford was
sold at Christie's auction-rooms in London in March, 1888 ; and among the
many valuable books then offered was a
first-folio edition of Shakspere in good
condition, although not quite complete.
The bidding was slow. It happened
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 93
with Mr. Bowden, as it happens at one
time or another to many of us, that he
was not possessed of enough available
resources to pay for so valuable a book
as a first-folio Shakspere ; yet, from
his habit of making low offers on the
chance of securing a bargain, but with
next to no expectation of such a result
in this instance, he bid £200. In a
moment the book was his -to pay for !
He was in a predicament, with little
time for action ; but he knew that the
book was worth about twice the money.
As quickly as possible the prize was
offered for £225 to a Mr. Pease, a
Quaker and a collector, payment to be
immediate. Mr. Pease had about as
keen a sense of a bargain as Mr. Bowden himself, and with foresight characteristic of the members of his sect had
the ready money ; -the sale was made.
94 ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
Thus Mr. Bowden kept his reputation
with Christie, Manson & Woods, and
with money in his pocket and an easy
conscience was better prepared for bargains.
It was also at an auction in London
that Mr. Bowden once bought a very
imperfect remnant of a first-folio Shakspere for fifteen shillings ! Not long
after he was in Zaehnsdorf's when that
notable master was preparing to bind a
first-folio Shakspere. Mr. Zaehnsdorf
remarked, "What a pity it is that a
leaf is lacking in the middle of this
book. " Mr. Bowden had that leaf, and
received £20 for it. In the remaining
leaves were seven plays complete ; these
he separated, catalogued, and offered at
£5 each. The well known Shaksperean, Mr. J. O. Halliwell-Phillipps,
ordered them all, and Mr. Bowden
9
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 95
cleared £54 5.-seven thousand per
cent. on his investment.
But it was after he left England that
Mr. Bowden made his most distinguished transaction . In December,
1890, a sale was held at the auctionrooms of Thomas Birch's Sons, Philadelphia, of many of the personal effects
of Washington and his family. One of
the items was the Bible of Martha
Washington, which, though mentioned
in the announcement of the sale, was
inadvertently omitted from the items
described in the catalogue. Because of
this omission the book had not attracted
much attention, and it was thought best
to make a reserve price of $750, so that
the neglect could not result in a sale at
an insignificant sum. That is, it would
not be sold unless some one should bid
more than $750. Mr. Bowden offered
96 ANECDOTE
AND ADVICE
.
$760, and there were no other bids.
The other dealers present laughed at
what they regarded as an absurdly high
price. Full accounts of the sale were
published in the press, and letters of inquiry poured in on the firm of which
Mr. Bowden was a member ; and when
one of the most merry of those who
had been present offered $ 1800 for the
volume, it was Mr. Bowden's turn to
laugh. The firm soon issued a catalogue in which the Bible was fully
described, with particular mention of
the autographs of its former owner, of
which there are three in the book.
The price fixed upon was $5000, and
for this sum the Bible was bought by
Mr. C. F. Gunther, the well known
collector, of Chicago.
13
"Mydear with
Giovann Ihopeyoureyes
soon be wellenoughtoread this withMea.
sure and casePoems,
BY
JOHN KEATS.
"What more felicity can fall to creature,
" Thanto enjoy delight with liberty."
Fate ofthe Butterfly -SPENSER.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR
C. & J. OLLIER, 3, WELBECK STREET,
CAVENDISH SQUARE.
1817.
TITLE-PAGE OF A COPY OF KEATS'S FIRST BOOK,
With the poet's autograph inscription.
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 99
V.
Autograph inscriptions. Letters. Distinguished
ownership, printing, and binding. Proofs. Manuscripts.
Idylls ofthe Hearth. The True and the False.
In first editions oftener than in later
issues will now and then be found
autograph notes or inscriptions of the
author. These give the volumes much
additional interest, and such books are
preferred over other copies even if their
condition is not of the best. Notwithstanding the high esteem in which the
book-lover must hold original bindings,
and the satisfaction he has in the possession of books in excellent condition,
any copy of a valued first edition, however bound, and whatever its condition,
that has actually been in the hands of
the author himself, and has been the
100 ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
vehicle to convey his thought of a
friend, or has been used by him to record post-publication changes, additions,
or memoranda, will always take precedence over any other. For when autograph annotations are joined to the
"potencie of life, " which, in Milton's words, belongs to the progeny of
souls, has not the volume an added
power to bring us close to the writer's
personality ?
The book-lover will scarcely need to
be reminded that for like reasons letters
of any author whose books he may be
collecting, especially those which refer
to the author's writings, should be acquired at every opportunity.
Collectors are particularly eager for
any book previously owned by a person
of celebrity, a circumstance which bestows a value distinct from authorship

Songs andSonets.
Thenfear not me,
Butbelieve that I fhall make
Haftier journeys, fince I take
Morewings and fpurs than he.
Ohowfeeble is man's power,
That ifgoodfortune fall,
Cannot adde another hower,
Nor a loft hour recal?
But come badchance,
And wejoynto 't our ftrength,
13
Andweteach it art and length, The anaest judiciously nied,in
Itfelfo'r us t'advance. theaquacy
ofhaste toconfirm
of aggravate
.
Whenthou fight, thoufigh'ſt nowind,
But figh'ft myfoul away,
Whenthouweepft, unkindlykind,
Mylifes blooddoth decay.
Itcannot be
That thou lov'ft me as thou fay'st,
Ifin thine mylife thou wafte,
Whichart the life ofme.
Let not thydiviningheart,
Forethink meany ill,
Deſtiny maytake thy part,
Andmaythyfears fulfil,
But think that we
Arebut lai'd afide tofleep:
-
N.M.Spite
o
is the better
for the
ahhearances
, thisCoty
mjs. rives
de annota
1. S.T. C.
for himself
,says
This
beautiful
I
herpet
Doen
pooves
by
of Tibe
"Sing
",that
all Dinner Poems are
equallymetrical/mih
Theywho one anotherkeep a lamedſor the seroithre
/misfont
Alive, ne're parted be.
(1.e.themetre necessitaty to peoperreading
he Teeme appropriate&Songs
where thewitherthink Ierfastt
thedense mustbe inferstood in ord
Jostain
the themetres
A PAGE OF LAMB'S COPY OF DONNE'S POEMS,
With notes in the handwriting of Coleridge.
ader
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 103
or contents. One of my most valued
books is a shabby little volume of
Donne's Poems with numerous annotations by Coleridge on the inside of both
covers, on the only remaining fly- leaf,
and on the margins of many of the
printed pages. There are also personal
memoranda, one of which, at the foot
of the back cover, reads :
Ishall die som, my dear Charles
Lagul! and there
thatIhadbescribbledyearbook
willnotbe vered
A facsimile of one of the most interesting pages of this volume is given on
the leaf opposite this.
Again, the chief interest of a volume
may be due to its having been printed
or bound by a noted craftsman. Some
collections consist entirely of such
books.
104 ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
The collector will not fail to recognize the superior interest of proofs, and
the supreme importance of autograph
manuscripts. It is seldom that either
proofs or manuscripts can be obtained,
but the watchful will sometimes have
unexpected opportunities. Only a few
months after I began collecting, more
than one hundred pages of original
manuscripts of Keats that were just
then offered for sale came in my way
and were secured at one fifth of their
value ; and though it is less than three
years since I began collecting, I have
obtained three sets of proofs of as many
books by Tennyson, two of which have
corrections in the poet's handwriting.
It seems to have been Tennyson's
custom to have proofs taken on both
sides of each sheet, so that the sheets
when folded and bound present the
51
The Monarch handled ber and ver
as
am
These dayschool lucroglyplues with a sigh:
Wiittobeorders
Somewhat in Sadness
but pleasa
in thea
Till this occicular couplet met his eye
main
Astounded "Cupid I dothere defyour Chain
Itwasto much,week,bathinthecouch depluky
Grew pale as death andfainted verynigh.
Oho, nonsense ex claimto now don'tdeshair
out The does not mean it really cheer up there!
mah 170mm y yo jan
ime
n y
ny
So m
or my mom por
m
poogetobuy minormining for prom no you
2009 mim drop by yunoy of
порт
1
'pamg mi ho meэро
I pjes now yr
m
my in pun
nou 'puny Sum Sumy
my
A PAGE OF THE ORIGINAL MANUSCRIPT OF KEATS'S
THE CAP AND Bells;
A stanza of the poem ; and eight lines of hitherto unpublished blank verse, also in Keats's handwriting, that have no relation to the poem.
182 NORTHERN FARMER.
VIII.
D'ya moind the waäste, my lass ? naw, naw,
not born then ;
www
tha was
Theer were a boggle in it, I often ' eerd un
mysen ;
of
Moäst loike a booter-bump, for I ' eerd un aboot an
aboot,
But I stubb'd un oop wi' the lot, an raäved an
rembled an oot.
a/
29
makil
IX.
asid
Keäper's it wur ; fo' they fun un theer a laid on ' is
face #
^
Doon i' the woild ' enemies afor I comed to the
plaäce.
Noäks or Thimbleby-toner ' ed shot un as deäd as a
naäle.
Noaks were ' ang'd for it oop at ' soize-but git ma
my yaäle.
+
both in
Fmer
tabe
butter-bump. bittam
# anemones
A PAGE OF A PROOF COPY OF TENNYSON'S
IDYLLS OF THE HEARTH,
With corrections in the poet's handwriting.
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 109
same form as a book. Thus they were
not only proofs, but a trial book. One
of the sets of proofs in my possession is
similar to four or five others, all bearing the title Idylls of the Hearth. All
have corrections in Tennyson's handwriting ; and three of the volumes, if
not all, show that they were corrected
successively, and that the corrections of
each were made in type before the next
was struck off to be sent to the author
for further revision. On the title- page
of my copy is the numeral " IV " made
with a pen, and this number probably
indicates that the set is the fourth of the
series. The title of these various trial
books, on the issue of the first edition
to the public, was changed to the well
known Enoch Arden, etc.
Another of my three sets of Tennyson proofs is not sufficiently important
IIO ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
to be described here ; but the third,
which was obtained after the present
writing was begun, is of such unusual
interest that the story of it shall close
these notes.
In the British Museum is a trial copy
of an early form of the first two idylls
of the Idylls of the King, which was
published in 1859. Its title is Enid and
Nimue; The True and the False, and its
date 1857.
Catalogue No. 135, issued and sent
to me by S. Drayton & Sons, of Exeter,
England, in July, 1896, contains this
item : "Tennyson. The True and the
False, 4 Idylls of the King, half calf,
neat, 30/-, 1859. The very rare first
issue of the Idylls of the King, not
known to most bibliographers." Upon
reading this description I cabled :
"Draytons, Exeter. Mail Tennyson's
•
ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. III
True and False, thirty shillings. Arnold, "—and had the book in a week.
Pasted to the verso of the title leaf is a
slip of paper, on which is written :
(130)
Grogtalan
e 1860
I am told by the Draytons that the
book was sold at the auction of the
library of a Dr. Evans, at Bridport,
Dorset, England, in 1892. It was
bought by a dealer, and sold by him
to the Draytons.
In this volume the second idyll re-
112 ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
tains throughout the original name
"Nimuë," afterwards changed to "Vivien " ; but its text, and that of the first
idyll, " Enid," vary materially from that
of the British Museum volume, and
there are several additional lines. The
third and fourth idylls bear the titles
"Elaine" and " Guinevere. " The pages
have the appearance of printers' proofs,
and such I believe them to be. This
opinion is confirmed by a correction in
the punctuation made with a pen by an
unknown hand, which makes it agree
with the punctuation of the Idylls of
the King, and also by a proof- reader's
mark of a reversed type.
In the second volume of Literary
Anecdotes ofthe Nineteenth Century, published in November, 1896, its co-editor,
Mr. Thomas J. Wise, gives a brief description of the Evans volume sent him
IDYLLS OF THE KING.
BY
ALFRED TENNYSON, D.C.L.,
POET LAUREATE
'Flos Regum Arthurus.'
JOSEPH OF EXETER,
LONDON :
EDWARD MOXON & CO. , DOVER STREET.
1859.

ANECDOTE AND ADVICE. 113
by me, and also describes a trial book
in the Forster Library at the South
Kensington Museum, which has the
same title as the Evans volume, and the
same table of contents ; but the word
"Nimuë" has a line drawn through it,
and the half-title, the head-lines, and
the text of the second idyll have this
word changed in the printing to "Vivien." Bound in with the Forster copy
of The True and the False are proofleaves with Tennyson's manuscript corrections of Enid and Nimuë, without
title-page, the text of which differs
slightly from that of the copy of Enid
and Nimue in the British Museum.
It is evident that the Evans copy of
The True and the False, which I obtained so easily and at so little cost, is a
link between the Enid and Nimuë of
1857 and the Forster copy of The True
15
114 ANECDOTE AND ADVICE.
and the False. As such, and because in
it the third and fourth idylls, " Elaine "
and "Guinevere, " make their earliest
known appearance in print, this volume
has great bibliographical value and
great interest for students of Tennyson.
So far as I am able to learn from considerable inquiry this book is not only
unique, but its existence was unknown
to any bibliographer or collector until
it came into my possession.
An Account of
BOOK-WORMS.
Some bookes are to bee tasted, others to bee swallowed,
and some few to bee chewed and disgested.
Bacon.
BOOK-WORMS.
Much has been written of "the bookworm," as though there were a specific
worm or insect that feeds wholly on
books. The fact is that many species
of insects whose natural food is dry organic matter, both animal and vegetable, occasionally prey on books ; but
no one of these feeds on them exclusively, or even chiefly, and they all
would have ample means of subsistence
even though books had no existence.
The leather, cloth, paper, cord, paste,
and glue of which books are made
afford these creatures acceptable food ;
and consequently books, when in their
way, are subject toto their ravages.
Nevertheless, while there is no such
117
118 BOOK-WORMS.
specific insect as "the book-worm, ” it
is true that some of the many species
of insects which sporadically feed on
books may properly be termed bookworms. One species of moth―possibly
more than one -and several species of
tiny beetles in the larval stage of their
existence bore their way into books,
leaving smooth-cut round holes which
externally look like shot- holes. Usually
the holes penetrate only part way into
a volume, but sometimes they extend
quite through from cover to cover.
It should be particularly noted that
only larvæ, and never imagos, bore round
holes into books ; and moreover that
the possession of this boring power and
the exercise of it in books class certain
species of insects as book-worms and
distinguish them as such from various
other insect species that infest books.
BOOK-WORMS. 119
As book-worm larvæ are not capable
of quick progression they must begin
life near the food that is to sustain
them. In fact, owing to the rotundity
of their bodies and the weakness of
their legs, they can scarcely walk on a
smooth flat surface. It is most probable, therefore, that the larva which
bores its way into a book has emerged
from an egg deposited by the mother
on or near that book. As soon as the
worm comes in contact with any part
of a book, whether it be a cover of
leather, cloth, or paper, or the closed
leaves, its progress is easy. With its
strong jaws it begins to eat at once,
and is soon buried in a hole of its own
making. After several months of boring the fully developed larva usually
constructs near the external surface of
the book a cocoon of soft silky matter
120 BOOK-WORMS.
mixed with substances upon which it
has been feeding, and while in it
changes to the pupal state, from which,
after a few days, the fledged insect
emerges, and leaves the book in search
of more congenial food.
I find but one record of book-boring
by a moth larva. This is under the
name Oecophora pseudospretella, which is
now placed in the genus Acompsia.
Professor Comstock states that it was
probably first an American insect, but
is now found in Europe, Australia, and
New Zealand.
The family of Scolytidae beetles supplies one species of book-borers, namely,
Hypothenemus eruditus. There are several
records of depredations by this insect.
In the larval state it closely resembles
the beetles of the family Ptinidae, or
“death-watch " beetles, to which by far
BOOK-WORMS. 121
the greater number of book-worms belong. There are authentic records of
book-boring by six species of this family, namely, Sitodrepa panicea, Ptinusfur,
Ptinus brunneus, Anobium pertinax, Anobium bibliothecarum, and Nicobium hirtum.
These species of Ptinid larvæ range
in length from one twenty-fifth to one
quarter of an inch, and individuals of
the same species vary considerably in
size, according to age. The body is
always soft and fleshy, very hairy, with
a corrugated surface, and the posterior
end is obtusely rounded without appendage. The head is hard and horny,
and is almost smooth. The color varies
in the different species from almost
white to dark brown.
Many members of the Ptinidae family have the power to make the ticking
sound which is superstitiously called
16
122 BOOK-WORMS.
"the death-watch." There is considerable difference of opinion among entomologists as to how this sound is
produced. Many say it is by striking
the mandibles together ; but quite a
different method is described by Mr.
H. Doubleday in The Entomologist, volume 3 , page 66, as the result of his
observations. HeHe says : " I can speak
positively with regard to the Anobium,
and I assure you that this little beetle
produces the loud ticking sound by
raising itself upon its legs as high as it
can, and then striking the head and
under part of the thorax against the
substance which it is standing,
generally about five or six times in rapid
succession ; and it always chooses a substance which produces the most sound.
It is evidently a call-note from one individual to another, as you very rarely
upon
BOOK-WORMS. 123
hear one rap without its being immediately answered by another. I have repeatedly kept one in a card pill-box,
and if I imitated the sound by tapping
anything with a pointed pencil, or
something of that kind, the Anobium
would instantly answer me."
Doubtless besides the species mentioned above there are many others
liable to bore into books. No exhaustive investigation of the subject has been
made, and the difficulty of setting limits
to the varieties of insects to which the
term "book-worm " may properly apply renders it improbable that the task,
if undertaken, would be successfully
accomplished. Considering the great
number of existing books that have
been punctured by book-worms, it is a
little surprising that recorded observations are so few. Unfortunately, most
124 BOOK-WORMS.
of these observations have been so slight
and so unscientific that the literature of
these creatures abounds with inaccuracies, and the descriptions of specimens
are sometimes so incomplete that it is
impossible to determine their species.
In the larval state book-worms are not
easily distinguished from one another,
or from the larvæ of the various other
insects, not book-worms, that occasionally infest books. Thus it happens that
curious errors occur.
In 1665 Robert Hooke, in his Micrographia, gives a full description of a
"small white Silver-shining Worm or
Moth," with an engraved illustration,
magnified many times, and remarks :
"This Animal probably feeds upon the
Paper and Cover of Books, and perforates in them several small round holes."
In the first edition of The Enemies of
BOOK-WORMS. 125
Books, published in 1880, Mr. Blades
quotes from this account, and says :
"Certainly R. Hooke, Fellow of the
Royal Society, drew somewhat upon
his imagination here, having apparently
evolved both engraving and description
from his inner consciousness.' This
statement is repeated without change in
the succeeding editions of the book, of
which the latest was issued in 1897.
""
But really Mr. Hooke's description
of the insect he had observed is unquestionably accurate, and the picture in his
book is a true representation of what
he saw. It was not, however, a bookworm . The error that Mr. Hooke
made is one that has been repeatedly
made by others. He mistook for a
book-worm a certain insect that he
happened to find in a book. Mr. E. A.
Butler, in Our Household Insects, has
126 BOOK-WORMS.
identified it as a fish-moth, or bristletail, (Lepisma saccharina, ) for this is
what the description and the illustration
in Micrographia portray. This little insect often gets into a book for the sake
of the glue in the binding, and it also
eats off the sizing, or enamel, of some
kinds of paper. It probably never eats
the paper itself, and it surely is not a
book-worm, for it is not a borer.
In the New York Sun of March 29,
1896, two species of book-worms, Sitodrepa panicea and Ptinus fur, are described. Specimens of these species were
found in the library of Georgetown University by Father O'Conor, the librarian,
who gives an account of them and of
other insects that infest books. The observer, however, includes in his list of
book-worm beetles three species of the
family Dermestidae, but does not connect
BOOK-WORMS. 127
an instance of book-boring with any
of them. This newspaper article, with
another from the Sun of March 22,
1896, has since been published, with
some changes, in book form, under the
title Facts about Bookworms ; and two
larvæ, described but unnamed in the
newspaper, are identified as Dermestes
lardarius. They were found in a book,
one of them near small holes in "the
inner edge of the binding. " These larvæ were removed and examined under
a microscope. Paper was placed near
them, but "they were in no humor to
do much boring, as very little was effected during their days of captivity. "
But Professor C. V. Riley, Chief of the
United States Entomological Commission, to whom these same specimens
were submitted, states in a note printed
in the appendix to Father O'Conor's
128 BOOK-WORMS.
own book that the larvæ of Dermestes
lardarius are "unable to bore galleries
through paper." And Professor Comstock says in a letter to me: "I know
of no instance of a species belonging to
this family working as a borer ; but as
they possess biting mouth-parts it is not
impossible that sometimes they assume
boring habits, but if they do so it is
very anomalous. I should be unwilling
to class Dermestes among borers without
some very well authenticated observations on the point. " Father O'Conor also
includes in his list the insect Lepisma
saccharina, which not only lacks boring
power, but, moreover, is not a beetle.
It is natural enough, on finding any
small worm-like insect in a book, to
suppose it a book-worm. An instance
that fell under my observation may be
worth relating here.
BOOK-WORMS. 129
གང་ །།
In November, 1896, a brown grub
was found alive in a book taken from
the Flushing, Long Island, Public Library, the leaves of which appeared to
have been nibbled. The little creature
was given by the finder to Mr. E. D.
North, the well known bookman, of
Charles Scribner's Sons, in New York,
who kept it in a box on his desk to
show to persons interested. Later he
gave the insect to Mr. Francis Wilson,
book-collector and actor, who put it in
his pocket. Mr. Wilson went from
Scribner's to the De Vinne Press, in
Lafayette Place, where he saw Mr.
Hopkins, who remarked that he wished
he could get a book-worm for his friend
Mr. Arnold, just then in need of one
to photograph for a book he had in
preparation. "Well, " said the genial
Wilson, "I sometimes have a worm
17
130 BOOK-WORMS.
myself," and pulled from his pocket
the Flushing grub. As soon after as
possible, magnified negatives were made,
and several successful pictures obtained.
Then, to satisfy a lingering doubt, I
took the insect to Professor William
Beutenmüller, of the New York Museum of Natural History, who, after a
momentary glance at it through a magnifying glass, pronounced it "not a
book-worm at all, but the larva of a
species of dermestid beetles."
Books frequently used are not often
subject to attack, and perhaps it is to
the credit of American readers that
there are only a few instances of the
finding of book-worms in the libraries
of the United States.
I have several leaves taken from a
copy of the seventh American edition
of Blair's Lectures on Rhetoric, published
BOOK-WORMS. 131
at New York in 1817. The volume
was given to the Redwood Library,
Newport, Rhode Island, in January,
1885, and ten years later, there being
another copy in the Library, it was sold
with other duplicate books to Bowers
& Loy, dealers in old books, of New
York. Shortly after its purchase Mr.
Loy found a tiny insect in the book,
which was supposed to be the individual that had made the perforations of
which there are two or more in every
one of the two hundred and fifty leaves
of the volume. Unfortunately, this
specimen escaped before it was submitted to expert examination, and the
obtainable descriptions of it are insufficient to identify it. This instance has
more than common interest, as it is unusual to find an American-made book
that has been the subject of attack by a
book-worm.
132 BOOK-WORMS.
The picture opposite this page shows
part of a leaf with many worm-drilled
holes. The original leaf was taken
from an imperfect copy of John Bouchier's translation of Froissart's Chronicles, printed by Richard Pynson, one
of Caxton's workmen, in 1525. The
numerous holes were probably made
by Anobium pertinax, as they are of
about the size made by that species,
which is reputed to be the most common European book-worm.
One of the best authenticated instances of the finding of book-worms
occurred at Cornell University a few
years ago. Mr. Willard Austin, assistant librarian of the University, made
the discovery, and wrote the following
description for insertion here :
"It was on the 7th of May, 1893 ,
that I took from the shelf a volume of
Duke ofLancautre and alergeriept ontheir
boles, and the crown andceptour werput
in a cofer,andconueyed to thabbey ofwelts
minster, and there kept in the treatozy . And
enery man wentto ther lodgynges, and as
bode till the dayofparliament andcounfail
thuldbe at the palais ofnerminCer.
Ofthecozonation ofkingHenry
DukeofLancastee bythe confent
ofthe realme & the maner ofthe
feaft, Cap. CC,xlv.
theyeare ofoure Lode
gobathoufande the huns
cedfourefcogeninetene,
the lad dayofSeptembe,
on a Tuesdaybegan apar
pamente at teeftmyniter,
holdenbyHenty Buke of n
Lancafter, at whichtyme there wasaffems f
lebprelates andclergy ofthe realm ofEn
gland a greatnombre,and alfoDukes, erles
andbarones,and ofeuery totone acertain,
PART OF A WORM-DRILLED LEAF.
From a copy of Froissart's Chronicles, 1525.
d

BOOK-WORMS. 133
Dante's Works which had been sent
from Florence by Mr. Willard Fiske
as a part of the Dante collection which
for some years he has been gathering.
The volume had been received by mail
a few days previously. The cover was
worn by time more than by use, and
was riddled with worm-holes.
"Down close to the hinge of the
front cover were found remains of
worms which had had ' their day, and
ceased to be,' together with the larvæ
of several that were alive. The titlepage was pierced with eight holes,
which extended through only a few
leaves. In the back hinge were found
some more remains and some live larvæ.
The holes which pierced through the
back leaves numbered twenty, and went
deeper than those in the front. Knowing the Entomological Department de-
134 BOOK-WORMS.
sired all such unusual specimens, I took
them there, together with the volume.
The cover was removed, and the volume returned to the library."
J. H. Comstock, Professor of Entomology at Cornell, says in a letter :
"Mr. Austin has given you an account
of the finding of the worms. When
found, my attention was called to them ;
and as the injury was confined chiefly
to the cover, it was removed and given
to me. At that time the cover contained many specimens of the insects.
It was placed in a tight insect- case, and
the insects allowed to develop. The
cover was left in the case a month or
so, at the end of which time a considerable number of beetles had matured
and left it. I send you by mail specimens of larvæ of Sitodrepa."
The multitude of beetles found in

A BOOK-WORM.
Natural size, and magnified thirty-six diameters.
BOOK-WORMS. 135
the latter part of May, 1897, in bags
of coriander seed from Bombay that
had been stored in a New York warehouse, and of which the local daily
press gave full descriptions at the time,
were of this species.
Collotypes of one of the Cornell
specimens, natural size and magnified
thirty-six diameters, will be found on
the leaf opposite. Pictures of bookworms engraved from drawings have
often been printed, but reproductions
by photographic process, direct from a
specimen, were published for the first
time in the larger form of this book.
Of the other insects, besides true
book-worms, that occasionally infest
books, the most destructive are termites,
commonly called white-ants, and the
stories of their devastations are almost
incredible. Books that come in their
136 BOOK-WORMS.
way are sometimes wholly consumed.
But except in tropical climates they are
little to be feared.
Several species of the family Dermestidae, in the larval state, are known to
eat the paste and glue and to nibble
the leather covers of books. The well
known buffalo-bug, or carpet-beetle, is
a member of this family, and is often
found attacking books.
The injury done by Blattidae, familiarly known as cockroaches, is well
known. They frequently eat the paste
and glue of books, and are fond of the
sizing applied by bookbinders to the
exterior surface of cloth and leather
covers.
Lepisma saccharina, already spoken of,
is an insect about one third of an inch
in length, whose body is covered with
BOOK-WORMS. 137
shiny scales similar to those of a fish ; it
is therefore called a fish-moth.
Atropos divinatoria, of the family
Psocidae, commonly called the booklouse, often gets into little used books
and eats the smaller and most easily
accessible portions of both covers and
leaves.
The larva of the moth Aglossa pinguinalis, of the family Pyralididae, injures books by spinning its webs on
them, and by occasionally gnawing the
leaves.
A mite, Cheyletus eruditus, eats the
paste and has been known to gnaw the
paper of books exposed to damp ; and
little scorpion-like creatures, the pseudoscorpions, enter after him, not to eat
any part of the book, but to capture
and devour the erudite mite.
18

A list of insects that are known to infest
books, accompanied by references to the
articles and notes in various publications
consulted in preparing the preceding account of book- worms.
BOOK-WORMS.
Order Coleoptera. Family Ptinidae.
SITODREPA PANICEA.
Comstock. Manual for the Study of Insects, p. 553.
Packard. Guide to the Study of Insects, p. 470.
Westwood. An Introduction to the Modern Classification
of Insects, vol. i, p. 270. ( As Anobium paniceum. )
Horn. Proceedings of Entomological Society of Philadelphia, vol. i, p. 29. (As Anobium paniceum. )
Schwarz. Insect Life, vol. iv, p. 403.
Schwarz. Insect Life, vol . vii, p. 396 .
Hagen. Library Journal, vol. iv, p. 251 .
Savage. Library Journal, vol. x, p. 131 .
Thomas. First Report of Noxious Insects of Illinois,
P. 122.
Shimer. American Entomologist, vol. ii, p. 322.
139
140 LIST OF INSECTS.
O'Conor. New York Sun, March 29, 1896 .
O'Conor. Facts about Bookworms, p. 57.
Butler. Our Household Insects, p. 13.
PTINUS FUR.
Packard. Guide to the Study of Insects, p. 470.
Westwood. An Introduction to the Modern Classification
of Insects, vol. i , p. 270.
Schwarz. Insect Life, vol. vii, p. 398.
Thomas. First Report of Noxious Insects of Illinois,
p. 121 .
O'Conor. New York Sun, March 29, 1896.
O'Conor. Facts about Bookworms, p. 63.
Butler. Our Household Insects, p. 15.
PTINUS BRUNNEUS.
Thomas. First Report of Noxious Insects of Illinois,
p. 122.
Shimer. American Entomologist, vol . ii , p. 322.
ANOBIUM PERTINAX.
(Anobium striatum is a synonym of this name. )
Kirby and Spence. Introduction to Entomology, vol. i,
p. 204.
Westwood. Report of the British Association for 1879,
P. 371.
Westwood. Nature, vol. xx, p. 472.
Westwood. An Introduction to the Modern Classification
of Insects, vol. i , p. 270.
Entomologist, vol. i, p. 204.
LIST OF INSECTS. 141
ANOBIUM BIBLIOTHECARUM.
Schwarz. Insect Life, vol . vii, p. 398.
NICOBIUM HIRTUM.
Schwarz. Insect Life, vol. vii, p. 398.
Order Coleoptera. Family Scolytidae.
HYPOTHENEMUS ERUDITUS.
Blades. The Enemies of Books, 1880 edition, p. 66.
(As Anobium eruditus. )
Scudder. Proceedings of Boston Society of Natural History, vol. x, p. 13 .
Westwood. Transactions of the Entomological Society
of London, vol. i , p. 34.
Blanford. Insect Life, vol . vi, p. 262.
Order Lepidoptera. Family Tineidae.
ACOMPSIA PSEUDOSPRETELLA.
Blades. Enemies of Books, 1880 edition, p. 67. (As
Oecophora pseudospretella. )
OTHER THAN BOOK-WORMS.
Order Isoptera. Family Termitidae.
TERMES, or White Ants, various species .
Comstock. Manualfor the Study of Insects, p. 95.
Hagen. Library Journal, vol. iv, p. 252.
Insect Life, vol. vi, p. 35.
142 LIST OF INSECTS.
Order Coleoptera. Family Dermestidae.
DERMESTES, and allied forms.
Garman. Science, vol . xxi, p. 158.
Hagen. Library Journal, vol . iv, p. 252 .
Encyclopædia Britannica, 9th ed. , vol . vi, p. 130.
Horne. Introduction to Bibliography, p. 310.
O'Conor. New York Sun, March 29, 1896.
O'Conor. Facts about Bookworms, pp. 15 and 63 .
Butler. Our Household Insects, p. 22.
Order Coleoptera. Family Blattidae.
COCKROACHES, various species.
Hagen. Library Journal, vol . iv, p. 252.
Riley. Insect Life, vol . i, p. 67.
Horn. Proceedings of the Entomological Society of Philadelphia, vol. i, p. 28.
Butler. Our Household Insects, p. 116.
Order Thysanura. Suborder Cinura.
Family Lepismatidae.
LEPISMA SACCHARINA.
Comstock. Manualfor the Study of Insects, p. 83 .
Garman. Science, vol . xxi, p. 158.
Hagen. Library Journal, vol. iv, p. 292.
Sharp. The Cambridge Natural History, vol . v, p. 186.
Westwood. Nature, vol. xx, p. 472.
O'Conor. New York Sun, March 29, 1896.
LIST OF INSECTS. 143
O'Conor. Facts about Bookworms, p. 31 .
Butler. Our Household Insects, p. 314.
Order Corrodentia. Family Psocidae.
ATROPOS DIVINATORIA.
Comstock. Manualfor the Study of Insects, p. 98.
Butler. Our Household Insects, p. 304.
Order Lepidoptera. Family Pyralididae.
AGLOSSA PINGUINALIS.
Kirby and Spence. Introduction to Entomology, vol. i,
p. 240.
Westwood. Report of the British Association for the
Advancement of Science for 1879, p. 371 .
Meyrick. Handbook of British Lepidoptera, p. 428.
Order Acarina. Family Tyroglyphidae.
CHEYLETUS ERUDITUS.
Kirby and Spence. Introduction to Entomology, vol . i,
p. 220 .
Westwood. Report of the British Association for the
Advancement of Science for 1879, p. 371.
Murry. Economic Entomology, p. 286.
Order Pseudoscorpiones.
Family Chernetidae.
PSEUDOSCORPIONS, various species.
Comstock. Manualfor the Study of Insects, p. 17 .
The first edition of First Report of a
Book-Collector, 85 copies, imperial 8vo,
was printed from July, 1897, to January, 1898. This second edition, 12mo,
consists of 220 copies on American
hand-made paper, printed from type
at the Marion Press, Jamaica, Queensborough, New-York, from February to
April, 1898.
FRANK E. HOPKINS.

