
KAIS.KON.HOF BIBLIOTHEK
24.017- A
ALT-
SA 31.D. 38.


24017-A

BIBLIOSOPHIA;
OR,
BOOK-WISDOM.
CONTAINING SOME ACCOUNT OF THE
PRIDE, PLEASURE, AND PRIVILEGES, OF THAT
GLORIOUS VOCATION,
BOOK-COLLECTING.
BY AN ASPIRANT.
II.
THE TWELVE LABOURS OF
AN EDITOR,
SEPARATELY P.TTED AGAINST THOSE OF
HERCULES.
LONDON :
PRINTED FOR WILLIAM MILLER, ALBEMARLESTREET.
BY W. BULMER AND CO. CLEVELAND-ROW.
1810.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE first of the two following Pieces contains a feeling Remonstrance against the prose
work, lately published by the Reverend
T. F. D. under the Title of
BIBLIOMANIA;
OR
BOOK-MADNESS.
CONTAINING SOME ACCOUNT OF
THE HISTORY, SYMPTOMS, AND CURE
OF THAT
FATAL DISEASE.

ADDRESS
FROM THE BOOK-COLLECTOR, TO THE
BOOK-READER.
Ye Pedants, burning to be known
For literary blood, and bone,
Though all your energies are shewn
In opening Authors, like dissectors ,-
Give room ! —and, gulping your disgrace,
Be taught to take the second place ;
Thefirst -I vaunt it to your face
Belongs to ... whom but Us COLLECTORS ?
Book-worms, attend !
-
I'll make it good
(What Ye by halves have understood)-
Your reading is unwholesome food,
And serves but to oppress the system :
Our TITLE-PAGE is just enough ; —
It does not starve-it does not stuff;
Presents the smooth, removes the rough,
And shews the fruits, where you have miss'd 'em.
iv THE BOOK-COLLECTOR,
Idolator of Greece, and Rome !
That div'st into the deepening tome,
In quest of Sages far from home,
Thou, seeking others, drown'st thy self:-
Collectors know a safer way ;
We skim the gulf in airy play,
And what we gather through the day,
Endangers nothing --- but the shelf.
In pity of thy weary coil,
that Spell contains
By morning dawn, and midnight oil,
I'll school thee how to cheat the toil,-
Blabbing the secrets of our Doing : -
FOUR RULES, AND FOUR !
The mystery of our learned gains , —
The wealth, discumbered of the pains ;
Perpend the charmed words ensuing :
-
FIRST MAXIM.
-
Who slaves the monkish Folio through,
With lore, or science, in his view, -
Him ... Visions black, or Devils blue,
Shall haunt at his expiring taper : -
Yet, ' tis a weakness of the Wise,
To chuse the volume by the size,
And riot in the pond'rons prize,
Dear Copies ---
---
"printed on LARGE PAPER ! "
TO THE BOOK-READER.
SECOND MAXIM.
Who, with fantastic pruning- hook,
Dresses the borders of his book,
Merely to ornament its look -
Amongst Philosophers a fop is :
What if, perchance, he thence discover
Facilities in turning over ?
The Virtuoso is a Lover
Of coyer charms in " UNCUT COPIES."
THIRD MAXIM.
Who, swearing not a line to miss,
Doats on the leaf his fingers kiss,
Thanking the Words for all his bliss, -
Shall rue, at last, his passion frustrate :
We love the page that draws its flavour
From Draftsman, Etcher, and Engraver,
And hint the Booby (by his favour)
His gloomy " Copy" to " ILLUSTRATE."
FOURTH MAXIM.
Who in all Copies finds delightThe wrong not scenting from the rightAnd, with a choiceless appetite,
Just comes to feed, ... like Soph, or Templar, -
Out on his iron stomach !
Have rarities we merely see,
We
Nor taste our Phenix, though it be ...
Serv'd up in the UNIQUE EXEMPLAR."
vi THE BOOK COLLECTOR,
FIFTH MAXIM.
Who blindly take the Book display'd
By Pettifoggers in the Trade,
Nor ask of what the leaf was made,
That seems like Paper,
- I can tell ' em,
That though ' tis possible to squint
Through any page with letters in't,
No Copy, though an Angel print,
Reads elegantly — but " on VELLUM. ”
SIXTH MAXIM.
Who of Editions recks the least,
But, when that Hog, his Mind, would feast,
Fattens the intellectual Beast
With old, or new, without ambition,-
I'll teach the pig to soar on high,
(If pigs had pinions, by the bye) ;—
Howe'er the last may satisfy,
The bonne bouche is the " FIRST Edition."
SEVENTH MAXIM.
Who dares to " write me down an Ass,"
When, spying through the curious mass,
I rub my hands, and wipe my glass,
If, ' chance, an Error bless my notice, →→
Will prize, when drill'd into his duty,
These lovely warts of ugly beauty ;
For Books, when false, (it may be new t' ye,)
Are "TRUE Editions:" odd, -- but so 'tis.
TO THE BOOK-READER. vii
EIGHTH MAXIM.
Who dreams, the Type should please us all ,
That's not too thin, and not too tall ,
Nor much awry, nor over small,
And, if but ROMAN, asks no better
May die in darkness : - I, for one,
Disdain to tell the barb'rous Hun,
That Persians but adore the Sun,
Till taught to know our God ... Black Letter.

BIBLIOSOPHIA ;
OR,
BOOK-WISDOM.
BIBLIOMANIA, Mr. D! and is this the
softest title which you can afford to the noble
passion for literary accumulation — that
passion, to which, throughout the very book in
which it is thus stigmatized, you almost avow
that you are, yourself, a voluntary, if not an
exulting Victim ?-But let me restrain the
severity of reproach against one, who, whatever may have induced him to assume the
guise of an enemy, has shewn himself so urwilling, or so unable, to conceal, that he is
among the very warmest of our friends.
His enmity is, at worst, the enmity of a
doating parent, towards the darling child
B
-
2 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
whom he gently tickles with those twigs,
which he had prepared to exercise as a rod :
"Bis conatus erat- -bis patriæ cecidere
manus.
"9
And may we hope that Mr. D. is really a
friend to the pursuit which he has so treacherously treated as a disease?—which he would
seem to represent as either originating in, or
conducting to, the cells of Bedlam ?-He
is ! He is ! Whence, on any other supposition, that fondly elaborate catalogue of the
catalogues, which contain, and nourish, the
very seeds of his pretended disease?--Why,
else, that unwearied mention, and that illdisguised admiration , of his more furious
maniacs ?-or why such ample, as well as
minute, chronological details of those celebrated Libraries, which he denounces, at the
same moment, as the very Pest-houses of
literature ?-Why, else, those tempting smiles
of invitation, that flicker in his notes, and so
sweetly disarm his text of its artificial, and
reluctant frowns ?-Why, else, in a word, is
the great body of his work devoted to an
enamouring display of the charms of that
fatal disease, for which an handful ofhopeless
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 3
nostrums are coldly held out, at the end of
the volume, to Incurables of his own making ?
-As if he, any more than Ovid before him,
could have sincerely entertained the wish, that
his " Remedium Amoris " would ultimately
operate a radical cure upon him, into whose
hands he was delivering, in the same scroll,
the most copious instructions " De Arte
Amandi."
In fine, then, boldly assuming it as proved,
that our Author has been secretly labouring
to stock with infection , the very regions which
he was outwardly professing to fumigate, I
shall openly congratulate Mr. D. upon his
possession ofthe true literary taste, which he
can no longer clandestinely enjoy. *
* I have thus stepped down from my text, for a
few moments, for the purpose of intreating Mr. D.
to accompany me into this private corner of the
page, where I would say to him, in a low whisper
" To be sure, Sir, you have left us a little in
the dark, as to the side you really mean to take between the two great parties of Book-hunters-those
who collect, and those who read; and you may, perhaps, be regarded by the censorious, as a sort of
literary Trimmer :-but, if you are a Pat, you have,
BIBLIOSOPHIA.
And now, before I enter into the minutiæ
of my business, let me indulge in a few prefatory and general commendations of that
quality, or energy, or propensity, (I know not
exactly how to denominate it, ) which Mr. D.
has been so cruelly pleased to malign, under
the term, " Bibliomania."
I will begin, by designating the high, and
dignified passion in question, by its true name
-BIBLIOSOPHIA, -which I would define
-an appetitefor COLLECTING Books,-careon other occasions, as distinctly shewn the reading
half of your partisans, that you can fly, as you
have now convinced the collecting half, that you
can creep. Even I, if I could find it in my heart
to say any thing favorable on the wrong side ofthe
question, am strongly tempted to squeeze out a
compliment to your late Edition ofthe "Utopia."-
But, whatever I may say, or not say, the Student
will certainly consider it as affording sufficient evidence that, whatever it may best please you to hear
yourself called, you well know how to read, what
you may have laboriously collected ; and, what is
more still, that you have the rare faculty of skilfully imparting to others, the pleasure, and benefit,
ofyour own studies.
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 5
fully distinguished from, wholly unconnected
with, nay absolutely repugnant to, all idea of
READING them.
Observe, then, with merited admiration,
the several points of superiority, which distinguish the Collector, when brought into fair,
and close comparison with the Student. As
-
First ; the said Collector proceeds straight
forward to his object, and, (with one only exception, which will hereafter be shewn, ) under
the most rational hopes of accomplishing it:
There is but a certain, and limited, number of
books, to which he, and his inquisitive fraternity, have agreed to consecrate the epithet
" curious ;" and all of these, — with the requisite allowance of cash , cunning, luck,
patience, and time, he is within the " potentiality " of drawing, sooner, or later, within
his clutches : whereas, the Student, granting him the wealth of a brewer, the cunning
of a horse-dealer, the luck of a fool, the patience of Jerry Sneak, and the longevity of
the Wandering Jew, can never hope even to
taste an hundredth part of the volumes which
he meditates to devour.
In the next place, the treasures of the
6 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
Collector, when once he has submitted to the
pleasing toil of procuring them, are his own ;
—his own, I mean, in the single sense in
which he is desirous so to call them ; for he
leaves them in the safe custody of his shelves,
until the arrival of that proud moment, when
he shall be dared by an envious rival, to prove
that the Title-page of some forgotten (and
thence remembered) volume, is perfect -
or properly imperfect ; or that it enjoys the
reputation of having been printed , long before
the Art had approached towards any tolerable
degree ofimprovement ; or, that it possesses
some one, or more, of those curious advantages, upon which a fitter occasion for expatiating, will present itself by and bye : —and
now, how stands the point ofpossession, with
the Student? -unprosperously indeed !—for,
besides that, as already observed, he can
never possibly possess, in his sense of that
expression, more than a wretched modicum
of his coveted treasures, he is doomed to a
very precarious property even in those which
he may have actually hoarded ; in as much
as they are entrusted to the care of that most
treacherous of all Librarians, Memory, -
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 7
which, at all times, and of necessity, treats
the Student's collections, as the professed
Collector, occasionally, and by choice only,
is tempted to treat his, by casting out a
great part of them for want of room.
-
The mention of Memory directly leads to
another advantage on the side of the Collector ;
viz. that this faculty, on his part, is wholly
exercised upon what is delightfully easy of
retention, when compared with the more
burthensome recollections, which embarrass
his opponent ; -two or three words of title,
for instance, instead of two or three thousand
thoughts ; a Printer's name, instead of a
Philosopher's System ; -the chronology of
an old Historian, with a single reference to
the course of the editions, or of the hands,
through which the Chronicle has passed ;
and so in a multitude of othersimilar cases.
To proceed : the Collector, if liberally communicative of his volumes to those who use
them, as it is called, ( as if there were no use
in possessing what one longs for ! ) has the
generous consciousness that he is wasting his
life, and fortune, in the accumulation ofthose
materials, of which the use, in the above inso-
BIBLIOSOPHIA.
lent sense of the word, is exclusively enjoyed
by the less opulent Student, to whom he makes
them accessible ; and whose poverty thus reduces him to the mortified state of a pensioner,
while the other is revelling in the angelic delights of a benefactor !
Lastly ; the personal labour of gathering
his volumes, which I have supposed the Collector to undergo, was conceded ex abundanti ;
for it is fully at his option to avoid it ; and
this without any sacrifice of those distinctions,
which grace the name, and rights, of a Proprietary. The self- indulging Purchaser, who
may consider even an unique, uncut Copy of
Purchas's Pilgrimage as dear at the price of
of a short walk, though cheaper than dirt at
that of 50 guineas, or who may happen to
prefer the atmosphere of his own parlour, to
that of a crowded sale-room, has merely to
hire the nod of a deputy, or the hammer, and
even the judgment, of the Auctioneer, and
the choicest flowers of the choicest Collections shall seem to shoot spontaneously from
the shelves of the unconscious bidder.-
Here, then, is at length discovered, in favour
of the Collector, what has hitherto been re-
-
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 9
garded as the despair of learning-
-
royal road to Mathematics," and to every
other region of knowledge, human and divine :
-From this Prince of the Library, I turn
with compassion to the pallid, emaciated, Hypochondriac ofthe Study, -condemned to earn
his laurels, by the sweat of his own brow, and
to travel,—often without a guide, and always
without a " Deputy,"-over every inch of
territory, which he aspires to conquer.
" Let us now be told no more," of the superiority ofthe Student over the Collector.
In all my past allusions to the Museums of
literary curiosities, I have thought principally
of those well-stricken volumes, which pass
under the familiar name of Old Books.-
But, although the worm- holes of oak- bound,
and brazen- clasped antiquity, so justly sanctify
the tome in the eyes of our virtuoso, and procure it a lodgement in the most hallowed
recesses of the shrine, yet is the magnificence of the modern press admitted by every
impartial Collector, to its inferior share of his
veneration. But, the distinction betweenBuyer,
and Reader, is as strictly observed in this, as
in the former case. Both inspect the costly
10 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
volume, but with widely differing purposes,
and satisfactions. While the plodding votary
of meaning, is anxiously enquiring out the
sense of the Oracle, his fellow- worshipper,
remembering that our eyes were not given for
nothing, is entranced in admiration of the
stately form, or gorgeous vestment, of the
Priest that utters it :-in plainer terms, he
stands exploring,without end, the type, ofjetty
black, and dazzling cut, that seems to float
amidst a satin sea of cream (it is impossible
to be watching after one's metaphors on such
inspiring occasions) —roves, in gazing ecstasy, from page to page, till here and there
arrested bythe choice vignette, or richly tinctured plate : at length, " lassatus, necdum satiatus" with the beauties of the interior, he
reverently closes the superbly plated leaves ;
and, turning to the sumptuous, silk- lined cover, marvels as he views the verdant, red, or
purple, pride of Russia, Turkey, or Morocco,
glittering, in every part, with the mazy flourishes ofgolden decoration! "Miror, immò
etiam stupeo !" is the language of his heart, —
if it cannot be of his tongue.
In one of those bursts of enthusiasm which
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 11
I have, myself, been accustomed to indulge ,
among these later wonders of the press, an
idea flashed upon my fancy, (and I have since
been feeding it into a blaze, ) that. I might
electrify the world by exhibiting such a pageant of typographical splendour, as should
throw all rival enterprizes, past, coeval, or to
come, into the shade.
As it will necessarily be very long, before a
project, of peerless grandeur, and extent, can
be ready to march into execution, I can, at
present, indulge the public no further, than
by offering a transitory glimpse of its more
prominent features to their admiration.-
To this partial display I will immediately
proceed.
In order that the delight, and astonishment,
of the Spectators, may not be diverted from
their proper channels, I have chosen for the
basis of my edifice, a work which shall not
too forcibly appeal to the understanding. And
yet, if, on the one hand, the work in question
should fail of elevating this noble faculty to
the sublimest altitudes ofwhich it may be capable, it is, on the other, a performance of
such great celebrity, and has so long, and so
12
BIBLIOSOPHIA
.
powerfully, swayed the sions of a very numerous, and interesting class of human beings,
as effectually to preclude all possible danger
of contempt. It is, in short, THE HISTORY
OF TOM THUMB, THE GREAT.
In the prosecution of the magnificent object here promulgated, I cannot for a moment,
allow myself to despair of encouragement literally without bounds ; and in that undoubting confidence, shall submit to universal notice the following
PROPOSALS.
1st. With respect to THE TYPE,-in order to
embrace the fullest advantage of competition, where
the object is so highly momentous, as well as to
secure all conceivable perfection to this great branch
of the design,-Messrs. BULMER, BENSLEY, and
BALLANTYNE, will severally receive a requisition
to task their founts in the rival construction of A
LETTER,which shall be, ifpossible, worthy ofits des❤
tination ; and He whose effort shall be pronounced
victorious, bya body of infallible Inspectors, who will
be convened as Umpires, shall be THE PRINTER.
2. The smaller, and less valuable Copies of the
work will be taken off on Imperial, Super-royal,
Atlas, or Columbia, papers. With respect to those
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 13
of higher value, and account, Mr. Fourdrinier, who
has recently signalized himself by an engagement to
manufacture paper of unlimited dimensions, as well
as superlative quality, will be employed in creating
sheets, of which the magnitude will remain at the
discretion ofthe contending subscribers ; -with this
solitary restriction , that one Exemplar, of ten feet
in height, by six in breadth, will be reserved forthe
presumed commands of every Crown in Europe ;
and, to secure characteristic superiority to these
august Copies, it will be expected of every inferior
competitor, that he restrain the measurement of
his paper within the above maximum of bulk..
3. A very bounded number of impressions will
be pulled away ON VELLUM ;-and here, the Publisher has deeply to regret, that Nature should have
circumscribed the growth of the animal who furnishes that material, so much within the limits of
his ambition with respect to size :-thus baffled in
a most concerning particular, yet still disdaining
to be disconsolate, he will dedicate his highest
powers, with only the more ardent assiduity, to
unheard-of excellence in the quality of the article.
With this determination, he has already become
the Purchaser, at an incalculable expense, of a
breed of Calves, most anxiously selected from the
stock of the late Mr. Bakewell ; and the surviving
14 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
feeders of that super-eminent Grazier, to whom this
precious trust is committed, are instructed to regulate the nourishment, and habits, of the creature,
with an undeviating, and paramount regard to the
interests of the HIDE.
•
4. With respect to the cost of such inestimable
things as the Publisher has had the honour of announcing, he is far more apprehensive of wounding
the feelings of his Subscribers, by seeming to suspect
their readiness to lay down their hundreds, and even
thousands, for a single volume, than he is of drawingdown discouragement upon his " MagnumOpus"
by confessing that his price will unquestionably be
found to emulate the magnificence ofhis Proposals.
He has, therefore, only to solicit, at the present
immature period of his project, that his Subscribers
would restrain theirimpatience to outvie each other
in the reach of their liberality, until his further advancement in that project, shall bring the princely
disbursements which are hourly gathering around
it, within the sphere of probable calculation.
Deferring less important details, till a riper moment for their disclosure, he impatiently proceeds
to those branches ofhis daring speculation, inwhich,
as an Englishman, consumed by the flames of his
patriotism, he most proudly glories. To the splendourofpaper, and ofvellum, and to the seducements
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 15
of typography, will be superadded the classical, and
still more potent auxiliaries of the pencil, and the
graver ; of which the former will have to boast that
it has laid the perennial foundation of the
TOM THUMB GALLERY,
a Structure, destined to be erected on the most
imposing among the hitherto unoccupied seats of
the Metropolis. The Painters who will immortalize
the Undertaking, and themselves, by their consentaneous efforts on this awakening occasion, have
not, as yet, received the outward formality of an
application:-but it is not difficult to predict, with
how little resistance that application is likely to be
encountered. Assuming, then, with no hesitation,
both the exulting assent of this enlightened Body in
the general enterprize, and the prompt acquiescence
of each individual in the particular task which I
have already presumed to assign to him, I shall confidently speak, in the future tense, of the several
subjects on which they will, respectively, have to
compete, in this most glorious field of adventure.
A COLOSSAL STATUE OF TOM THUMB, of precisely equal bulk with that of the Farnesian Hercules
at the Royal Academy, and intended, in like manner,
to front the spectator, on his entrance to the Saloon
of the TOM THUMB GALLERY, is destined to pro-
16
BIBLIOSOPHIA
.
-
duce upon the general eye, and mind, impressions
at least as awful, and petrific, as those which overpower us on our approach to that Stupendous Image
of the Demigod of Greece. -WHAT CHISSEL
will be canonized for the fabrication of this figure,
is a question, of which a long and studious pre- consideration must hold Messrs. Flaxman, Rossi,
Nollekens, Westmacott, and Bacon, in a state of
the most tremulous suspense.
SUBJECT I.
This will be the celebrated, and truly calamitous
immersion of our Hero in the hasty pudding-An
event which will equally, and liberally, call into
exertion the tender feelings, and tasteful execution,
of MR. THOMPSON, whose qualifications for the
treatment of such a subject, have been repeatedly,
and amply, attested by his interesting representations of puerile forms. To the inimitable WILKIE
will be given, on the same canvas, the venerably
rural figure of Mrs. Thumb, to be shewn under the
maternal anxiety which must have been elicited on
this moving occasion : the same hand will scatter,
in picturesque confusion, the homely, but interesting
utensils of the cottage, which was the scene of the
catastrophe. Mr. W. will excuse me for slightly
hinting, that the public sentiment would probably
-
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 17
feel itself wounded, should he allow any indulgence
whatever to his comic powers, on a subject of such
unmingled sadness.
SUBJECT II.
We shall here be invited to vent our sensibilities on
the second great affliction , in the earthly course of
Tom Thumb; when, through the censurable negligence of his mother, he was inadvertently drawn by
the tongue ofa cow, together with the dock-leaf in
whichhe was enveloped, into her body.--The animal,
at this tragical moment, will appropriately call forth
the vaccine capabilities of MR. WM. WARD.-
The Hero himself, is, by the circumstances, to be
represented as invisible if this paradox of the
pencil should happen not to defy the omnipotence
of Art.
·
SUBJECT III.
The Raven flying away with Tom Thumb. — MR.
NORTHCOTE, whose eminently spirited representations of the feathered race confers additional lustre
even on his historical canvas, will here enjoy a
proud opportunity of concentrating his versatile
powers in one unique association of Bird and Man.
SUBJECT IV.
The Publisher is forward in becoming a guarantee
for the avidity with which MR. LAWRENCE will
18 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
of
devote himself to the Giant Grumbo, in the horrible
act ofswallowing the orts of the cow, in the person
our Lilliputian Worthy. Mr. L. by his celebrated
portrait of Satan, upon the noblest scale, has given
an over-sufficient pledge of the peculiar adaptation
ofhis powers to this gigantic subject ; in his management of which, he will, doubtless, remove whatever
regret we may, at present, feel, that it cannot exercise the pictorial prowess of Michael Angelo.
SUBJECT V.
Tom Thumb, erected on the hand ofKing Arthur on
horse-back. This striking scene will jointly employ
the geniuses of Messrs. WEST, SARTORIUS, and
ENGLEHEART :-the first gentleman to work upon
the figure of the Monarch, a task for which he is
more especially qualified, as having been so frequently distinguished by a similarly honourable
employment at home ;-the second, to exert himself on the horse of the Sovereign ; and the third,
on the smaller of the united heroes. This splendid
piece will thus exhibit, what has never been before
displayed, or attempted, a choice, captivating, and
surprizing incorporation of the province miniature,
with two rival departments of the pencil .
SUBJECT VI.
Tom Thumb, at the cruel instant of becoming the
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 19
victim of " a large Fish," will task the highest capacities of Mr. HEAPHY, who is already immortalized by his mackarel ; and who, it is hoped, will,
on this occasion, repeat a brilliant specimen of his
favorite fish, which, although not strictly deserving
to be considered as "large, "may, yet, with reference
to the minute proportions of its supposed prey, be
indulgently allowed that epithet .- MR. POCOCK
will furnish the canvas with proper water, and will
be earnestly solicited to visit the coast, for the
express purpose of carefully studying the waves, as
they are agitated by the gambols of a porpoise.
SUBJECT VII.
Tom Thumb engaged in the Tilts and Tournaments,
at the Court of King Arthur.- This magnificent
subject falls, of itself, into the hands of MR. STOTHARD, whose accurate knowledge of costume, and
thedue arrangement of cavalcades, are so luminously
set forth in his grand representation of the progress
ofChaucer's pilgrims to Canterbury.
SUBJECT VIII.
Tom Thumb, at the remarkable crisis of springing
down the throat of the Miller. -MR. SMIRKE has
abundantly evidenced, by his happy personification
20 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
of certain scenes, and characters, from the Arabian
Nights' Entertainments, and from Gil Blas, that if,
with becoming reverence towards our Hero, he can
compel himself to draw, with discreet moderation,
from the overflowing treasury of his fancy, he will
present this unusual event to our eyes, in all its
serio-comical richness .
SUBJECT IX.
Tom Thumb's Battle with the Cat, may be expected
to be as triumphantly fought by the hand of the
Artist last named, as it once was by that of the
Hero himself.
SUBJECT X.
Tom Thumb, supposed to have recently quitted the
shelter of a snail- shell, mounting on the dangerous
back of a butterfly.-The eye of every Subscriber
will here be instinctively turned upon MR. FUSELI,
the enlightened delirium of whose pencil will revel
over a field, comprehending in a single composition,
a congenial assemblage of all that is wildly tiny,
preternaturally quaint, and fantastically dire. *
* It is hoped, and believed, that the various excellent Artists
above enumerated, and who are introduced expressly because
they are greatly and deservedly celebrated, will at once perceive,
that a distinguished compliment is sincerely intended, by the
Author, in the usewhich hehas made oftheir respective names.
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 21
The foregoing Performances will ultimately animate the copper- plates of those greater Luminaries
of the Burin, whose names will hereafter be confronted with the subjects allotted to the genius of
their respective tools.
MR. MARCHANT, "Principal seal- engraver
to his Majesty, and Sculptor of Gems to his
Royal Highness, the Prince of Wales," will
elaborate, in his most exquisite manner, A
SEAL, representing Tom Thumbin his chariot
and six .... mice. This GEM, will be presented to the fortunate finger, which shall be
judged by an unconcerned council of Artists,
to have produced the painting most worthy
of the Hero to be celebrated, as well as of
the splendour of this grand national Undertaking.
Leaving such a Project as that which I have
now brought before the Public, to sound its
own recommendations, I shall simply add,
that more will be communicated, as its further
advancement, aided by the expected influx
of patronage, shall enable me to quiet the more
boisterous clamours of curiosity, with fresh
intelligence.
22 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
In the mean time, I proceed to fulfil my
immediate engagements, as a Writer.
During the meditation in which I have just
been buried, respecting the matter, and order,
of myfuture observations, my eye was fortunately saluted by that page of Mr. D's. performance, in which he has most luminously
arranged the ravings ofhis maniacs—or, in
his own words, "the Symptoms ofthe Disease,"
to which, after Dr. Ferriar, he has given the
opprobrious name of BIBLIOMANIA. These
symptoms, which he would have us believe
that he regards as terrible, and as calling upon
the Philanthrope to counteract their balefulness, I shall, on the direct contrary, consider
as the very evidences for their sanity-I should
rather have said, for their wisdom . - His
Symptoms, aforesaid, are eight in number, and
are thus exhibited : - 66 Symptoms of this
disease," says Mr. D. " are instantly known
by a passion for
I. Large-Paper Copies.
II. Uncut Copies.
III. Illustrated Copies.
IV. Unique Copies.
V. Copies printed upon Vellum.
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 23
VI. First Editions.
VII. True Editions.
VIII. Ageneral Desirefor the black letter. *
These symptoms, or passions, which are enumerated by Mr. D. with a seeming mixture
of censure, and commiseration, I shall now
proceed to examine, severally, as they stand ;
and I despair not of irrefragably convincing
every unbiassed understanding, that, under
the above heads, are enumerated the highest
prizes which Literature can propose to the
ambition of her Children. -To begin, then,
with
LARGE-PAPER COPIES.
In treating of this first symptom, it might,
perhaps, be sufficient, to ask whether we live
* Mr. D. has contrived to indicate, in a very remarkable manner, the inveterate, and complicated
strength of this last symptom; for, ( as the reader,
by attending to the construction of his words, will
plainly perceive, ) he describes the unhappy patient
as influenced, not merely by " a general desire for
the black letter," but, by " a passionfor a general
desirefor the black letter ! " se dreadful an exacerbation of the disease as this is, must indeed be
hopeless !
2
24 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
not in a world, wherein the proudest and most
coveted distinction , is that ofwealth, including
the envied power of openly displaying it ? "
Now, who but the wealthy can presume to
touch the LARGE-PAPER COPY ? So well
aware, indeed, are Publishers, and Booksellers,
of the value set by opulent Collectors on the
privilege of paying an high price for excellence and rarity combined, that they goodnaturedly run into indulgence towards these
favoured Purchasers, by demanding for the
Impression on Large Paper, a sum evenfancifully over-proportioned to the intrinsic difference in worth, between that, and the
smaller copy: and this indulgence has become
a subject of bitter envy, and heart- burning,
to the indigent book-collector, who is compelled to swallow the mortification of possessing the said small copy, at no more than its
real value ! -What consolation does it afford
to him, as he carries away his diminutive impression, that the type, and still less that the
words and thoughts, are the same in his volume,
and in that of his wealthy concurrent ?
There is one circumstance relating to this
point, which must by no means be forgotten ;
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 25
I mean, the late, and still increasing advance on the price ofpaper -a source of
expense which cannot fail of heightening the
avidity, as well as flattering the pocket-pride,
of the candidate for preposterous paper.
So much for the interest of the Rich in
these stupendous Copies ; -but their advantages end not here ; -I have been credibly
assured that there are actually now in existence, Book- collectors, who occasionally commit their thoughts to the margins of their
volumes -supposing, then, that such instances might be produced, shall the " ocean of
margin " by which these copies are distinguished, be considered as nothing ?-affording,
as they do, a space of such extent, that, supposing them to be filled with the manuscript
reflections of their owner, even in a spreading
hand, the words of the commentary would very
greatly out- number those of the text :-now,
what reasonable man, with the fever of remark
upon him, will permit himself to carp at that
text, for shrinking so modestly into the centre,
while, by so doing, it leaves such a desart of
elbow-room for annotation ?
In passing to the conclusion of this article,
26 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
I will barely graze one very obvious, yet very
important consideration, serving to magnify
the merit of LARGE- PAPER Copies, - viz.
that, bythis contrivance, the dwarf duodecimo
can be erected, at pleasure, into the well- grown
quarto ; and the well-grown quarto, in its
turn, into the gigantic folio ; by which means,
rank, and precedence, may be, at once, conferred upon the plebeian writer, who thus
unexpectedly finds himself reposing upon a
shelf of honour, by the side of his natural
superiors "Miraturque novas frondes, et non
sua."
After the foregoing tribute of respect to
these bibliothecarian Patagonians, it would be
insulting them to mention, in the same breath,
certain other Copies, distantly related to them ,
which, by a sort of Irish courtesy, have received
the Title of TALL Copies-although, in truth,
they are actually no better, nor other, than
SHORT Copies, -nay, Short Copies, which
have been cut still shorter, -but only (through
the humanity of the Binder, we will suppose)
not much shorter ! *-After this, we may next
*"Analagous to Large- Paper Copies," says Mr.
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 27
expect to hear of HEAVY guineas, to be emphatically so called, because they have not
been sweated into immoderate lightness. -To
say the truth, I am a little vexed with my
friends on this occasion, and take some credit
to myself for my candour, and impartiality, in
thus openly confessing it.
UNCUT COPIES.
The honest avowal which appears in myTitlepage, that I am but an " Aspirant " to the
higher honours of a Collector, includes, of
course, a further confession, that I am not yet
privileged to penetrate into all " the secrets
of his Doing." The present article finds me
in this humiliating state ofignorance.-Since,
however, I am not forbidden to indulge conjecture, when certainty is hung out of my
reach, I shall respectfully exercise this right,
with regard to the special distinctions, and
advantages, pertaining to UNCUT COPIES.
D. " are Tall Copies ; that is, Copies of the work
published on the ordinary sized paper, and not much
cut down by the binder.”
28 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
I, at first, inclined to the supposal, that
where the Binder is thus restrained from the
use ofhis cutter, the prohibition is bottomed
in a principle of economy :-but I was presently driven from this hypothesis, by the
recollection of that boundless, and magnificent scorn of expense, by which the conduct
ofthe Collector, in every other instance, is so
eminently signalized .
But, although I am thrown out in my first
supposition, I flatter myself that I shall be
applauded for happier sagacity, in my two
remaining surmises.
First, then, it is to be remembered, that
such books only as have received the awful
stamp of Time, are predestinated to remain
Uncut; and the Collector, by leaving the
edges of such a volume for ever horrent, and
hirsute, may purpose to maintain (in the language of the painter, ) a judicious keeping between the rudeness ofthe age in which the
book was born, and that of its external appearance ; as, who would suffer the reverend
mazard of a mummy to be desecrated by the
barbarous hand of a modern tonsor ?-Such is
the first of my two favorite conjectures ; but,
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 29
whatever be the fate of this, the next may be
safely rested on as infallible :-
I fear not to pronounce, then, that the governing motive of the Collector, in saving his
Copy uncut, is one which has been noticed on
other occasions, as ever present to his mindthat of strongly discriminating his own " pursuits of literature," from those of the Student,
who invariably discovers a strange partiality
for CUT copies. The former, by preserving
perpetually inviolate the comfortless, and embarrassing roughness of the edges, (a torment
which has been unaccountably overlooked
by Messrs. Testy and Sensitive, among the
" miseries " ofthe Reader, ) significantly notifies, that his attachment to the volume is carefully, and effectually purified, from all that
relates to its interior.
Thus confidently taking it for granted, that
the leading allurement of his rough - edged
Copy, in the eyes of the Collector, resides
in the impediment with which it harasses
the Book-worm , who may chance to meddle
with it, I feel myself irresistibly impelled
to unveil before the world a most horrible
imagination, which has just presented itself
-
30 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
to mythoughts, on the subject ofthese UNCUT
COPIES.
Let us conceive, then, (as far as it is possible
to conceive it, ) what would be the sensations
of a zealous Worshipper of UNCUT COPIES,
if, on repairing, in the exultation of his Soul,
to that shelf, which, but a week before, had
had the honour of sustaining a lengthened line
ofthe raw literature in question, he should find
that some officious Goth, assuming the name
of a friend, and plotting an agreeable surprize,
had been secretly clawing away every volume
ofthem tothe Binder ; who is found, bythe distracted Collector, in the act of briskly setting
them up in their places, -the once precious
ruggedness of their edges now sprucely
trimmed, and shaven away, -and those intractable leaves which had teized the impatient
and impertinent finger of curiosity, from age
to age suddenly butchered out of their
reserve, and then, after so unparalleled an
act of violation, turned loose upon the world,
and, all at once, become as free, common, and
accessible , as .... the Coffee-house volumes
ofa News- paper !
-
But let me look away from the " air- drawn
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 31
-
dagger," with which I know not why I have
thus unnecessarily appalled myself, and others,
—and rush at once to the last circumstance
which confers upon the copy ofwhich we are
now treating, a proud superiority over every
other : this circumstance is, that, if the present rational rage for the unclipped volume
should, unhappily, ever come to subside, it
will be, at all times, in the option of its possessor, to convert it, in a second of time, into
a CUT COPY- while the contrary transformation must for ever mock the hopes of the
SMOOTH- EDGED Exemplar. Concluding,
however, more honourably for the Collector,
that he is far too constant an admirer, to be
capable of thusjilting his literary sweethearts,
and, consequently, that the UNCUT COPY
will never be shorn of its beauties, I will finish
by observing upon a singular, and, even
contradictory pre-eminence, belonging to the
Copy in question -viz. that its owner, by
simply saving himself the expense of causing
it to be cut, is doubling, quadrupling, perhaps
centupling, its marketable value ; which is
obviously increasing with the length of time
32 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
during which it has escaped the ever-impending profanation of the knife.
ILLUSTRATED COPIES.
The very sight, and sound, of these two cabalistic words, prescribe a reverential pause, both
to the Writer, and the Reader. We are now
suddenly led into the Presence ! - This is the
Majesty of the Press, as in BLACK- LETTER
we shall behold its Deity :-let us bend before
it, arrayed, as it is, in all the pride, and pomp,
of its regalia ! The ILLUSTRATED COPY
exhibits a dazzling constellation of all the
glories which I have already attempted to
display in other instances-with an additional
burst of splendour, from the graver and the
needle ! - Here, the Type-fount, and the
Copper-plate, are beheld in a constant, though
amicable, contest. Page, and plate -page,
and plate-page, and plate, keep on together,
in wedded harmony, ( " concordia discors " )
through a lengthening career of delight !
Shades of Shakspeare, Clarendon, Granger,
Chatterton !-is it counted among your posthumous felicities to behold the wreaths of
1
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 33
――
―
ILLUSTRATION which have recently been
woven around your literary remains ?-Let the
departed Author of these immortal volumes but
speak, or motion, through the medium ofthe
press, and, in an instant, like Aladdin, unconsciously gifted with the wonderful Lamp,
he starts at the sudden appearance of the
Graphic Genius at his side, obediently conjuring between the leaves the form of man, or
mansion, beast, or reptile, answering, as it
were, in person, to the thought of him who
named it ! Let the Historian but obliquely
allude to a long-forgotten Name, —and, with
stupendous alacrity, the PowER of ILLUSTRATION has dragged the world of curiosity
for every effigies, genuine, or spurious, by
every graver, ofevery age, from every country,
in every degree of excellence, and in every
stage of preservation, down to the last dregs
ofruin :-Io triumphe ! —there they are, and
in they shoal, upon the groaning, bursting
volume !-Let the writer but have innocently
hinted that his Hero, or his Hero's cousin,
had a house to live in, -and, while the press
is working the intelligence, representation
upon representation of the last rafter of every
D
34 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
dwelling, suspected to have been once visited
by either, is ready to push into its place ! ·
Did an illustrious (and accordingly illustrated)
Personage, ever sit down ?-there is his chair,
-or, at least, a leg of it. —Did he ever write ?
-There are his pot-hooks, and hangers.
Did he, like a late venerable Prelate, occasionally relax from the toils of study, by
watching the drolleries of his kitten ?-There
is Puss.-
But, of commemorating that scrupulous
minuteness of homage which is offered by the
Illustrator to his Author, there would be no
end. To estimate as it deserves, the value of
the etched, or stippled information, thus benevolently poured upon us, let us only observe
our own emotions, when we pass from such a
volume as I have been faintly describing, to
the common work, as it crudely comes to us
from the general shelf.-What poverty ! what
nakedness ! what baldness ! -The traveller
who passes, de suite, from the plains ofArabia
Felix, to the sands of Arabia Deserta, can,
alone, illustrate such a contrast. The yawnings, the stretchings of disgust ! —the mountain of ennui under which we labour, as we
BIBLIOSOPHIA. $5
>>
languidly turn from one sterile page to
another, with the ever-baffled hope oftreating
the eye with at least one solitary morsel, as a
short relief from the tedious, cloying surfeit of
the mind! -- We moil through the lucubrations of the Philosopher ; but where is that
lively, and faithful image of his beard, or his
night-cap, which, in the leafof illustration , imparted such a zest to his lessons ?-Wefollow
the Warrior to the field ; -to what purpose,
while we have to fancy all his exploits, and, so
far from contemplating the array of his battle,
are not even solaced with the cut of his spur,
or a pleasing likeness ofthe bullet with which
he was killed. —Is it enough for the Historiographer to inform us that some of the nostril
of a Generalissimo had been hacked off by a
broad- sword, and so leave us to piece out the
rest of it for ourselves, without even an authentic out-line of the stray scrap, accompanied by a diagram, with proper figures of
reference, enabling us to dove-tail it, in idea,
to the " sympathetic snout ? "-Happily for
the present generation, we now know, or are
in the way to know, all that related, however
faintly, to our Fore-fathers : --- thanks to the
36 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
-
" Draftsman, Etcher, and Engraver, " even
the most trivial appendages of their persons
are laid before us : their tobacco- stoppers are
no longer left to our imaginations ; — their
scratch-backs, tooth-picks, and tongue-scrapers, are safe in our memories ;
their very
turn-spits will never die —and all this at the
fiat of ILLUSTRATION !
-
It is difficult, and painful, for an ardent
mind, with a glorious subject in hand, to descend into sobriety. But I am unwilling to
leave unsaid, though in an humbler style,
whatever may, in any degree, conduce to the
honour, or augment the value, of such an
" Arabian Bird," as an ILLUSTRATED COPY.
I shall, therefore, beg leave additionally to
offer it the following detached tributes of
applause.
My first remark shall be, that at a period
when daily improving methods are devised
for the instruction of children, a description
of books more admirably adapted to their use,
than that which I am now celebrating, can
scarcely be figured in the mind ; and when it
is recollected that such writers as Watts, and
Roscoe, have considered their abilities as
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 37
"
worthily employed in stooping to the weakness
of childhood, I shall not, I trust, offend our
Copy-holder by the suggestion. -If the Student in petticoats be successfully decoyed
into literary pursuits, by the " pretty pictures"
that smile through the frowns of his hornbook ; if the toddling scholar so eagerly
employ its mind, and its mouth, at the same
moment, upon the toothsome capitals which
it nibbles off from its " Copy " of that gingerbread Edition of the A. B. C. which is
baked for its benefit ; how shall we doubt of
the rapid improvement in historical, and other
branches of knowledge, which would ensue,
if an illustrated Granger, or Clarendon, were
placed in its hands-or rather, propped against
its cradle ?-
Passing, in the next place, to certain other
Children, the growth of whose limbs has considerably outstripped that of their intellects
-who no longer draw a batch of education.
from the oven, and have entirely done with
getting their cakes by heart, and then making
a luncheon of their libraries, how, let me
ask, can they be more delightfully drawn to
taste the writings, or emulate the achievements,
-
38 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
of Great Men, than by seeing these records
confronted, onthe opposite leaf, with the wellattested noses, jaws, ears, &c. or even with the
caxons, and tweazer- cases, of these Godlike
characters ? And if, after all their endeavours, they should still be obstinately indifferent to the plain pudding of the page, they
can but turn, at last, to the opposite side, and
feast on the plumb pudding on their plates.
But to return to the distinguished Possessor
ofthese hallowed Copies, or rather, more immediately, to their Constructor. He is a Collector indeed !-and this in a still more exalted
sense than that under which we have hitherto
employed the term : for, neglecting all that a
sneering world may have chosen to term more
useful, important, or honourable employments,
with the patience of an -- of a donkey, he
consents, with the view of helping to celebrate
the Great, and Good, to worm, and nuzzle,
into every unthought-of recess of graphic
litter ; moths, spiders, worms, and lizards,
fly before him !-from the shop to the garret
-
--- from the garret to the cellar from the
cellar to the stall-in town-in country- and
in country-town, he magnanimously scouts,
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 39
and rummages, for the last leavings of what
may have been an head, to satisfy the patriotic cravings of his ravenous
-
Repository.
Should the orgies of his joy the ecstatic
supnna, which bursts from him at the sudden
discovery of a treasure, encourage the wary
vender to rise in his demands for the fragment,
ourimpassioned Purchaser counts not by tens,
or by hundreds, the guineas which he leaves.
in exchange ; and bears away, at a leaping
step, the tattered trophy of his lucky industry.
-The fortune of his Youngest Child may
suffer-but he has an Albert Durer, for which
every other Illustrator has raked in every other
sanctuary of rubbish -- all in vain !
His Philanthropy, however, is not dormant,
even in the midst of his exultation ; for he
reflects that the sale of half a dozen etchings,
at rates like these, are comfort and competence for life, to the pedling dealer, from
amongst whose trash-holes the prizes had
been grubbed.
Should it here be objected against the pursuits ofthe Illustrator, that they are interminable, since it is too much for the most fortunate
forager to hope that he shall ultimately rally
40 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
together every head, or part of a head, that
his occasions may require,
- or seem to him
to require,-I answer, so much the better : he
feasts the longer upon the pleasures ofexpectation : So directly is it the law of our very
natures to trade upon hope, that complete
fruition is downright bankruptcy. If then, I
have happily proved, that it is the dearest interest of the Collector to be perpetually disappointed, he will surely thank me, with tears
in his eyes, for the exhilirating prospect
which I have held out to him, of fruitless
labour for life. And fruitless (let me earnestly
assure him for his consolation) it must necessarily be for, what is the real, and definite
extent ofhis desires,-or, at least, ofhis expectations ?-He knows it not himself ; nor is it,
in truth, to be known. Having, with a noble
wildness ofambition, left far behind him every
recognised, and statutable rule, which formerly
obtained in the common affair ofornamenting
a book with plates, he is lost in the boundless
uncertainty of his own wishes. In short, Sir,
you may be considered, as a benighted Traveller ; -and by this image, I mean not to
discourage you ;-quite otherwise, as my late
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 41
heartening discouragement will abundantly
shew. I wish, merely as a matter of curious
information, to shew you why you can never
accomplish your object, upon your own
excursive plan. You are quite conscious,
without any occasion for being reminded of it
by me, with what bias you peruse your Granger; (a particular instance is always clarifying;) that you journey through him, line
by line, and word by word, with a jealous
watchfulness, altogether unknown to the mere
reader for instruction . Your business is, if
possible, to extract something graphic out of
every sentence : - thus : You find mention
ofa man ; —ifof a celebrated man, the better ;
if not, still of a man ;
-
"
rem ;
Si possis, rectè ; si non, quocunque modo, rem ;" )
you proceed - a certain tree is noticed as
having occasionally afforded shelter to your
man : - a little further ; a magpie is reported to have haunted your tree : - enough
for the present ; you have taken in your lading
of subjects for enquiry : your Man, obscure
though he now be, may, once, have been
42 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
remarkable enough to set the engraver at
work -but his favorite tree?-it is not your
fault that no representation of it has been
discovered ; for not a crevice of virtù has been
left unsearched. Your Author, however, has
fortunately been minute in his reference, and
has dispatched you, with an Artist at your
back, to the Shetland Isles, in one of which,
the tree was perverse enough to grow ; it is
happily found, and accurately copied . The
drawing is, in the next place, as carefully
etched, as it was carefully sketched : it is
modern, to be sure ; but that objection is
dazzled away, by the splendour of the means.
to which it owes its birth, and of which the
full history is recorded by your own hand, in a
MS. memorial behind. But the magpie?
-alas ! alas ! as the man, and the tree, flourished 750 years ago, the magpie must be no
more ; and it never sat for its picture !
But your principal security against the fear
of ever arriving at the end of your task, is yet
to come -this lies in the last improvement
which has been made upon the print-compelling system ; I speak of the new obligation which now lies heavily upon the shoulders
----
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 43
ofeverydiligent illustrator-that ofinoculating
his tree with innumerable slips, not merely
from the Engraver, but from the Printer, and
even from the Penman.-What a glorious
field of despair is here laid open to our hopes!
-Eternity might do great things, there is no
doubt; but my proselyte to the joys of uncertainty, (if I have been so lucky as to make
one) may hug himself in the confidence that
though his existence should be protracted to
the last " syllable of recorded time," he would
have nothing to apprehend on the score of
complete success, in this part of his undertaking for, until he shall have had access
to, and devoured with his eye, every line, of
every page, of every book, in every language,
of every library, public, and private, native,
and foreign, as well as the contents of every
shelf, closet, box, or stall, throughout the
terraqueous globe-the cabin, and locker, of
the voyager, from the Captain, and his passengers, down to the studious guinea pig, all
included, he will never be thunder- struck
with the sudden discovery that he has done ;-
that not a sentence, or half- sentence, remains to be clipped from its native page, and
--
44 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
coaxed, or cramped, into subserviency to the
calls of ILLUSTRATION.
With this most animating assurance, I
leave him to revel undisturbed in the luxury I
have laid out for him- consisting in the restless, and drudging prosecution of a darling
object, altogether unalloyed by the dread of
final success.
The reader will, assuredly, smile forgiveness on the vanity of a determined Illustrator,
if he cannot take his leave of this article,
without offering to notice a few precious
morsels, now preparing for his own illustrated
Copy of Том THUMB ; which, with all his
boundless ardour of collection for an object
so close to his heart, he still flatters himself
will not transgress the limits of fifty Atlas
Volumes.-
1st. By way of frontispiece, will be inserted
an ETCHED THUMB, cut out of the only copy
that was saved out of a whole impression
(the rest having been consumed by fire) of a
little collection of Fabliaux, ornamented by
the hand of Hollar ; there being many cogent
reasons for supposing, that this thumb had
immediate reference to our Story, as repre-
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 45
senting that digit on the hand of Gaffar
Thumb, the Father of our Hero, in consequence of the capricious wish of his pregnant.
mother, that her child might prove exactly
equal to it in stature.-
2d. The Editor is already master of an inestimable fragment of a Danish standard, still
displaying a very lively figure (wanting only
the bill) of the Raven, universally known to
have been the military bearing of the Danes.
This relick, when enshrined in the Publisher's
unique tome, opposite to the third adventure
(see my Proposals) will immediately explain
its own connection with the work.―
3rd. An incomparably " scarce and curious" engraving of the Miller of Trumpington,
almost too hastily torn out of a copy of the
Princeps Editio of Chaucer, ( purchased for
this single purpose at a price which he is unwilling, though not ashamed, to confess, ) will
be pasted on the leaf which fronts the 7th
adventure (which see, ubi sup. )- Let these
serve for a prelibation of the sumptuous banquet in prospectu.
But it is more than time that I pay my
respects, in due course, to
46 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
UNIQUE COPIES.
AND, surely, a more savoury title never
moistened the mouth of a literary Epicure !-
But, unfortunately for its claims to the most
detailed discussion , and the warmest panegyrick, the principal theme of its praises has
already been exhausted in my notice of
LARGE- PAPER COPIES, of which I have
stated that monopoly is the leading charm.—
Yet, I trust, I shall be liberally indulged in
ridding myself of a few troublesome transports, with which I suddenly feel myself distended at the very mention of this article.
The Unique Copy, then , is ( as Mr. P. has
very carefully defined it, ) " a book which has
any peculiarity about it, by either, or both,
ofthe foregoing methods of Illustration —or,
which is remarkable for its size, beauty, and
condition."-The Reader, who is supposed to
have gone through the preceding article, will
immediately perceive, that I have at present,
no concern but with the latter clause of the
grave sentence above cited. Mr. D. indeed,
subsequently celebrates the Binder's share in
the honour of producing an UNIQUE Copy ;
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 47
-but, in this department, also, I have anticipated myself; and my attention is undividedly
riveted, by the definition above given, to the
three-fold attractions of " Size,* Beauty, and
Condition."
I naturally take them as they stand.
And, first, with regard to unwieldiness, as a
winning feature in a book, I have terrible
news to tell:-it is much to be apprehended
by the present Owners of Colossean Copies,
in consequence of a threatening project now
nearly ripe for execution, that unless, by a
counter-invention, the stretching part of the
process of Procrustes can be successfully applied to ready- made paper, these Giants will,
by comparison, very suddenly dwindle into
Pigmies ;-pretty much in the same manner
as Gulliver, who had enjoyed the advantage
of being a Monster in Lilliput, was shortly
afterwards reduced , at Brobdingnag, to pine
By the word size, as employed in this place, I
do not apprehend that Mr. D. alludes to what is appropriately termed a Large-Paper Copy, (which we
have already disposed of, ) but, generally, to a large
volume ; and to this presumed sense my ensuing
remarks will be accommodated.
48 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
in vain for the honour of ranking as a runt.
-This alarming apprehension is founded on
Mr. Fourdrinier's improvement, in the manufacture of paper, by which, as already stated,
he undertakes to carry out the longitude, and
latitude of sheets, ad infinitum . Now, when
the practical benefits of this discovery shall
come into the hands of the Bookseller, the
sufferings of the Large Copies, of the old
school, on seeing themselves thus suddenly
overlooked bytheir towering neighbours, may
be conceived, perhaps, but that is all ; nor
could they even be conceived, in full perfection, unless Milton, in his account ofthe
demoniacal Debates at Pandemonium, had
accidentally led us to imagine the feelings of
the full-sized Fiend, when, all in a moment,
he found himself coolly cut down to an imp,
merely by way of making a little more room
for his betters, at the upper end of the council- table .
-
But, lest I should be taken to task, as an
encourager of despondency, I shall suppose
that the Grenadiers on the literary musterroll will be grenadiers still, and that they will
not have to stand the laugh of the drummer-
BIBLIOSOPHIA, 49
duodecimo, for degradation to the ranks. I
would willingly congratulate their Captain, the
Collector, on the joyful moment in which his
""
goodly rows and files," on being brought to
the measuring-standard, shall come off victorious in the contests of procerity. May the
deserving accumulator of burly books be never
condemned to encounter the discovery, that
he has given a place upon his shelf, to an
Author, whose merit falls short, by the tenth
part of an inch, of the merit of the same Author, in the happier hands ofanother ! So far,
in short, as " Size " is an indispensable recommendation of an UNIQUE COPY, may he be
blessed with one specimen, at least, of such
astounding dimensions, as may defy a porter
to sustain it, a shelf to hold it, or a hand to
open it!
With respect to the second attribute of an
UNIQUE COPY, its Beauty, -here, too, many
a loud commendation has been forestalled by
my previous remarks ; and I have little more
to do than to reiterate my congratulations
to the " fortunate holder of the prize," and
to cast on him a benignant glance with the
eye of fancy, whilst he, (with a glance, it must
E
50 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
be confessed, not quite equally benignant,
is eagerly scrutinizing the beauties of his Author, in a contemptuous comparison of his
own, with every rival copy.
Coming, now, to the last-named qualification ofthat." faultless Monster," an UNIQUE
COPY, its Condition,—the greenest Collector,
I presume, is not to be taught, that that term ,
in its application to a book, is to be strained
as clear as possible from all allusion to the
state of the text, with a view to its purity, or
corruptness, and its consequent fitness, or unfitness, for the eye of a scholar, and a critic.
" Non erat his locus : "-in pronouncing upon
the condition of a book, we are simply saying
that its cover, and its leaves, are nice, or
filthy ; tattered, or whole ; that it has, or has
not, the required number of pages ; and, far
above all, (to the surprise, perhaps, of the
mere Reader, who will always be busying
himself about the contents of books, ) that the
TITLE-PAGE is ready to shew its face, upon
demand. Here, (if here only, ) the Collector
is indeed a Student ! " Stupet in titulis !—
No word, nor figure, impressed upon this
sacred Surface, is ever, for a single instant,
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 51
absent from his memory, or, scarcely, from
his thoughts. " Omnis in hoc est ! " - Here
he " reigns, and revels ! " -This is his Encyclopædia ! Over these leaves, he swells into
a Critic ; and finds, in these, his beginning,
and his middle, and his end ! --
I say, then, that when we have received
answers to our interrogatories, as to the three
great particulars above mentioned, we have
learned all that is contained in the word
Condition. The foregoing precautions, (and
especially that respecting the just complement
of leaves, ) will, I doubt not, be admitted, even
by our adversaries, the Students, as rational
enough ;—and therefore, in the honesty ofmy
nature, and in defiance ofthe scorn which the
confession may provoke, I must make it distinctly understood, that the said precautions
are still taken by us as Collectors, and not
as Readers ; for, supposing the volume
which is rejected for imperfection, to have
been as perfect as good usage could make
it, we should equally have adhered to the
principle by which we govern our conduct
-that of abstaining from all participation in
52 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
the pleasures of a literary class, to which it
does not seem good to us to belong.
--
Before I leave this article, I feel myself
irresistibly impelled to give vent to an enthusiastic idea which has been growing upon me
during the whole progress of my remarks upon
the UNIQUE COPY : -whatever be its fate,
the thanks, at least, if not the applause, of the
Collector, will reward my effort to extend his
triumphs. Myidea is, that the said Collector,
if so unhappy as not to be possessed of such
a treasure as an Unique Copy, may boldly,
nobly, and originally, create one for himself,
-and one that shall throw every other out of
the ranks of competition ; that shall gloriously
concentrate into one blazing focus, the lustre
ofall (or nearly all) those eight jewels which I
am now engaged in shewing off, and which,
in theirpresent separate state, can dazzle us but
with dissipated rays. I explain the course I
would recommend. -Let the Collector print
(not publish) two beautiful, black-letter Editions, properly seasoned with typographical
errors, and each consisting but of two copies,
one on Large Paper, the other on Small, -
-
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 53
ofwhatever book he may first lay his hands.
on ; the circumstance of merit being a matter
in which his anxiety is not at all concerned..
Finally, let him illustrate his Large Paper
Copy. The grand object of his ambition is,
already, nearly accomplished : -for, I. He has
a LARGE-PAPER COPY.-II. He has an
UNCUT COPY.-(for, here, he has nothing to
do but just to let its edges alone. )—III . He
has a FIRST EDITION. (and it was solely
with a view to securing this point, that I recommended two Editions, first implying,
and requiring, second. ) — IV. He has a TRUE
EDITION : (this perfection of an impression,
as the reader will be taught, when I come to
the head so entitled, is to be conferred upon
it by its imperfections, viz. the " typographical
errors " ordered above.) -V. He has BLACKLETTER. VI. he has an ILLUSTRATED
COPY.- and, VII. he has, or the deuce is in
it, an UNIQUE COPY.- Only one desideratum
remains ; for, ( alas ! ) there is still wanting
A COPY PRINTED ON VELLUM.-Envious
Fates !-after having liberally granted seven
parts of so illustrious a whole, to refuse the
eighth ! -Why will not paper be vellum ...
--- -
54 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
or vellum, paper ? -But since it does certainly seem to be impossible that a Large
Paper Copy should be printed on Vellum,
we must patiently wait, till Nature may be
pleased to alter her laws in favor of BookCollectors. This consolation, however, remains in fast hold ; viz. that, although we
cannot have ... what cannot be had, we have
still obtained, what we have been labouring
for,-an UNIQUE COPY.
COPIES PRINTED UPON VELLUM.
Here, again, I seem to hear the reading Wits
at " their jests, and their gypes, and their
knaferies, and their mocks," pleasantly reminding me of the calf to whom we are
indebted for our VELLUM. But, while the
Collector enjoys the proud consciousness of
having paid no less a sum than 15 guineas
for a handful of Poems by Goldsmith, and
Parnell, merely because they were stamped
off upon the skin of one of these calves ; and
15 guineas more, on the same account, for
less than a handful of pages, composing a
little book of nursery morality, under the title
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 55
of " The Economy of Human Life,”—I am,
for once, provoked to bite the biters, and,
retorting their supposed allusion, to
"-hang a calf's skin on their recreant limbs."
But as the only effectual way of getting rid
of troublesome people, is, to run away from
them, I shall suddenly quit the Vellum Copy,
-and the less reluctantly, as, by an unusual
agreement among the moderate, on botk
sides of our question, the elegant beauty, and
chastened splendor, by which it captivates,
have secured to it unanimous admiration,-
though still with a wide variance of opinion,
respecting the proper occasions for its introduction.
FIRST EDITIONS.
It is sufficiently evident, (and here, again, we
find both parties at accord,) that the FIRST
EDITION of every book, may, primâ facie, be
supposed to have the advantage of every subsequent impression ; because, if printed during
the life of the Author, we may be nearly
certain that the business of the press has been
supervised by himself; and (what is at least
56 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
as valuable a consideration) we may be quite
certain that it has suffered no violation from
that furious spirit of arbitrary improvement,
by which Editors are accustomed to be possessed.-Here begins, and here ends, the partiality of the mere Book-worm, to FIRST
EDITIONS. Not so with the Collector, who
is distinguished by no other mark so illustriously, as by daring deviation from all the
tracks of the Student. I have, on various
other occasions, said more than enough to
evince, that, in the reasons which influence the
former Gentleman in his attachment to these
original Editions, the latter can have no part.
The Collector, indeed, goes far beyond his
learned Rival, in the terms of eulogy with
which he greets the FIRST EDITION ; and a
metaphor from (or at least a pointed allusion
to) sovereignty, is alone thought worthy of
distinguishing it:-" PRINCEPS EDITIO" is
its lofty name. Leaving the Student to vary,
and qualify, his expressions of respect, according to circumstances, the Collector, more
loyally, acknowledges the PRINCEPS EDITIO,
in all cases, and under every form, as
" A King indeed !"
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 57
Ye who are not ofus, are here ready to ask,
with your accustomed flippancy, - has he
reasons to shew for this determined preference? or has he passed sentence in the lump,
and in the dark, upon all the plebeian Editions, (as he seems to consider them) without
even the formality of inquiring
"Which is the Merchant here, and which the Jew?"
Gentlemen, hear him : -he tells you, and
very truly, that he has been indefatigable in
his inquiries after an answer to the only
question that at all concerns him ; viz. which
is the PRINCEPS EDITIO, and which is not ?
-You are very eloquent, —and, to others,
perhaps, very convincing, -in your rejoinder
to this reply ; but permit me, (who presume
to consider myself as allied to the Collector)
to ask yourselves — can you seriously entertain the supposition that any man would
follow any object so strenuously, and so enthusiastically, as he is following his, unless
he had the most cogent reasons for so following it whether he may be pleased to
assign those reasons, or not ?-Or, let this be
as it may-can it be possible that you have,
58 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
knowingly, been addressing these, or any
other arguments, to one who sleeps, drinks,
diets, physics, and exercises, for no one
purpose whatsoever, except that of getting
himself into strength, and wind, for running
over the world in chase of FIRST EDITIONS ?
TRUE EDITIONS.
Wee are, here, invited, once more, to admire
the " curiosa felicitas" in phraseology, by
which the Collector has substituted, in the
place of the obvious term, its direct opposite : the other instance, it will be recollected, is that ofTall Copies. In my mention
of these, at the proper place , I added a
gentle rebuke to the Collector, " though he
is my friend," as if he had been guilty of a
slight solecism ;-but I now humbly acknowledge my own hasty petulance ; having since
discovered what I have no doubt is the true
ground of his having voluntarily fallen into
this seeming absurdity : thus :-I have repeatedly noticed the natural desire ofthe Collector, to be distinguished from the more
studious, and critical classes of Literature ;
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 59
-
and I would here observe, that, in furtherance
of that object, he cannot more definitively
lay down his line of demarkation, than by
such little inaccuracies in the nomenclature of
his own science. -But, to return ; the ignorant, by the kindness of Mr. D. are suffered
to know, that the TRUE Edition, is essentially,
and emphatically, the false one ; being distinguished (and most greedily coveted on account of that distinction,) by at least one
gross error, defect, redundancy, &c. &c. from
every inferior Copy of the impression to
which it belongs. Some readers, who are
sadly given to the vexatious scrupulosity of
wondering and objecting all along, at whatever is not quite familiar to them, will be
asking, (as in the case of the Uncut Copies,
just now,) for the reasons upon which this
plan of conferring titles, without merit, is
founded. But, lest the Collector of True
Copies, who is here on his own --- throne,
should, again, chuse to give no other reply
than " stet, pro ratione, voluntas," the querist
may as well quietly grant the rationality of
the proceeding, just as he concedes to the
mathematician, that a point occupies no
60 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
space, and so suffer me, by way of diverting
his attention, to conclude this article by
laying before him a few of the mortifications
which the True ( i . e. false) Copy Hunter, is
in constant danger of undergoing. It is , for
instance, not easy to imagine the degree of
honest indignation to which his feelings must
be mounted, when, having paid down the
princely price of a copy warranted unsound,
he discovers that he has been villainously
fobbed off with one which is immaculately
perfect in all its parts !—He examines, with
eagerness, the numbering of the pages, which
he had been faithfully promised that he
should find all in confusion ;-not a figure
out of its most exact, and regular order !—
He looks, with the eye of a hawk, for the
invaluable blunder, consisting in one word
bedevilled by the compositor into two ; post
est, for example, instead of potest ;—he has
been made a fool of! nothing can be more
shamefully intelligible, and correct, than the
whole sentence is found to be, from beginning
to end !-Where is the precious passage inadvertently slapped off in red-ink?-NOWHERE !
-He flies to the fraudulent vender, in a
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 61
paroxysm of just rage, and demands his
money, or, at least, some other good-fornothing Copy, by way of making him a little
amends ;--but he is cheated and disappointed,
to the last ; there was, unhappily, no written
engagement, on the part of the Trader, to act
honourably, by giving him a volume abominably got up ; and he has nothing left for it
but to put off his bargain, at the best advantage he can, to some scholar, or critic, whose
absurd estimate ofthe value of an impression,
generally happens, very luckily for the ill used
Collector, to be of a totally different kind from
his own.
The order of my work has, at length,
brought me to the last, and (what the last
should always be) incalculably the most important, article on the list. The Collector
instinctively knows, or rather feels, that I
mean nothing less than
BLACK LETTER.
Why does it befal me, at my entrance upon
a theme which ought to stir up all the vitality
within me, to be suddenly paralysed into
62 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
torpor ? -Yet, well may I stumble at the
threshold of a Fane, which I am not yet
privileged to enter, but in the humble character of an Aspirant. The mysteries ofthis, the
Penetrale, the very Sanctum Sanctorum of
the Press, it is not for me to handle lightly,
if to handle at all. Yet, such amongst its
awful rituals as the Axabaplos may presume
to know, and publish, I will reverently
touch, — subsiding into the use of language
as familiar as the sanctity of the subject will
permit.
-
That Collector, then, who has reached the
highest seats in the Temple of typographical
Glory, is the votary of BLACK-LETTER. Why
may I not honour him, as he deserves, by inventing, in his favour, an appropriate name,
and procuring him to be henceforth called an
ATRALITERARIAN ? His are the choicest of
those joys, and privileges, which reward, or
stimulate, his humbler Brethren. Antiquity
—their general, and most venerated Deity –
showers all her rarest treasures on his head.
-The Black-Letter Copy is nearly coeval
with the very birth, and being, of the Printer's
craft ; and if the uncouthly angular configu-
-
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 63
"9
ration -- the obsoletely stiff, grim, and bloated
appearance, of its characters, " give pause
to the modern reader, so much the happier
for the Collector, to whom
-
66 teque, et tua, solus amares,"
is the address he would most gladly hear from
the reading gentleman, who thus leaves him
in that undisturbed possession of his beloved
rarities, which gives them all their value.
Little knowsthe Student, that whataffrights his
ignorant vision from the volume, is the " dulce
decus, et præsidium," of our learned Virtuoso.
Yes, let me inform him, from the mouth of
one who knew how to describe the object of his
worship, that it is " ipsa typorum ruditas, ipsa
illa atra, crassaque literarum facies," that so
" bellè tangit sensus. " If the eye of the
Atraliterarian be not caressed by the sweet,
smooth, sharp, and bold rotundity of letter,
which endears the modern page to the
modern reader, is there no pride in the reflection that, in rejecting these prettinesses, he
rejects but that, which, if accepted, he would
share with the most incurious ; whilst the
Letter in which he glories is his peculiar.
64 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
-
-And as for the gratification of seeing the
names of living Printers at the foot of the
Title-page, how languidly, how deadly,
must his eye repose upon these, when transferred from those of CAXTON, TOURNOUR,
and WYNKYN DE WORDE !-thrice happy
Typographers, whose departed Memories have
been recalled to nobler life, merely by the ages
that have gathered over your graves, — and,
together with the Authors, whom your types
alone eternize, have thus sociably rotted into
freshness ! Hail, and welcome ! venerable
volumes, which are thus victoriously shaking
off the sleep of a long enchantment ! -which,
though ye were lame, and crazy, and decrepit,
ere our great-great-grandfathers were weaned,
are now beheld to run, or fly,
the very
larks, and centipedes, of the Press !
---
Should the Objector still insist upon the
actual difficulty of making one's way through
a type so impassable as that which we have
described, I have only to remind him of
the leading distinction , so often laid down,
betweenthe Reader, and the Collector, in their
affairs with books ; and to say, that as the
latter takes but a bird's-eye view of a whole
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 65
field of page, though the former may be so
inquisitive as to pore through every furrow,
this formidable difficulty turns out to be a
bug-bear, as I am a little ashamed of having
been at the pains of shewing. But I have
too long ventured my foot within these hallowed precincts : -I make my prostration,
and retire.
- -
I HAVE now presented the offering of a zealous admirer, though a feeble Panegyrist, to
the noble Body of Book-Collectors . — One
other tribute, tending to the still higher advancement of their fame and felicity, remains.
May the Idea which fills my imagination but
be fastered into prosperous reality, — and the
self-applauding " vixi ! " will never have been
more exultingly pronounced, than by him
who was inspired to conceive it !
Perfect originality in any project for general, or particular benefit, it is now, perhaps,
too late in the long history of man, to hope
with reason. In the great object with which
I now teem, I am, in part, forestalled. To the
F
1
1
66 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
-
active, and enlightened spirit of the present
times, we are already indebted for four literary
" INSTITUTIONS."-I am ready with Proposals for a fifth ; an INSTITUTION, for
Young Book-COLLECTORS, whom, in their
combined capacity, I would call THE COLLECTORIAT. The scite, and dimensions, of
the future Edifice, are points which it would
be obviously needless to bring into view, until
it be seen whether the great object to which
they would have reference, shall be encouraged by the Parties concerned in it.
I, at present, restrict myself to the literary
ends of my speculation ; and these are, generally, that there be erected a Seminary, or
College, for the instruction of those youths,
who were blessed by Nature with the requisite
rage forbook-collecting, but cursed by fortune
with the denial of fit opportunities for venting it.
Over this College, I, of course, propose,
that well qualified, thorough-bred Collectors,
be placed, who should attend at stated hours,
for the purpose of giving lectures, theoretical,
as well as practical, to the Students. I further propose, that they be empowered to grant
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 67
--
-
the two first Degrees, as they are termed at
the Universities ; — those who have thus graduated, to bear, as their literary Additions,
the letter B. or M. (Bachelor, or Master,)
prefixed to one, or more, of the letters, which
will be shewn in the forms here following ; -
I will take B. as an example, and explain, as
I proceed ; — B. L. P. C. ( Bachelor of Large
Paper Copies.) - B. U. C. ( Ditto of Uncut
Copies.)-B.I. C. (Ditto of Illustrated Copies. )
-B.U.-omitting the C. to prevent confusion
with the second instance (Ditto of Unique
Copies. )-B. V. C. (Ditto of Vellum Copies. )
-B. F. E. (Ditto of First Editions. )—B. T. E.
(Ditto of True Editions. ) -B. B. L. ( Ditto of
Black Letter.) -in which last faculty, (and
in which alone,) the Students to proceed to
the degree of Doctor.
The Students are here supposed, for the
sake of perspicuity, to have followed some
one of the above studies, exclusively of the
rest : but, as so limited a measure ofambition
is not, for a moment, to be really dreaded, I
have only to notice, that such as shall have
passed honourable examinations in any of the
other branches, will be privileged to superadd
68
BIBLIOSOPHIA
.
the characteristic Letters which belong to
them.
In further exposition of my plan, I propose,
that the Great Room in which the Students
are to assemble, be portioned into eight Divisions, respectively appropriated to the study
of the eight liberal Arts above enumerated,
and conveniently furnished with shelves, for
the reception of books, and other articles
essential to a complete literary, or scientific
apparatus, for the use of the several classes of
scholars.
With respect to the shelves above-mentioned, they would be amply, and richly
stocked by the Professors, with specimens,
from their own collections, of all that is " curious,”—“ rare,”—“ precious,” —" unique,”-
and, generally, inaccessible.
-
Such is my faint outline of a noble, though
as yet uncreated, object : —such is the bare
skeleton, which I trust it is reserved for me
to see strutting with the halest flesh, and
richest blood. In the painful interval between
the conception , and the birth, of such an
establishment, let me seem to transport myself,
into my edifice, which, at present, alas ! has
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 69
nothing more substantial than Fancy for its
Founder ; nor any richer Benefactors, than
hopes, and wishes.—
-
Entering among my hopeful scholars, I
delight myself with glancing around upon
their various employments. -My attention is
first arrested by the School of Large Paper
Copies. The diligence, and ingenuity, here
required, must, confessedly, be exerted upon
somewhat a confined scale. All that the youth
can now, or ever, have to do, is carefully to
apply his rule to the length , and breadth, of a
Large Copy, and then do the same thing
with a small one, repeating these two operations with attention, till his understanding
shall have completely mastered the difference
between one Example, and the other. The most
backward lad, ifhe use indefatigable diligence,
must come at this in time ; -and when he shall
have succeeded, he will have the proud reflection in his mind, that his master has no other
advantage over him than that of possessing a
Copy, ofthe larger of the two sizes.
-
I turn next to the Uncut Copy Division.-
The Labour here imposed, is of a still more
lenient character. A youth of the common
70 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
rate of abilities, and application, will tolerably soon detect the whole extent of the
distinction between one book, of which the
leaves are cut, and another, of which the
leaves are not cut. The only other mystery which he will have to learn, is that
of never suffering himself to cut the aforesaid
leaves, by which he would evidently nullify
the very essence of the volume. Now, allowing the difficulties attending these two objects
to be ever so formidable, and embarrassing,
there will be but the higher glory in surmounting it ; and philosophers have long ago
decided, that trouble is the market-price of
immortality.
But the vision,-as it is yet no more than
avision,―is too tantalizing to be pursued ; and
so, ardently looking forward to the hour when
I may be destined to see the posse converted
into an esse, I will leave my imaginary young
friends at their studies.-Studies may, perhaps,
be thought a word requiring some qualification :-there are those who will be ready
enough to remind me of its particular reference to the reading Classes of the Learned ;
and they may be provoked to add, that, of all
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 71
the eight branches into which I have divided
these " studies," there are but three, which
require even the most learned of my Professors themselves, to have the slightest knowledge ofthe Alphabet ; viz . those of " Illustrated Copies " " First Editions" — and
"True Editions."-But perhaps I am overcandid in supposing them to allow even thus
much; lest, therefore, they should be disposed to deny it, I will prove the affirmative
in each of the three instances. For " Illustrated Copies," it is clear that he who employs
himself upon them, must, at least, be able to
spell through the volume, (whether he comprehend, the general drift of the writer, or
not,) as well as to take down the names of
persons, and places, as they come under his
eye; this being, in truth, the only object, for
which he concerns himself to peruse the
book.-Next, as to " First Editions," the
Collector of them could not have collected
them at all, (for himself, I mean, ) without
having made so much progress in his reading
as to be perfectly sure of those two words,
wherever he finds them in a title-page ;-just
as the poorest Linguist, when he goes into
72 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
another country, takes good care to be able
to ask for bread, and beer, in the language of
that country, as fluently as if he had spoken
it from his cradle. -And, lastly, with respect
to "True Editions," he who selects them, by
the strength of his own understanding, must
positively be as well able to read, —I have not
said, as able to read well, -as any man alive ;
-nay, he must actually understand what he
reads : how, otherwise, would he know, when
he meets them, these true faults , or faulty
truths, (or what are they ?) which he is so
bent upon finding ?
my
Having said thus much in your defence,
fellow-Collectors, if I am yet intitled so to
style you, I will entrust my project to your
protection ; exciting you, at the same time,
to do what I will call your duty, by a gentle
fillip, (which word, I hope, will not be misprinted Philippic, -even though the error
should be the means of making this a TRUE
EDITION,) before I take my leave. This I
have to say. It is not without a painful sense
of shame, that I behold our lethargic rivals,
with a sudden skip of activity, throwing open
the doors oftheir literary Ware-houses, before
BIBLIOSOPHIA. 75
mentioned, to all the monied Ignorance in
England ; whilst We -the very Harlequins
of Literature-idly leave our younger brethren to fish out their education for themselves, in the shops, and stalls, which are their
only Schools , -under the tuition of Shopboys, Catalogues, and Auctioneers, which are
their only Professors !-
This, Sirs, must go on no longer : -let us,
too, have our Institution ; -and we may live to
raise an offspring, who shall extend the conquests of the Collector over so wide a field,
as, finally, not to leave the Student a book to
study. At least, we may expect to see our
Eaglets drive these mid- day Owls from out of
their Palaces of Science, back to their native
element in those monastic dungeons, their
College- Libraries. Thence they ought never
to have ventured forth,-and there they may
again pursue their reading, amidst their fellow
owls, and owlish fellows, -drowsing, side by
side, over their studies, to the dismal clank
of the chains, in which they hang their
Authors.
66 My Lords, (and Ladies) I have done. ”-
I have accomplished the exalted end of my
74 BIBLIOSOPHIA.
..
ambition, by offering the free, and cordial,
however scant, and worthless, tribute of my
veneration to .. THE COLLECTOR. In
thus designating him by his proper name, I
use not the unnecessary prefixes of wise,
noble, illustrious ; &c. I say, with more dignifying plainness, THE COLLECTOR : —such
an appellation scorns to twinkle in the
jewellery of outward Titles ;-just as every
Briton feels, that " Lord," before the Name
of NELSON, serves but to dilute its glories.


THE TWELVE LABOURS OF
HERCULES,
EXHIBITED IN A RUNNING PARALLEL WITH THOSE
OF
AN EDITOR.
THE various duties, and qualities, of an accomplished EDITOR, having lately been presented to my mind, on a particular occasion,
have ever since continued, I know not how,
nor why, to trouble my meditations.
This intruding subject, in one of its late
visits, very naturally brought in its hand that
celebrated passage, respecting the office of an
Editor, which occurs in Johnson's Preface to
his own Edition of Shakspeare.
As the passage in question, considering its
extraordinary fulness, is very short, and as I
76 AN EDITOR PITTED
persuade myself that even those who best
remember it, will thank me for an opportunity of admiring it once more, " see here
it is :"-
" An Editor must have before him all
possibilities of meaning, with all possibilities
of expression : -such must be his comprehension of thought, and such his copiousness of
language. Out of many readings possible,
he must be able to select that, which best
suits with the state, opinions, and mode of
language, prevailing in every age, and with
his Author's particular cast of thought, and
turn of expression :-such must be his knowledge, and such his taste. Conjectural criticism demands more than humanity possesses ;
and he that exercises it with most praise, has
frequent need of indulgence. "
-
After a long, and close, consideration of
the above Oracle, I involuntarily exclaimed
" If these averments be as just, and true,
as the language that contains them is forcible,
and terse, what an HERCULEAN task is that
of an Editor !"-The expression which had
thus escaped my lips, in a purely proverbial
form, imperceptibly led on my reflections to
AGAINST HERCULES. 77
the Hero himself, whose arduous achievements gave it birth. —A general retrospect of
his Twelve celebrated LABOURS was the consequence ; and as Johnson's lofty description
of the Labours of an Editor, was still floating
on my fancy, there next ensued an insensible
(though, as yet, but slight, and desultory)
comparison between the corporeal, and the
intellectual exertions, on which my thoughts
were thus simultaneously employed. -To the
credit of Mind, in this comparison, I found,
at every glance, with growing pleasure, and
surprize, that the Scholar was running abreast
with the Hero, all the way ; and that the
powerful Writer, whose testimony I have
cited, so far from having over-valued the
heroism of the editorial character, has
passed entirely unnoticed the larger, as well
as more eminent and important, portion, of
its toilsome glories.
No longer satisfied with a general survey of
the Parallel, I took the resolution ofsubmitting
it to a close scrutiny.-The result of this novel
species of collation, is now before the Reader
-to whom I respectfully resign the office of
awarding the palm of honourable fatigue.
78 AN EDITOR PITTED
LABOUR I.
THE Exploit with which our heroic Series
commences, was the celebrated drubbing inflicted on the Nemean Lion, who had long
been behaving extremely ill to every man,
woman, and child, whom he chanced to meet
with in his rambles. When so unneighbourly
a line of conduct could be put up with no
longer, Hercules, as usual in all such difficulties, was called in to the offender. He instantly
obeyed the summons, and, having made himself master ofthe case, lost no time in waiting
on the King of the woods, for the purpose of
representing the improprieties of which he had
been guilty ; but, as neither spoke the other's
language, the Hero immediately began his
remonstrances with an argument universally
intelligible, and one which no man, before, or
after him, has had the art of urging with such
irresistible force-the argumentum baculinum.
When, after a long, and troublesome tussel,
he had sufficiently killed his enemy, -(for, so
plaguily tough was the hide of the quadruped,
that it stood the biped in a whole quiver of
灣
AGAINST HERCULES. 79
arrows, club-blows without number, and a
Cornish hug at parting, before he had done
his work entirely to his mind, )-he borrowed
the skin of the defunct, and wore it as a military uniform, ever after.
PARALLEL. A very formidable outset,
against the EDITOR, it must be confessed ! -
Mais, courage !-the Editor is as little afraid of
Hercules, as Hercules was of the Lion ; for
he, too, can boast of having manfully beaten
his Lion, in the form of a devouring Critic, or
Brother-editor, or both in one, who mayhappen
to want killing ; a business which, in imitation ofhis Model, he performs, either with the
arrows of wit, the club of argument, or the
close hug ofironicalpanegyric ; nay sometimes,
as in the Labour before us, with a happy combination ofall three. As an example is generally thought to have a pretty effect, I shall
barely remind the reader of Hercules Johnson's
treatment of Lion Pope, when the latter had
incautiously ventured to roar a little too loudly,
about " the dull duty of an Editor."
80 AN EDITOR PITTED
But there is another particular attending
this inaugural Labour, which has not yet been
mentioned ; and this is, that the remarkably
sturdy resistance of the Lion, was, probably,
in some measure, owing to his parentage ; for
it appears, on inspecting his classical pedigree,
that he had an hundred- headed, fire- vomiting
Monster, for his Papa. The name of this
gentleman was Typhon. Now, as to the
value of this little genealogical anecdote, for
the purposes of my PARALLEL, -it would be
very strange if, in reading it, we should not
find our thoughts insensibly sliding off to a
certain OTHER many- headed, fire- breathing
animal, considerably posterior in date to this
Typhon, and well-known among the moderns
by the name of a REVIEW. As theformer of
these Monsters was the natural father of the
Lion, the latter is not less obviously the literary parent of that roaring, lacerating savage,
the Critic ; and the one child may be as easily
supposed to have morally emulated, as the
other to have physically inherited, the intractableferocity of the Sire.
AGAINST HERCULES. 81
LABOUR II.
DESTROYING THE LERNEAN HYDRA.
Before I enter upon a detailed account of
this triumph, obtained by our Hero at the
Hydra's expense, I may, perhaps, be indulged
in expatiating somewhat at large upon a few
singular traits in the manners, character,
of this numerous individual.
and {persons }0of
We have no Abortion on record, that ever
contrived to get itself more frequently into
scrapes with the swordsmen of its day, than
the above ; and it is, perhaps, to some secret
consciousness of this untoward destiny, that
we are to attribute the uncommonly large
stock of heads, which our provident and calculating Pest appears to have laid in , against
a rainy day; a stock, which, moreover, it
had found a knack of turning to the best
possible advantage, by promptly producing
two for one, from any given neck, which
might have been topped, or pounded ; —thus
yielding a sudden and clear profit, in this
essential article, of cent. per cent. per head,
-
82 AN EDITOR PITTED
upon the very death of every partner in the
general firm of mischief ! This formidable
singularity in the habits of the Hydra, had,
doubtless, a considerable share in occasioning
the striking discordance, and perplexity,
which prevail in the accounts of ancient naturalists respecting the real complement of
heads, by which this thriving non-descript
was distinguished, and which fluctuates, in.
their vague and unsatisfactory accounts, from
seven, to an hundred. Yet let us not lose
sight of candour, in our zeal for knowledge.
We have just convinced ourselves, by unanswerable reasons, that in reality, there can
have been no determinate complement at all.
But, admitting, for a moment, that there was,
and, consequently, that our laudable love of
accuracy, might have been rewarded with the
true number, there are sundry little particulars,
in explanation of the above discrepances,
* It may, probably, become me in this place, to
offer an apology to our Barings, Goldsmids, &c.
for having unwarily led them to murmur at the
Hydra, which has so cruelly suffered this invaluable
secret to perish with it.
AGAINST HERCULES. 83
-
-
which, on closer reflection, could scarcely fail
ofoccurring to our minds. For what, let me
ask, was the thing (or things) to be counted ?
-Ifwe duly attend, first, to the numerosity
of the object in question, as an argument by
itself; secondly, to the perpetual variations
in the returns of killed , wounded, and missing,
which necessarily resulted from its ingenious
method of breeding extempore recruits—(an
idea, by the bye, purely its own, though it has
since been adopted, without acknowledgment,
by Mr. Pitt in his scheme of a supplementary
militia) thirdly, to the subtle, and restless
manœuvrings of so large a party, incessantly
transposing themselves, at the respective caprice of each, into every embarrassing (however otherwise entertaining, and picturesque)
variety of groups ; fourthly, to the distur-
-
bance given to the attention of our observers
by the ungracious, and unamiable (not to say
forbidding) turn of feature, and expression,
which probably prevailed, without a single
exception, through all the countenances of
this hard-favoured family—
" facies non omnibus una,
Nec diversa tamen, quales decet esse Sororum; ".
84 AN EDITOR PITTED
fifthly, to the difficulty of clearly distinguishing objects through the dubious atmosphere
of smoke and fire, of which (with an added
proportion of venom) their breath was composed ; and, " although the last, not least '
-
""
to the momentarily increasing probability
that the Object of the calculation, either in an
animated start of pique at the over- curious
familiarity ofits Tellers, or in compliance with
an incentive still less sentimental in its proposed indulgences, would suddenly, and
finally, close the account, by .... gorging the
accomptants ; —after dispassionately weighing
all these considerations, I say, we cannot
we, surely, cannot, but allow, that, from the
first dawn of arithmetic, down to the present
moment, there never existed an operation to
be performed bythe rule of addition, in which
the totals were so hard to be reconciled, or
where a fairer claim might be put in to the
commonly allowed salvo of " errors excepted. "
Having, thus far, confined myself to the
securities with which the Hydra had so liberally, and so discreetly, provided its person,
I have now to mention a draw-back upon
these privileges, of which Hercules found
AGAINST HERCULES. 85
means to avail himself, to its disadvantage. It
comes down to us, that the jugular stumps
which knew how to make so good a market
of decapitation, had not been equally circumspect in insuring themselves againstfire.
Let us now attend our Hero to the field,
and see in what manner he acquitted himself,
in a species of service, which he had never
before had an opportunity of seeing —At the
opening of his interview with the Hydra, he
observed, as well as the very adverse circumstances of the case would permit, the shifting
positions, and complicated evolutions, of his
compound adversary ; when, finding himself
no match for the Monster in tactics, (where
even two heads, they say, are better than one, )
he resolved to make what shift he could with
strength, and courage - managing, also, by
the great variety ofhis weapons, to put himself,
in some sort, on an equality with his more
versatile foe.
Thus prepared, and not yet aware of the
disadvantages of success, as I have stated
them, the human Combatant at once uplifted
his noted two- handed bludgeon, and lustily laid
about him among the enemy, in his old way,
86 AN EDITOR PITTED
and as far as relates to execution-with his
old success ; but we may easily imagine his astonishment, and vexation , as soon as he came
to perceive the reviving, nay propagating, influence of his death-blows. Not being of a
temper, however, to be disconcerted by trifles,
and fully sensible that " faint heart," could
never be expected to " win " so " fair a lady,"
he merely changed his mode of pressing her,
and resorted, with better hopes, to the other
means of persuasion which he had still in reserve ; till, finding that her ferocious coyness
did but increase with every fresh accost, and
wearied out, at last, by his disheartening
victories, — whether by the force of native
sagacity, or by the seasonable exercise of his
memory, he suddenly fell upon the searing
process to which I have already alluded .
At this juncture, his friend Iolas very seasonably comes in the way, and to him he
deputes the office of burning away the proud
flesh, when he should, himself, have removed
the heads which he had found so obtrusive.
Iolas, patly lighting, at the moment, on a
pretty bit of iron for his purpose, lost no time
in warming it up to a most intemperate degree
AGAINST HERCULES. 87
of the thermometer, and then carefully applying the actual cautery to the proper places,
as fast as the Hero had properly prepared the
way for it, by amputation. The above severe
operation on the patient, had its curiously
customary effect, of immediately relieving the
Surgeon who thus critically stunted, ( or
caused to be stunted, ) at every touch, the
growth of those quickening twins, whose upstart elder brothers he had before so perversely, and unaccountably fathered.
The rapid increase of miscarriages thus
brought on upon Madam, at once inclined
the victory to the Man's side ; and his plural
Antagonist, irresistibly assailed in her headquarters, and giving up the battle, and the
ghost, at the same instant, very quietly slept
with her fathers,-or with whatever principle
(or no principle) she had to thank for her
existence.
In conclusion, the Conqueror, acting in the
true spirit of that martial maxim- " fas est
et ab hoste doceri," and not disdaining to
take a hint from a Hydra, when he found it
worth adopting, very laudably emulated his
late opponent in the useful virtue offore-cast;
88 AN EDITOR PITTED
ingeniously contriving to make one triumph
the foundation of others, by transferring to
the points ofhis arrows the convenient venom
ofits late proprietor, whose occasion for it
was now over.
-
66
-
PARALLEL. The Editor again marches,
passibus æquis," by the side of the Hero.
The swarm by which he is threatened, are
the innumerable ERRORS that spring out ofthe
body of a single volume, and thence attack him
from every side. His weapon is the goose- quill
with which he assails them. His enemies, are
also endued with that self-multiplying power
which gave Hercules so much trouble. When
he has decapitated a single Error, with a backstroke, (" transverso calamo,") he is assaulted
bytwo, which have sprung out ofit in theproofsheet ; and when each of these, as he flatters
himself, are again destroyed, and sent to the
" Devil, " they return upon him, multiplied
into four, in the revise.-But his motto is
" Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito : "
like his great corrival, he now resorts to the
AGAINST HERCULES. 89
infallibility of the caustic -a cancel. One
" hallucination " after another, perishes under
this exterminating process, till not a " serpent
ERROR," " shews its ugly head." Finally, the
Editor is ready to carry me triumphantly
through the remaining part of my PARALLEL,
by dipping his literary arrows in the venom
with which the provocations ofhis late enemies
have supplied him, and succesfully employing
it against his otherfoes.
LABOUR III.
In this Labour, it was the discouraging business of Hercules, to catch, and bring into the
presence of Eurystheus, the STAG OF ENOE ,
which had long been renowned for throwing
out the whole field of his pursuers, by the
provoking quickness of his motions. Now,
although the bulk and bone of the Hero, had
stood him in great stead, when he had to do
with the Lion , and the Hydra, they were
evidently much in his way upon the present
occasion :-" ipsa sibi officit copia." In this
unequal contest of speed, therefore, our
90 AN EDITOR PITTED
Human Hound had to make up in wit , what
he wanted in foot, and in nose ; and the
more so as he was required by the express
stipulation of Eurystheus, to produce the
animal " alive, and unhurt." This latter
condition of the pursuit is sufficient to stultify
the story which represents him to have gradually won upon the Stag, by slightly
wounding him at a distance ; while it perfectly agrees with the more general account
of the matter ; viz. that, being prohibited
from the use of weapons, he saved his heels
by decoying the chace into a trap ; —though,
even with the help of this contrivance, we
find him in full cry after the horned fugitive,
during a hard and continued run , of not less
than a whole year. When he had bagged his
deer at last, something was still to happen
between " the cup" of victory, and " the lip"
of triumph ; for Diana, in her twofold relation to the Stag, first as its particular friend
and patroness, next as Lady of the Manor,
and, herself, a keen sports-woman, was extremely nettled at the trick by which her
four-footed protegè had been over-reached,
-scolded Hercules soundly for his trespass,
AGAINST HERCULES. 91
as well as for breaking through the rules of fair
hunting, boldly snatched her favorite out of
the hands of our heroic Poacher, and then,
as the Goddess of game, afforded sanctuary
to her Venison.
Hercules, who was not less renowned for
softness to Ladies, than for roughness to Gentlemen, and who is well known to have been
as ready to sit down to spinning with the former, as to stand up to fighting with the latter,
made his apologies in so insinuating a manner,
and so effectually appeased the rural Virago,
that, in token of her full forgiveness, she left
him in undisputed possession of the Stag.
PARALLEL.-The qualities of skill, and perseverance, were not more signally displayed
by the Hero, as above, than they are by the
Editor, as below, ―The slippery animal which
he has undertaken to hunt through the fields
ofliterature, and which is incessantly flying
before him, is the MEANING of his Author,
which, too often, keeps him dancing after it
for a whole year together ; — fortunate, if he
92 AN EDITOR PITTED
-
have produced it, as he, too, is required to
do, ALIVE, and UNHURT, before the eyes of
his employers, at last. Under the severe difficulties of this obligation , finding himself
unable to run down this subtle fugitive by native strength, and quickness, he is reduced, like
Hercules, to have recourse to a trap ; and
this trap is composed of the learned sagacity,
and enlightened research, with which he decoys
the runaway signification into his possession, —
when he triumphantly exhibits it, neither
wounded, nor lamed, nor distorted, nor in any
way injured, or altered, by the violence of
forced construction, during his long and arduous pursuit.
As he is exultingly marching off, in triumph,
with the prize he had so hardly won,—another
claimant, in the person of a rival Editor,
shall indignantly come up, and snatch it from
hisgrasp, with a severe rebuke to himfor having
presumed tofollow a passage, upon his literary
premises a passage, too, which was previously
sacred to himself, as the true Expositor.-
Yet our Editor, if he have the fortune, as he
has the skill, of Hercules, needs not, even yet,
despair. The Reclaimant, indeed, refuses to
AGAINST HERCULES. 93
resemble Diana, by resigning his title to the
prize ; but the justice, and discernment, of
the Public, may eventually destroy that title,
and award the scut to him who had really
seized the object ofpursuit.
LABOURS IV. VI . VII. VIII . AND X.
THESE several Labours, as their objects were
so nearly of the same kind, I shall class, and
dispose of, under one head. They consisted,
in the order above observed, in destroying, or
capturing, the Erymanthean Boar—the Wild
Bull ofCrete the carnivorous Birds ofStymphalis the anthropophagous Mares of Diomedes-and the Monster Geryon.
The above parties were all very great
plagues in their way ; and, in whatever they
may have dissented, were unanimous in settingtheir faces against Man. Hercules, though
a bit of a God, had, as we have seen, a strong
fellow-feeling for mortals, in the worst half
of his nature ; and, in the cases before us,
was indulged with ample opportunities of
employing his usual summary methods of
reform.
94 AN EDITOR PITTED
I. The Boar, like our late acquaintance, the
Stag, was to be taken, and brought before
Eurystheus, alive,-though we may not immediately perceive the ground of this tender
consideration for his feelings, and shall presently have occasion to view it with even
increased surprize. As for Hercules, he seems
to have never troubled himself about his
master's motives, but always went quietly to
his work, like an honest servant as he was.
He accordingly followed his Boar, without
farther inquiry, and overtook him with the
less difficulty .... first, through the fortunate
shortness of the animal's legs, -secondly, by
favour of a deep snow, (which, perplexing as it was to the feet even of the rational
runner, was four to two against the other,)—
and thirdly, because the Brute, when his
strength failed him, could hit upon no better
plan of concealment, than that of running
his head into the snow, under an idea that,
although it had refused him footing, it might
grant him cover. Hercules, however, presently
convinced him of his error ; and, as resistance
seems never to have occurred to him, he was,
according to order, introduced, " leaping
AGAINST HERCULES. 95
alive," into the presence of Eurystheus,
that unmerciful, and tyrannical Task-master,
whom Hercules had to thank for setting him
at work, through the whole of these tiresome
undertakings. Eurystheus, however, seems to
have been more courageous in imposing tremendous tasks, than in witnessing the proofs
of their accomplishment ; for the unexpected
entrance of the tusky forester instantaneously
frightened him into a tub, that stood handy
for the purpose, in which tub, he uninterruptedly passed his time, with a general order
of " not at home to any body," for many
following days.
II. A wild Bull, the subject of the ensuing
Labour, is so like a wild Boar, the subject of
the last, that we have the less reason to
complain of the conciseness with which we
are just told that he was taken, according
to order, and brought (alive, again, ) into
Peloponnesus.
III. As for the Birds of Stymphalis, whose
taste for man's flesh drew upon them the
attention of Hercules, we simply learn that,
having sprung this precious Covey of Cannibals, he found means to bring them all down ;
H
96 AN EDITOR PITTED
but we have no account of his particular
method of sporting.
-
IV. Our Hero was next summoned to the
wildMares ofDiomedes, whohadgiven general
offence by indulging the same depraved appetite, with which he had before quarrelled in
the Birds of Stymphalis. On arriving among
them, he soon made them wish that they had
contented themselves with common horsemeat, but not before he had treated them,
once more, with their favorite dish, by serving
up their Master, who had thought proper to
encourage their fancy for it ; but before they
could have time to digest him, they were,
themselves, presented, as a dinner, to another
party of wild beasts, who were as fond of
Mare, as they had been of Man.
V. The last ofthe five Labours, which I have
thus consolidated, was the destruction of Geryon, who was not the less a Monster, for
being a King : to the former of these characters, few men have been able to shew a
better title ; for, beside choosing to have three
heads to contrive with, and as many bodies to
execute their orders, beside, too, that he kept
a dog, with but one head fewer than his
AGAINST HERCULES. 97
master, we are assured that this confounded
King actually pastured his sheep (whose prejudices against their new bite must have been
peculiarly difficult to get over) upon us !
In a case of this most aggravated nature,
it was thought high time for Hercules to interfere, and he never less required a spur. His
triple-crowned Majesty, was, with very few
formalities, deposed, and thrown on the same
dunghill with his dog Janus, as he was (or
might have been) called.
-
As for the poor, misguided flocks, so
equitable an Hero knew how to distinguish
between choice and compulsion ; and accordingly, he not only forgave them their involuntary sins of the palate, but kindly restored to
them the long-forgotten comforts of a vegetable diet, in his own meadows at Tirynthus.
PARALLEL " PAULO MAJORA CANEMUS.'
-
The Editor, as ranked with Hercules, in
the five preceding Labours, is to be regarded
as the Enemy, and Avenger, ofthe anti- social
Passions, under their two main divisions -
-
98 AN EDITOR PITTED
those ofopen, brutal, Fury ; and deadly, poisonous malice. In the execution of his office,
he is, accordingly, to level his severity, either,
in the former case, against the exasperated
Critic, who has suffered himself, with whatever alleged provocation, to foam into sanguinary satire against his Author, — or, in the
latter, against the unhumanized, and more rancorous enemy ofthat Author, (and ofthe Good,
in general,) if he shall have execrablyfastened
upon his honest, envied, fame.
Such are the two distinct species of
rational Monsters, which our Hercules, working after his great Pattern, has enterprized to
hunt down. For the opposite rules, and
measures, by which he is to govern himself in
the pursuit of his double object, let us study
the corresponding particulars of our Story.-
-
We have there seen, that, in the ripened
hour of avengement, the Hero could teach
his anger discrimination. -If, among the victims of his noble rage, even the goring Boar,
or the tossing Bull, were found to stand within
the possibility of being tamed, byforcible restraint, he could seize , without destroying them,
in the very storm of hisassault : -but, for the
AGAINST HERCULES. 99
Birds of Stymphalis the mares ofDiomedes
the Monster Geryon-those fiercer, direr Savages, who had left their mild, and harmless
instincts, that they might be bloody, out of
course, his blow was sudden , mortal, and
unsparing,
Imitating this procedure in both its parts,
our moral Hercules, who rises against ferocity
in Man, proportions the weight of his inflictions, to the quantity of the offence : if he
perceive that, by the coercion of severe rebuke,
the keenly BITING SATIRIST, may be securely
heldfromfuture mischief, he can temperately
forbear the stroke that would have laid his
victim in the death of disgrace : this lawless
Desperado of the pen, may, generously, be
saved alive -but, for the literary Misereant,
who springs from the hold of the Charities,
into the arms of the Furies, for the
Christian Cannibal, whose soul, with strange,
and horrid longings, turns, disgusted, from the
`kindly nutriment of NATURE, that human reputation, may be his forbidden feast,
for
HIM, there are to be no reserves oflenity—no
falterings ofcompassion ; for, where Abominations come to punishment, correctives are
100 AN EDITOR PITTED
14
utterly out of hope : -let infamy like this, be
told with a trumpet,-that Man may have his
warning, whilst a Monster is abroad. But,
there is more. Justice wants her sacrifice ;
Virtue craves her Example ; Innocence lies
bleeding without help :-it is enough : —where
the calls for unmitigated rigour are thus collected into one clamorous cry, -to stint the
torture, were to patronise the outrage ; and
So, .... that Mercy may not darken into
Cruelty,-death, for death, must be the law.
LABOUR V.
I AM a little ashamed to find myself now required, by the severity of my duty as an
Historian, to exhibit my Hero in a character,
ofwhich the disgrace is, at first view, rather
more conspicuous than the glory—that of a
Stable-boy. But not too fast ! —it will presently be seen, that, like Virgil, as commended
by Dryden, he could " toss about his dung
with an air of dignity." The Augean Stables
were not for every common groom to take in
hand. In the first place, they were the stables
AGAINST HERCULES. 101
of a Monarch - the <" King's Mews," as it
were, of antiquity ; and in the second place,
if any modern Leicestershire Nobleman, who
may be disposed to look contemptuously on
my friend Hercules on this occasion, will
have the goodness to be (as Augeas had been)
so very inattentive to his out-houses, as to
suffer thousands upon thousands of unclean
beasts to continue in their stalls for nearly
half a century together, without the smallest
obligation to the spade, the broom, or the pail,
for the removal of their discomforts, during
the whole of that vast period, he may probably be of opinion, at the end of it, that,
should his Majesty's Master of the Horse
undertake to help him, by being his ....
Helper, it would scarcely, if at all, detract
from the greatness of his rank, or office.—
But, to my Labour.
--
After a grave, and comprehensive survey of
the whole extent of the evil, (which was such
as to lend the most powerful confirmation to
Mr. Burke's theory of the Sublime, where he
partially derives it from a sudden temptation to
wrinkle up one's nose,)-Hercules embraced,
with the mind of a Philosopher, as well as of
102 AN EDITOR PITTED
a Hero, the necessity of proportioning his
power to his work.-Laughing at such puny
subsidies of water, as could be raised from
springs, and wells, our illustrious Scavenger
at once boldly, and bodily, wrested from its
course a noble River, as an Agent alone commensurate with the portentous magnitude of
the distress. Having brought his River, with
all its tributary streams, under his grasp , he
sent it thundering before him, at full tide, in
a driving torrent of purification, through
every quarter, and recess, of this grand Metropolis of Nastiness.
Although the unparalleled difficulty of
effectuating this mighty mundification, rendered it almost worthy of the hand that was
employed in it, we are left to suppose that the
Hero was not insensible to the " sublimity,
of its annoyances ; for, on this only occasion,
did he stipulate for the hire of his Labour.
The reward he demanded was perfectly appropriate to the nature of the service , — viz. a
tythe of the beasts, whom he had re-instated
in the comforts of a clean house . Augeas,
however, whose mind was evidently as foul as
his stalls, and who seems to have had more
AGAINST HERCULES. 103
satisfaction in contemplating the work, than
in recompensing the workman, not only flatly
refused the promised perquisite, but actually
banished the Heir Apparent of his Kingdom,
in the person of his own son, for having disrespectfully urged him, on this occasion, to
practise so expensive a virtue as honesty.
Hercules, whose talent for redressing the
grievances ofothers we have so often admired,
was not likely to be an idle spectator of his
own wrongs. As soon as he had " washed his
hands " of an employment which so pressingly
called for that operation, he took up his own
cudgels, (we pretty well know of what sort
they were, ) and would, probably, have succeeded in beating a right sense of the business
into his Majesty's head, if he had not, at the
same time, unguardedly beaten out the brains.
which were necessary to the comprehension
of his arguments.
As for the young Prince, whose pleas for
justice had been as ill rewarded as the journeywork of his client, his troubles were of very
short duration . Our Hero, having begun his
dirty work by emptying a Stable for the
Father, and finished it by clearing out a
104 AN EDITOR PITTED
Throne forthe Son, immediately beckonedthe
latter from his short banishment, -leaving the
good people of Elis to thank him for a much
better King than he had taken from them.
PARALLEL. -It will be entirely the faultand the very grievous fault-of our Editor, if
having taken a tainted Author under his care ,
he riva! not his strenuous predecessor in the
great, and necessary Labour of purgation.
His STABLES are too frequently found to be
polluted with impurities, far more various in
their names, as well as pernicious in their
natures, than those which Hercules was
called to wash away ; -impurities, accumulated, not by goats, and oxen, only, (which are
exclusively named in the Herculean Labour,)
but by wolves, bears, foxes, apes, hogs, asses,
and every other bestial representative of the
vices, and follies, of man. He is to pour his
river of reformation through every contaminated stall, and stye ; and, where he may not
consider himself as authorized, like his Coun-
AGAINST HERCULES. 105
--
terpart, to remove the nuisance altogether, it
is, at least, his urgent duty to waru the unwary
foot against the foulness of the place. — In
this arduous enterprize, he, like Hercules,
may chance to be employed by a King ;-
but, lest he should be discouraged by an apprehension that he may too nearly resemble
the Hero by labouring for a thankless King,
he shall be reminded that there is a Monarch,
who is so far from being capable of witholding
from his servants the well- earned reward of a
distasteful labour, that he places half his
glory in assisting at the work of moral purification with his own royal hands ; and
desires not to rest from it, till he shall have
defecated all the seats of corruption, to their
remotest corners.
---- He, too has a Son : but, again, my
Parallel nobly fails me in its conclusion ; for
never shall it be the task of any modern Hercules, to visit on the head of his, and England's
Father, the crime ofhaving sent his son to banishment, for moving him to bejust.
106 AN EDITOR FITTED
LABOUR IX.
Ir is, already, once more, my painful task to
shew my Hero at a disadvantage, —if I should
not rather say, under actual shame. His gallantry, in both senses of that word, is in no
less danger of degradation in the present
Labour, than was his dignity in the last.-
Though we should incline to connive at his
having raised his arm against a Woman, and
a Queen, inasmuch as this royal Lady was an
Amazon, in what manner are we to cover his
conduct, in having terminated his conquest
over her, by stripping her of her girdle ? -
Would that I could plead in bar against his
sentence, that he snatched it away in sportive
fondness, vowing that he would for ever wear
it at his throbbing heart, -and thus class it
with many an other such flattering robbery,
committed bythe modern inamorato at a ball,
or during the delicious moment of mutual
confessions.--Alas ! it will not do :-the sturdy
caitiff seized it like a plunderer as he was, -
and, like a slave, as he also was, laid it at the
feet of his rigorous Master. -Well ! I have,
AGAINST HERCULES. 107
at least, the consolation of knowing that I
shall be believed in my several reports of his
extraordinary merits on other occasions, in
reward of the inflexible veracity with which
I have thus painfully recorded his treatment
of Hippolyte, Queen of the Amazons.
PARALLEL.- Editor, take warning ! -draw
your goose-quill upon the men, and welcome ;
nor need you ever wipe the poison out ofyour
pen, for want of victims to your noble rage :
-but, for your life, I mean for the life of
your reputation,-let THE LADIES alone !
-
" nullum memorabile nomen
Fœmineâ in poenâ est, nec habet victoria laudem ."
Rudest of Editors, Johnson ! - grim as,
questionless, thy Shade must be, and rugged
as, certainly, thy substance was, -where was
the softening, humanizing memory of Molly
Aston, when thou couldst lift thy ponderous
club against that most feminine Queen of
literary Amazons, Mrs. Montague, who feared
not to meet thee on the critical (if not the
108 AN EDITOR PITTED
editorial) field of Shakspeare ? " audetque
viris concurrere virgo." — So furious was thy
blow, that " with the wind and whiff of that
fell " club, it took away the breath of another
Amazonian Princess, though distant far from
the scene of thy terrific onset ; till at length
this gentle Championess -thy friend thy
" Thralia dulcis (yes, ' twas she herself, )
regained enough of this suspended breath, to
vow her innocence of the cruel charge which
brought her to the ground. *
""
―
To return, for a moment, to the former, and
most rudely injured, of these literary Heroines,
-I can only say, let Boswell (Tour to the
* On the last leaf of her Anecdotes ofDr. Johnson, this fair Amazon publisheth a " Post-script," of
the following tenor : " Since the foregoing went
to the press, having seen a passage in Mr. Boswell's
Tour to the Hebrides, in which it is said that I
could not get through Mrs. Montague's Essay on
Shakspeare, I do not delay a moment to declare
that, on the contrary, I have always commended
it myself, and heard it commended by every one
else ; and few things would give me more concern,
than to be thought incapable of tasting, or unwilling to testify my opinion of its excellence."
AGAINST HERCULES. 109
-
Hebrides.-page 247.-3d Edit. ) perform in
my stead the hardy task of narrating the cruel
story-a task from which my fingers drop, in
powerless trepidation. Reader, who possessest not the volume to which I have referred
thee, yet possessest legs, and leisure, and
curiosity, walk into St. Paul's Church, -
advance toward the marble image, of the
marble man, whose Ghost I have indignantly
arraigned, - and if thou canst behold, with
stedfast eye, the scowling Hercules before
thee, offer thine acknowledgments to the
artist who hath made thee independent of the
volume aforesaid, by chisseling out the mind,
that conceived the sentiment, that dictated
the language, that thundered at the head, that
prompted the pen, that dared to write, “ An
Essay on the Writings, and Genius of Shakspeare."
In the remaining, and least glorious, part
of this unmanly Labour, I have the pride of
an Englishman, in saying, that the Hercules
of Bolt Court rises infinitely above his Rival,
of the club. For, whatever prying gossips
may have chosen to say, or think, of his inclination to take away the girdle of one ofour
110 AN EDITOR PITTED
Amazons, I am eager to proclaim that he is
most honourably innocent of that offencealthough, by giving this testimony, I am compelled to sacrifice that universal, and minute
coincidence of circumstance, which some may
consider as essential to a Parallel.
LABOUR XI.
Procuring the golden Apples ofthe Hesperides.
But hold ! this is not an affair to be
hastily slurred over in a syllabus, or insinuated
by hints, and inuendos . The whole transaction has so little in it of the stale familiarity,
or mawkish flatness, of common- life occurrences, that it will well reward the labour of
pursuing it through all its particularities of
detail. And I beg leave to assure my Readers,
upon the honour of a Writer, that although
I may relate things in my own language, and
perhaps with a little of my own colouring,
the great, and prominent facts, shall , here, as
in every preceding instance, be truly, and
faithfully reported, as they stand on the
venerable authority of the Ancients.
T
AGAINST HERCULES. 111
We are instructed, then, that Juno, on her
marriage day, had presented her thundering
Bride-groom with an Apple-tree, of which
the fruit was distinguished from every common
species of eating apple, by being entirely of
gold. Jupiter appears to have very wisely
considered, that a tree which made such
ample amends to his pocket, for the trick
it played upon his palate, was well worth
guarding. It was, accordingly, entrusted , en
chef, to the Hesperian Nymphs, (or " Ladies
of the Hesperides," as Milton gallantly styles
them,)—and, en second, to the more efficient
custody of a sleepless dragon, remarkable for
the crabbedness of his disposition.
Our sinewy Labour-monger was ordered by
that hardest of all Masters, Eurystheus, to go
and fetch him a sample or two of the metallic
wind-falls in question . He obeyed, with his
usual submission ;-but, whether from a sentiment of delicacy towards the dragon, which
was very unusual with him in such cases- or
(which is more probable) from feeling himself
nearly knocked up by one set-to after another
with Stables, Boars, Amazons, Hydras, threeheaded Potentates, and other people of that
I
"
112 AN EDITOR PITTED
stamp,
-- he seems, for once, to have been all
for peace and quiet, in his way of doing business. In this temper, he arrived at that
remarkable orchard which produced the very
choice fruit he came in search of; when,
instead of boldly dashing up to the tree, in
his manner, and perhaps making a spring into
the midst of it from the back of the horrible
dragon that watched it, he tranquilly looked
round for Atlas, to whom he had obtained a
letter of recommendation, and who seems to
have been a sort of fellow- centinel with the
dragon, over the branches -though, apparently, not altogether so free and disengaged
for the more alert services of his occupation,
as might be desired ; for he was discovered
crouching (well he might ! ) under the unconscionable burthen, celestial, and terrestrial,
which it was his well-known office to stand
under. Hercules immediately requested him
to try his interest as an uncle (for such he was)
with the Hesperian Damsels, and procure for
him, if possible, a few out of the next gathering of these extraordinary apples. Honest
Atlas complies at the first word ; and, at once
to lighten himself for running, and to shew
AGAINST HERCULES. 113
his great alacrity in obliging his new friend,
- without more ado, very good- humouredly
tumbles the whole weight of Heaven and
Earth upon poor Hercules's shoulders, -
simply desiring his astonished, and unfortu
nate substitute, to holdfast till his return, -
and so scampers away to his neices, with a
basket in his hand. -Mighty pretty stuff, this,
one should really have thought, for working
up a good, round Labour, by itself ! —At all
events, here was, surely, a business not much
less onerous than that of filching a woman's
girdle, which we have lately seen enrolled
among the achievements of the Hero. At the
very least, one might have expected to find a
word or two, en passant, in the way of remark,
—an admiration- point extraordinary, — or,
somehow, a sort of written stare, at this marvellous part of the historical page : - But, no
-nothing like it ! it looks as if, in those
hardy times, a pack, of this nature , was considered as something quite of course ; for the
accounts pass it all over in the quietest way
that can be, -just as if it had been an everyday story of any other Porter, who might
have asked an idle stander-by to hold his
114 AN EDITOR PITTED
parcel for him, while he, too, stepped across
the way, for a pen'north of apples, to his
apple- woman ! — Hercules himself, however,
with all his general indifference about trouble,
does not seem to have looked at the thing
with exactly the same degree of nonchalance,
with which his biographers have since related
it it should appear, on the contrary, that, in
no very long time, he had had pretty nearly
enough of wearing the Universe about his
neck like a horse- collar ; for we find that, as
soon as ever Atlas came back with his apples,
his involuntary Locum-tenens very humbly.
intreated,―(and really one cannot help saying
that, all things considered, the request was
not an extremely encroaching, or unreasonable one,)-he intreated nothing more at
all than that his abrupt employer would have
the goodness to lend a hand, and relieve him
from the uncomfortable chafing and pressure
which he felt on the nape of his neck, by just
easing off the solar system for a moment,
while he ferreted about for something nice
and soft, to slip, by way ofpledget, between the
said system, and the sore place it had made !
----
Atlas, who —if not squeamishly punctilious
AGAINST HERCULES. 115
as to the outward forms of etiquette, seems,
however, to have been a man of a very supple
and accommodating cast, immediately acquiesced in the very modest petition of his overloaden Deputy. -The moderation of Hercules
has, thus far, been truly exemplary, and surprizing at this point of the story, however,
his natural independence of spirit, which
appears to have been hitherto crushed down,
together with his head, suddenly rises to its
ordinary pitch ; for no sooner has Atlas "fitted
the saddle upon the right horse," by taking
all his worlds back again, than the other
quietly leaves him to the uncontested honours
of his weighty office, and marches off in triumph with the golden pippins.
The trick by which he so neatly contrived to
get rid ofthe Spheres, cannot, perhaps, be denied to sit rather ungracefully upon an Hero
of the very first class :-but, as Hercules has
always been a prime favorite of mine, I will
crave permission to offer a few pleas in his
behalf.
With deference, then,
-it appears to me,
that we ought to make as charitable allowances
as we can, for his trying circumstances, after
116 AN EDITOR PITTED
he had found himself so strangely hitched in
this awkward affair. In the first place, there
seems good reason for suspecting, that Atlas
knew well enough what he was about, when
he originally shifted his load ; and in the
second, that, from some little regulation
about such matters, which does not appear, -
both Hercules, when he had once so unwittingly received the load, and Atlas, when it
was afterwards so adroitly returned upon his
hands, were, each, under the obligation
of keeping his bargain, unless he should have
been voluntarily released from it by the other ;
for, had not this been the case, it is not easy
to believe, that either of them would have had
much scruple about throwing down the Goods
upon the spot, and so leaving ' em to be
picked up by any that might fancy ' em.
All this premised, and admitted, there
can,
-
surely, be no great room for wonder, if
Hercules, who, possibly, may not have considered a handful of apples as a fully adequate
douceur for the inconvenience of standing
still, with the Creation on his back, to all
eternity, nor, moreover, have felt himself
much better reconciled to a Post, with so little
AGAINST HERCULES. 117
of the sinecure about it, by the very unceremonious manner in which he had been pro-
-
moted to it, —I say, we are not to be greatly
surprised, upon the whole, if the Demigod,
finding himself made an ass of, in a double
sense, and considerably puzzled how to act, in
so very new a case, should , for once in his
life, have seemed to lose sight of his character
as a Gentleman, and determined on punishing
the impudence of this lubberly Planet-Propper,
by retaliating his ruse -with only a slight
improvement upon it, in the article of
finesse.
And now, let me triumphantly ask, what
modern Vandal, who has attentively perused
the above history, will dare, hereafter, to open
his lips against the advantages of a classical
education ?
PARALLEL. The Editor, set at work by some
unfeeling EURYSTHEUS of a Bookseller, follows his great, and indefatigable Prototype,
in seeking the golden fruit of his Labour ; but,
desirous of avoiding the watchful Dragon of
Criticism, who would scare himfrom the tree
118 AN EDITOR PITTED
of learning, and probably pull him to pieces,
should he venture to approach it, he makes
his appeal to the Gentle Hesperides, i.e. the
indulgent Public, who are the guardians in
chief of the meed of literary enterprize, and
who are ready to accord him the object ofhis
honourable ambition ; but, during his diligent
prosecution ofthat object, he has to sustain a
heavy load, yea worlds, of malice, and envy,
which are cast upon his unsuspicious head ;
and this, but too often, by those very persons,
who insidiously affect to assist him in his pursuit. But he returns their injuries where they
ought properly to rest, upon their own heads,
and ultimately, bears away the prize in triumph.
LABOUR XII. AND LAST.
The Labours of Hercules, of the Editor, -
and of myself, are now drawing to their close,
together. The most ticklish of all the undertakings of our Hero, is introduced, with
becoming eclat, at the last-like a shower of
rockets in the finale of a pyrotechnical exhi-
AGAINST HERCULES. 119
•
bition. It was no joke for a man to descend,
in full health, as Hercules was called upon to
do, into the infernal regions ; nor was there
any thing at all more exhilarating in the
nature, and conditions, of the errand on
which he stepped down-viz. of seizing, with
his weaponless, and even gloveless, hands ---
of seizing, I say, and dragging out of his deep
retirement, into broad day-light, that most
ill-looking, snarling, snappish, lubberly tyke
of a dog, that ever wore three heads,-called
Cerberus ; in every respect, as unpleasant a
mongrel as ever was pupped, and good for
nothing but to frighten live company from
the doors, or, in his softer moments, to be,
as no doubt he was, a pet lap-dog for the
Furies ; and very lucky it was, by the way,
(considering how very miffy those Ladies are
said to have been,) that their favourite pug so
cleverly prevented all pulling of caps for
him, by offering to each of the girls exactly
one head a- piece, to be kissed and patted,
As for an head or two, more or less, (even to
the number of 50, which Hesiod liberally
allows him, ) I would not be understood to
lay too much stress upon a circumstance so
120 AN EDITOR PITTED
trifling as this must have appeared in the eyes
of one who had been accustomed to deal
with this part of the body by wholesale ; but
since, on this particular occasion, he was not,
as heretofore, provided with proper tools for
lopping such animal luxuriances, when he
might find them in his way, he could scarcely
have helped wishing that one, at least, ofthese
well-armed super- numeraries, had been left
out, at the making up of this Devil of a Dog,—
or Dog of a Devil. Yet, savage to strangers
as the cur generally was, we are told that he,
(as has been said of a certain other less per
fect animal, which comes into the world with
but two legs, and one head, ) " had his price,"
and that no very exorbitant one -a sop. We
know, also, that his taste for music had already
tempted him, in one instance, to betray his
trust. But, as it was equally out of Hercules'
line either to strum or cram him out of his
fidelity, it was necessary for him to think of
other methods of managing him. Leaving
others to draw their topics of persuasion from
the fiddle- stick, or the dripping- pan, he finally resolved to depend upon that half-andhalf mixture of strength, and stratagem,
1
AGAINST HERCULES. 121
which had availed him on some other occasions.
With this view he petitioned his Majesty
of Tartarus, for a short leave of absence to
his barking Porter ; and obtained it, under
an express recognition of the law originally
imposed-that of dragging him up- stairs, by
mere dint of muscle . The permission thus
granted, to give it any value, must be supposed to have included the administration of
amental sop, as it were, to the feelings of this
cantankerous whelp, during his forced excursion from home ; otherwise, he would probably have given Hercules frequent, and
pointed reasons for wishing the journey at
an end, as he and his uncongenial fellowtraveller were jogging along together.
So general a change has taken place in the
manners and fashions of the world, since
Cerberus's time, that we should not indulge too
freely in starts of astonishment at every circumstance which may strike us as a little out
of the way, in the annals of that period ; else,
it would certainly appear rather odd to us,
that that adventure of our hero, which made
by much the largest demands upon him for
122 AN EDITOR PITTED
what " in the vulgar, " is called pluck, * should
have been incomparably the most barren of
ulterior benefit, either to his employers in
particular, or to the world at large. The
professed, and single object of the unpromising speculation now in hand, was to gratifythe curiosity of Eurystheus with the sight.
of a dog who had certainly as few points of
beauty to boast of, as most that one sees of
his kind ; and, as soon as this passing whim
had been indulged, he was to be quietly, (or
unquietly, ) lugged by the Bearer (who, bythe
bye, was nothing less than a Demigod,) all
the way back to his infernal kennel, in the
heart of the earth. Allowing, however, this
fancy of Eurystheus to be of a more rational
sort than every one may immediately perceive, my readers, 1 fear, will not be able
entirely to help wondering at it, when they
recollect in what manner this same Eurystheus had formerly deported himself on the
* This is too hastily said. -I ought certainly to
have here excepted that least heroic, as well as
least useful, of all his labours, -first, beating a
woman, and then stealing her clothes.
AGAINST HERCULES. 123
too abrupt appearance of a far more personable, as well as orderly, Monster, than that
which he had now ordered into his presence.
But be this as it may, our Hero, who, as
already observed, always did what he was
bidden, without making impertinent inquiries,
again performed, by command of his Majesty,
his old part, -that of a Shewer of wild beasts ;
differing, however, from Mr. Pidcock ( his
present chief successor in the character,) in
four essential particulars ; first, that he caught
his Savage with his own naked hands ;
secondly, that those hands were the only
cage, in which he afterward confined it;
thirdly, that he exhibited it but once, and
that gratuitously ; and lastly, that having so
done, he very honestly carried back the borrowed Monster in his arms, from the sea-side,
to the very inland Country from which he
had brought it.
PARALLEL. -It happens very unseasonably,
at the conclusion of my task, where I am
naturally ambitious of going off in a blaze,
124 AN EDITOR PITTED
that I suddenly find myself out ofan Editor,
for the purpose of carrying on my business of
a Parallelist to the last. In default of an
Editor, therefore, I must make out as well as
I can, with a Critic ; and my Reader will,
perhaps, indulgently recollect in my behalf,
not merely how close a resemblance the two
characters bear to each other, but how frequently they are actually identified in the
same Being. My Critic, then, shall be the
late worthy, and learned, Bishop Douglas,
who had the honour of successfully dragging
into the open sunshine of exposure, a most
mischievous triumvirate, in the persons of
Hume, the Atheist, -Bower, the Apostate, -
and Lauder, the Liar. So far, good. -For
what remains, I shall make a short turn in my
road, and, after the example of my Master,
Plutarch, " elevate and surprize " the reader,
(who has, probably, by this time, had enough
of Parallels) with a CONTRAST or two. My
first CONTRAST shall be made out by pointing
the observation of my reader to the Place
from which the earlier Monster was dragged
up into day ; —leaving him to join me in the ----
silent hope, that, in this particular, a total
AGAINST HERCULES. 125
dissimilarity prevailed between the two
cases.
My second CONTRAST consists in this, —
that, whereas in the ancient Labour, the permission ofPluto was a pre-requisite to success,
-in the modern one, our prelatical Hercules
would certainly have left his achievement
unaccomplished, rather than have addressed
a petition in a similar quarter.
Having thus dispatched my CONTRASTS,
I will make my submission to such readers as
may disapprove the change, by gracefully
taking my leave, with a concluding
PARALLEL.-Eurystheus (though occasionally
seized with a nervous panic on such occasions, )
must besupposed to have viewed with some kind
ofsatisfaction the Monster which he had taken
the trouble of commanding Hercules to bring
before him ; and which, when the inspection
was over, was to be carried back to perpetual
darkness and oblivion : —on the other side, the
Public, for whom our right reverend Labourer
undertook his triple task, must, doubtless, have
experienced that species ofpleasure, with which
all men contemplate monstrosities brought to
126 AN EDITOR PITTED, &c.
light; and, when the discovery had once been
fully made, they must have been equally desirous with Eurystheus, that such revolting
objects might be quickly taken from their sight,
into the unhallowed obscurity from which they
had been dragged, and, there, be covered up
for ever.
THE END.


