
The bibliographical decameron
Thomas Frognall Dibdin
YYYY

жетн
Dihid



THE
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL
DECAMERON.
• Now pray I to hem alle that herkene this tretyse or rede, that yf ther be
ony thing that liketh hem, that therof they thanke HIM of whom procedeth al wit and goodnes. And yf ther be ony thing that displese hem, I praye hem also that they arrette it to the defaute of myn unkonnyng and not to my will,
that wold fayn have seyde better if I hadde knowing. '
CHAUCER.
THE
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL
DECAMERON;
OR,
Ten Days Pleasant Discourse
UPON
ILLUMINATED MANUSCRIPTS,
AND
SUBJECTS CONNECTED WITH
EARLY ENGRAVING, TYPOGRAPHY,
AND BIBLIOGRAPHY.
BY THE
REV. T. F. DIBDIN.
VOL. I.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, BY W. BULMER AND CO.
Shakspeare Press :
AND SOLD BY G. AND W. NICOL, PAYNE AND FOSS , EVANS, JOHN AND
ARTHUR ARCH, TRIPHOOK, AND J. MAJOR.
1817.
TOR
BRAKE
THE
ASTOR
NY
LIBRARY
TO HIS GRACE
WILLIAM SPENCER CAVENDISH,
DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE,
&c. &c. &c.
THIS WORK
IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED
BY HIS OBEDIENT AND
FAITHFUL HUMBLE SERVANT,
THE AUTHOR.

PREFACE.*
HAT the Reader may know in as
few words as possible the nature of
the Work here submitted to him, he
is informed that the FIRST DAY of
this BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DECAMERON comprises an
account of the Progress of Art as seen in some
of the more celebrated Manuscripts abroad, and
more particularly in those of our own country.
This portion of the work is illustrated by a great
number of embellishments (chiefly upon copper)
which are new to the public, and which are presumed to be executed in a manner equally creditable to the skill andfidelity of the several artists
employed. The author must ingenuously confess,
* The above cut is from the Poliphilo, Edit. Ald. 1499.
VOL. I. a
ii PREFACE.
that however replete with information of a novel
and interesting nature these pages of his Decameron may appear, he has, in reality, done little
more than presented a sketch - capable however
of the most costly and elaborate finishing. The
public taste in this department of the BIBLIOMANIA is yet partial, and not sufficiently cultivated ; but a more intimate acquaintance with its
characteristics will only convince the zealous student ofits various and inexhaustible attractions.
The SECOND andTHIRD DAYS may be considered
a necessary sequel to the First. The love of
beautifully-printed Books, and more especially
ofsuch as are adorned with the productions ofthe
early Engravers, seems to be a natural consequence
of the admiration bestowed upon the efforts ofthe
Illuminator ; and ifthe author have, in any material degree, realised his own ideas upon this
fruitful subject, there will be found, both in the
text, and decorations of these two succeeding
days, a source of amusement not quickly capable
of satiety.
The FOURTH, FIFTH, SIXTH, and SEVENTH
DAYS are devoted to what the author has presumed
to hope may be considered a popular History of
the Rise and Progress of Printing upon the Continent ; including observations upon Decorative
PREFACE. iii
Printing, and brief notices ofafew ofthe Eminent
living Printers of our own Country. He is aware
that such a Subject is worthy ofa more ample and
satisfactory disquisition ; but he has attempted to
compensate the omission of much dry detail and
lengthened description, by appropriate decoration
and amusing anecdote. The fac-similes of the
Devices ofthe more celebrated Foreign Printers—
andparticularlyofthose ofFrance and Germany—
are at once numerous, faithful, and brilliant ; *
while the biographical notices of the Printers, to
whom they relate, will be found, it is hoped, as
interesting as the Subjects were capable ofrendering them. Nor should it be forgotten that some
ofthe most illustrious Scholars of Europe did not
disdain to superintend the operations of THE
PRESS. They were literary Cincinnati at the
tympan and frisket.
The EIGHTH DAY embraces a portion of information rather calculated, it must be admitted, to
It is due to departed genius to state, that a very great portion ofthe wood-engravings in this work are the production ofthe
late EBENEZER BYFIELD ; who was cut off, in his 26th year, not
leaving his superior behind. He just lived to complete the last
specimen which was put into his hands. His sister MARY, and his
brother JOHN, have executed the greater part of the remainder ;
but the beautiful specimens at pages 170-2, 177-178 of this first
volume, by Mr. WILLIAM HUGHES, will not fail also to receive
the approbation of the skilful.
iv PREFACE.
gratify the professed Bibliomaniac than the general Reader. Yet the subject of Book-Binding, to
which it relates, is probably, as a question of Art,
not wholly divested of interest. The specimens of
ancient book-covertures, which adorn the pages of
this day, may possibly create or correct an indulgence of a similar taste in the present times. To
the Book-Antiquary, no apology is due for occasional minuteness and technicality of description ;
while the biographical sketches connected with the
illustrious Characters to whom the volumes, from
which such specimens ' have been taken, belonged,
may serve even to inflame the ardour, and quickèn
the competition, ofsome ofour most distinguished
living Collectors.
C
The NINTH DAY, relating to Sales of Books by
Public Auction, is a continuation of a Subject
which seemed to be productive of some gratification in the second edition ofthe BIBLIOMANIA. It
only professes, therefore, to carry on the Record
of the disposal ofLiterary Property in the vendition ofBooks by public auction. Such a series of
Sales of Libraries, within the metropolis of Great
Britain, shews, in a very forcible manner, the
eagerness and gallantry of our countrymen to
avail themselves of treasures which they were not
likely to possess through any other channel, 1
1
PREFACE. v
The TENTH DAY is exclusively devoted to Literary Bibliography : in other words, to an account
ofthe more celebrated bibliographical Writers of
other countries as well as ofour own. But it will
be also found to contain some brief and not uninteresting memoirs of Book Collectors among ourselves : thus supplying some deficiencies in the
Workjust mentioned, and carrying on the Personal History of Bibliomania from the period at
which it there concludes. These pages are also
embellished with some beautifully- engraved portraits ofseveral of the Collectors noticed ; ofwhich
the greater number are, for the first time, here
given to the public. The INDEXES are presumed
to be full and complete.
Such is the briefoutline ofthe BIBLIOGRAPHICAL
DECAMERON which the author submits to the attention of the Public : and he trusts that brevity
has not been studied to the exclusion ofperspicuity.
He only begs leave to add, that the great body of
information is thrown into theNotes ; which, from
their number, extent, and the minute and various
information which they contain, might, if the present fashionable method of Book-Making had been
resorted to, have served to extend this publication
`to seven or eight comely octavo tomes. Upon the
success with which this most essential department
vi PREFACE.
of his Work has been executed, it becomes not
the author to say a syllable : but he may be
permitted to state that no pains have been spared,
and no toil has been shunned, which could contribute to the gratification ofthe curious. In such a
vast and varied mass ofinformation, it is very
probable that many errors have been committed ;
but the Author trusts that his attachment to the
Winchester Measure will even here operate by way
ofexcuse and apology. For one feature which the
Work possesses, he may boldly challenge the criticism, and bespeak the approbation, of the skilful :
the typographical execution of it has been rarely
equalled, and perhaps never surpassed.
CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS
PAGE χχίν LINE
TO VOL. I.
FOR READ
5 n. Insert not ' between are ' and ' only.'
cliii Thefollowing page is incorrectly numbered clxiv for cliv.
18 32 n.
37 n.
indicebit 93 last n. SIXTH 268 5 n. absurdus 173 10 n. SEVENTH
319 16 n.
mention 339 32 n.
360 note
inter
habebit EIGHTH absurdas TENTH mentions
The Royal Library of Paris now possesses Count Macarthy's copy of the first Psalter.
A subsequent experiment - was made perfectly successful : and I presume a piece of string, or some such casual intervening obstacle, occurred in the printing of the original.

VOL. I.
INTRODUCTION.

Introduction.
IVE summer-suns have shed their
kindly influence upon the vine
which mantles LYSANDER's cabinet-window, since the first visit of
his bibliomaniacal friends. During
this period the conversion of
LISARDO to bibliography has been
rapid and complete. The studies
ofPHILEMON have taken a somewhat different turn ; connected, however, with the same object, and equally productive of benefit to the student : while the well- stored library
of LYSANDER has served as a rallying point to satisfy the
doubts, or to promote the researches, of either who chose to
consult it.
Such, gentle Reader, is a very hasty sketch of the intellectual pursuits of those, who, in the BIBLIOGRAPHICAL
ROMANCE, have been fortunate enough to meet with thy
approval. There are yet other characters to notice : for let
me hope that the fair names of BELINDA and ALMANSA
are not forgotten-and that the hospitality of LORENZO,
iv INTRODUCTION.
."
their brother, is still fresh in remembrance ? Turn therefore,
to the seven hundredth and forty-fifth page of the said
Romance, and read as follows : -- upon LORENZO's frankly
' confessing, though in a playful mood, that such brothers-
' in-law [as LYSANDER and LISARDO] would make him as
' happy as the day was long--the Sisters both turned their
' faces towards the garden, and appeared as awkward as it
was possible for well-bred ladies to appear ' —and, a little
onward, —that some other symptom, wholly different from
any thing connected with the Bibliomania, had taken pos-
' session of their gentle minds.'
6
The symptom here alluded to will dart as quick as lightning upon the understandings of the intelligent : a symptom,
in the description of which the muse of Lucretius has
carried him into the most wild and not unlovely regions of
poetry, and which has softened and sublimed the heart of
man from the hour ofhis first great trespass ' to the present.
As there is no necessity to borrow the noble strains of
Milton, * - so I will studiously shun the common place
imagery of minor bards - in the description of this symptom but will gravely, simply, and soberly observe that it
was Love : love, leading to, and consolidated by, Marriage :
a union of principles and of interests, so complete, and so
commendable, that I can only wish, in my heart, that all
matches may be like unto those ofLYSANDER with BELINDA,
and LISARDO with ALMANSA.
There seems however something mysterious, and a little
spiteful, in such a summary account of two marriages, which
were probably the result of long-continued and assiduous
courtship. Let me hasten, therefore, to clear up all doubts,
and not quarrrel with my reader on the very threshhold of
* Paradise Lost, Book iv.
INTRODUCTION.
this new Decameron. The facts are few and soon told.
The more reserved character of Lysander had induced
him to contemplate the bridal day with a becoming portion
of patience ; the impetuosity of Lisardo stimulated him to
press the siege ofcourtship with unremitting alacrity, so as,
almost with difficulty, to allow the Lady to make her own
terms of capitulation : yet, in the end, the due formalities
were observed by all parties. Seven months only sufficed for
Lisardo ; the last two weeks of which were, however, unnecessarily protracted, by a determination, on his part, to have
a copy of the First English Prayer Book, PRINTED UPON
VELLUM,* lying upon the cushion of the altar before which
the first English Prayer-Book PRINTED UPON VELLUM. ] The first impression of the Liturgy, ' after the use of the Church of England,' was published
in the year 1549, in folio, by Grafton and Whitchurch, under royal authority.
There are copies bearing the dates of May, June, December, and other months
in the same year ; and there are occasional variations in such copies, which
cannot at present be accounted for. The names of the above printers are inserted separately, it being presumed that each shared the expense and profit
of the work. The reader may not object to consult the third volume of our
Typographical Antiquities, p. 463-6, 493, for a particular description of this
impression.
fancying that there
As Grafton printed
It is not very difficult to justify the whim of Lisardo in
should be a copy of this book struck off UPON VELLUM.
more than one copy of his BIBLE of 1540 upon the same material, (Id. vol. iii.
p. 441-2. ), he might possibly have executed at least one copy of this PRAYER
Book in like manner : let us say for the presentation, or Royal Copy. I am,
however, quite unable to set this matter at rest : rather believing that Lisardo
will one day find the darling object of his search.
While upon the subject of ancient forms of our Liturgy, let me coax the
reader's patience to endure a trifling enlargement of this Note. Is he aware of
the antiquity ofthe ORDER of MATRIMONY,' as at present used ? Will he believe,
that upwards of three centuries ago, the husband thus addressed his wife, on
taking her, as now, by the right hand ?-I, N. underfynge the N. for my wedded
wyfe, for beter, for worse, for richer, for porer, yn sekness, and in helthe, tyl
deth us departe (not do part,' as we have erroneously rendered it-the ancient
meaning of departe,' even in WICLIFFE's time, being separate ') as holy
churche hath ordeyned, and therto I plygth the my trowthe. ' The wife replies
in the same form with an additional clause : to be buxom to the tyl deth us
·
·
<
vi INTRODUCTION.
he was to be united. To attain this glorious object he spared
neither pains nor expense. He parted from his Beloved, by
moonlight, upon the terrace of her brother's garden (at the
very moment when the bell of the outer-gate announced the
arrival of a cargo of books from his binder) , and mounting
his coal black steed, ' promised to return within three days,
with the treasure beneath his arm. No Knight of the
Round Table ever promised more faithfully-no heroine of
romance ever sympathized more sincerely in the object of
her lover's wishes. If he could not purchase, Lisardo might
borrow, this vellum curiosity. He travelled therefore, early
and late, far and near ; searching, amidst heaps of rubbish,
and beneath clouds of dust, the libraries of Cathedrals, and
the shops of Booksellers : but no such treasure was to be
found. More than seven days had elapsed when his hopes
were elated by a suggestion that the volume might be
discovered upon the shelves of the Althorp or Wilton Collections ; * when, forgetting his promise of only three days
་
' departe.' So it appears in the first edition of the MISSAL FOR THE Use of
THE FAMOUS AND CELEBRATED CHURCH OF HEREFORD, 1502, fol. In what
is called the SALISBURY MASSAL, the Lady promised a more general obedience :
to be bonere and buxom in bedde and at the borde.' Edit. Wayland, 1554, 4to :
See the Typog. Antiq. vol. iii. p. 6 , 523-4 , and also Mr. Todd's enlarged definition of the word Buxom' in his edition of Dr. Johnson's Dictionary. The
editors of the later impressions of the Salisbury Missal (if any there were) might
have taken a hint from the more courteous strain of the Marriage Service in the
first Protestant Prayer Book of 1549.
the Althorp or Wilton Collections. ] Althorp, in Northamptonshire, is the
ancestral residence of the noble family of the SPENCERS ; and the Collection
here alluded to, containing about 36,000 volumes, is probably unrivalled for the
beauty, rarity, and intrinsic worth of its contents. Here repose all the Polyglots
upon Large Paper-but the reader must at present patiently await the treat
reserved for him by a particular enumeration of such treasures. The Library at
Wilton, in Wiltshire, was formed by the famous EARL OF PEMBROKE, in the
reign of Queen Anne. Here are the Azzoguidi Ovid, and the St. Alban's Book
of 1486: see Bibl. Spencer. vol . ii . p. 191-5 : vol . iv. p. 373.
INTRODUCTION. vii
absence, and the frightful distance of those libraries apart
from each other, he resolved to put the truth of such surmise to the test. He came, saw, and was hopeless : nor did
the rich book-treasures of Longleet or Stourhead * supply
the object so dear to his heart. The moon was deeply in
her wane when Lisardo returned-dispirited and dejected :
and he was married without having the service read from a
copy of the First English Prayer Book—printed upon
VELLUM.
The union of Lysander with Belinda was not preceded
by any measure of so extraordinary a nature. Thirteen
months glided happily away beneath the soft influence of
betrothed love ; and the first day of the fourteenth month
saw them united in the usual manner-the service being
performed from an edition of the Common Prayer ' which
had reposed upon the velvet cushion only since the time
of Baskett. Lisardo and his consort attended the ceremony: the former pertinaciously making his responses
from the black-letter text of Oswen, † and the latter having
* the rich book-treasures of Longleet or Stourhead. ] The magnificent and
tasteful residences of the MARQUIS OF BATH, and of SIR RICHARD COLT
HOARE, BART.
+ the black letter text of Oswen. ] Oswen was a provincial printer, and carried
on his business at Worcester, Ipswich, and Shrewsbury. He merely printed
the text of the Common Prayer, as extant in Grafton and Whitchurch-rather
omitting and abridging, than substituting alterations. Acopy of Oswen's reprint,
now before me, and executed at Worcester, in May, 1549, 4to. affixes the price
ofthe work (as printed at the end of it), at ii shillinges and two-pence y piece,
unbounde. And the same bound in paste or in boardes, not above the price
of thre shillynges and eyght pence the piece. ' This copy, from Earl Spencer's
Collection at Althorp, is fair and sound ; wanting the title-page. The printing
is of dismal execution. It may be added that Grafton's impression (at least
the copy of it in the pessession of Messrs. J. and A. Arch, booksellers) was sold
at the same price as Oswen's, when unbound ; but bounde in paste or in boardes
covered with calues leather, not aboue the price of iiii shillinges the piece. '
I can scarcely account for Lisardo's partiality for Oswen's edition of our
viii INTRODUCTION.
her eyes sedulously fixed upon the silken pages of Baskerville. *
To describe how the first short years of wedlock flew
away, with characters so suited in every respect to confer
happiness upon each other, were a waste of words and of
time ; but I will only briefly observe that if all the doves
and darts ' which crowd the pages from the Minerva Press'
were concentrated to give force to the quantum of connubial
felicity enjoyed by these worthy pairs, they would fall
greatly short of that object. Philemon and Lorenzo were
neither indifferent spectators, nor indifferent partakers, of
this felicity. The former had buried his Beloved ' beneath
the yew tree, which his great grandfather, when a child,
remembered to have seen planted, with due pomp and
parade, by the vicar and churchwardens of the parish ; and
he resolved upon making the memory of past conjugal
happiness cheer him for the remainder of his days. Lorenzo
without laying down rigid rules to be engrossed upon parchLiturgy, except it be on the score of its rarity : for, upon consulting Herbert,
vol. iii. p. 1460, it appears that this book was thought so great a rarity, that it
was sold to Lord Oxford for ten pounds, at Thomas Rawlinson's sale , in 1727.'
It is there erroneously called a folio. '
* the silken pages of Baskerville . ] The Prayer Books of Baskerville are probably more frequently seen within the pews of a church than any other : at
least they were so, till within these dozen years past. They are of two forms,
or sizes : royal octavo, and crown octavo. Of the former, there were two
different impressions ; one in long lines, and the other in double columns ; and
each of these again is varied by the omission, or introduction, of a fancy-border
round the entire page . The crown octavo impression, which is the rarer of the
two, has no such distinction of border. It is executed in a small character, in
double columns, upon thin paper, but of a close and durable texture. I do not
remember to have seen more than one copy of the royal octavo in an uncut
state ; and of the crown octavo, not a single copy : so popular were these impressions upon their first appearance. There is a soft and silky ' tint about these
volumes which makes them grateful to the eye : but in point of FINE PRINTING,
they have each been excelled by a royal and crown octavo Prayer Book from the
Press which produces the present Work.
•
INTRODUCTION. ix
ment, or engraved upon granite, had quietly but steadily
resolved upon the experiment of Bachelorship for life : and
thus the reader will readily conceive, that, with a thoroughly
good disposition on each side, no great obstacle should present itself towards the mutual happiness of all parties.
The passion for foreign travel, which has so lately and
generally prevailed, had induced the Widower and the
Bachelor to explore a few of the libraries on the Continent,
in order to extend or confirm their bibliographical knowledge. Accordingly Philemon and Lorenzo hired a roomy
carriage, purposely contrived for the accommodation of
about threescore stout volumes, and accomplished the object
of their wishes chiefly in the capital of France.
In the course of some nine weeks, a letter from the travellers
announced their probable return within a fortnight from
the date of the dispatch. That period, however, was prolonged by a sudden and violent inclination, on the part of
Lorenzo, to visit the cities of Mayence and Cologne : sister-nurses of the art of typography in its infancy. Of this
visit I shall at present say little or nothing : only that the
bibliographical enthusiasm of our travellers left scarcely a
shelf unexamined, or a nook unexplored, for the discovery
of an hitherto unknown typographical production ; nor
were they wholly without hopes of finding a more legitimate resemblance of the physiognomy of FUST than that
which adorns the collection of Reuter. *
At length, after the lapse of an extra month, the tra-
* adorns the collection of Reuter. ] There is , prefixed to the Second Part of
Fischer's Typographischen Seltenheiten, 1801, 8vo , a copper-plate, in the outline,
representing the bust of Fust (from the original, which is carved in wood), both
in the full-face and the profile position . I doubt much the genuineness of the
original ; as well as of the portrait of the same character published in the frontispiece of Mallinkrot's work, De Ortu Art. Typog. Colon. Agrip. 1640, 4to. and
X INTRODUCTION.
vellers returned, and found their friends not a little overjoyed to receive them. The neighbouring circle of acquaintance was invited to hear of the wonders that had been seen
and of the curiosities that had been collected ; and for three
successive days the chimnies of Lysander, or of Lisardo,
never failed to cast forth picturesque volumes of smoke.
Their hospitality was indeed without bounds.
The scene of congratulation was however to be transferred
to the splendid mansion of Lorenzo. It was essential that
Lysander and Lisardo should examine the treasures that
had been acquired, and the memoranda that had been taken,
during the Continental tour. The weather, although the
month of October was pretty far gone into, still continued
inviting: and the removal of the scene of action to the distance of some forty furlongs (for the visitors, with the exception of Lisardo,* lived in grey-tinted fermes-ornées at
about four miles from Lorenzo's residence) could be productive of no inconvenience. It was fitting also that the
ladies should enjoy a calm after the late uproar, and that
mental recreation should succeed to bodily activity. Accordingly, the period, both of the commencement and of the
termination of this adjourned visit, was quickly and formally fixed. We will tarry with you some TEN DAYS,'
replied Lisardo, in a playful mood. The offer was seized
upon with avidity by the generous Lorenzo. Let us have,
then, a BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DECAMERON '-he exclaimed-
' It is long since we discussed those subjects which formerly
gave us so much delight. You, Lysander, were formerly
from this latter introduced into the frontispiece of Maittaire's great work upon
the annals of printing. Fischer's representation of Fust gives it the air of an
ancient Greek or Roman bust.
* See the Bibliomania, p. 280-1.
INTRODUCTION. xi
our chief oracle ; and I have a perfect recollection, at this
moment, of the pleasure and improvement with which we
listened to your discourse. We may each, now, take a part
in the discussion : -and so let us hasten to the enjoyment of
our BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DECAMERON. '
The suggestion delighted Lisardo. He appealed (with
becoming deference) to Almansa, whose assent almost preceded the appeal. Lysander cordially approved ; observing,
that as the brunt of the discourse would not fall upon himself, he should be the more careful in what he advanced,
now that his pupils had become critics in turn. Philemon
was resolved to take no ordinary share in the discussion ; -
' Three out of the TEN DAYS shall at least fall to my lot !'
said he: And the same number of days shall witness my
oracular powers,'-resumed Lisardo- For the rest, let
Lysander and our Host act their parts as they please.'
-
The invitation was quickly accepted : and within twentyfour hours of its being given, the cavalcades of the respective parties were in motion, to reach, pretty nearly at the
same time, the residence of Lorenzo. The sun rose cheerily
on the morning of their departure. His beams were reflected by a hundred ploughshares which were preparing
the earth for another year's harvest, and the tranquillity of
the air was only broken by the melancholy note of the robin.
The leaves of the forest had put on their marygold tints,
and the distant hills were already purpled in the deepening
haze of autumn. The hearts of the visitors were light and
unoppressed ; and a short hour brought them, within a few
minutes of each other, at the outer gate of Lorenzo. You
would have smiled at the formality of their approach ; and
especially at the Caravan, which closed the cavalcade, * being
* the Caravan, which closed the cavalcade. ] The Caravan is a sort of narrow
xii INTRODUCTION.
filled to the utmost with books and portfolios. This latter
might be considered a sort of baggage waggon, to furnish
materials for the discourse ; Lysander and Lisardo having
resolved to compete with the continental travellers in variety
and interest of discussion.
Loudly rang the bell, and quickly flew open the gates
which were to receive and enclose the visitors. Some twenty
feet were in motion to open carriage doors, and unload the
luggage. The old Steward or Seneschal (let us allow every
man his due dignity) caused the bugle to sound long and
loud, so as to awaken the echoes of every beechen avenue ;
and the entire establishment of Lorenzo was in motion,
giving evidence of the cordiality with which the visitors were
received My readers have probably not forgotten the
drawing- room within which these visitors were wont to be
entertained ; * and therefore I shall here add nothing to
foriner descriptions of Lorenzo's mansion-save that many
a bust and many a rare tome had recently enriched his
residence. A printing-press, on a small scale, was among
the late acquisitions to his book-comforts ; but the Library,
as usual, formed the principal object of attraction. Here
Lisardo quickly perceived new book-treasures clad in a
Parisian surtout ; † and the fruits of the late tour were sufficiently evident in various other directions. But every
oblong carriage, without cover, and is also sometimes used in this country for
breaking in horses : not, however, but that quiet and gentle horses may be
attached to the Caravan ; such at least were those which transported the Duplicate Volumes of his Grace the Duke of Devonshire, in this very kind of conveyance, to the house of Mr. Evans, in Pall-Mall, for the purpose of public sale by auction.
* See the Bibliomania, p. 281.
t clad in a Parisian surtout. ] That is, bound by Parisian binders. In the
subsequent pages (or the EIGHTH DAY) the reader will find a criticism, in due
order, upon the merits and demerits of the art of binding in France.
THE
ASTOR
NY
LIBRAR
LIBRAN
201
LIBRAS
LIBRAR
EN
C &
AST
OR
NY
OR
LIL
NEA
NEYPHILE
Freeman se.
PH YLMNA
ELISSA
FACSIMILES of CAPITAL INITIALS froma MANUSCRIPT of the DECAMERON of B
in the pofsefsion of T.W.Coke Efqre of Holkham Hall .
ACCIO.
BY A
INTRODUCTION. xiii
thing in appropriate order ; as matter of high moment, and
multifarious research, is about to be gradually disclosed.
The day of the arrival had been previously considered as
a dies non; except that they had agreed to examine the
fac-simile drawings which Lorenzo had procured an artist
to execute from the splendid MS. of the TRUE Decameron
in the library of Mr. Coke at Holkham. *
After a good deal of animated, and even warm discussion,
(especially on the part of Lisardo, whose eagerness sometimes forced him beyond the limits of severe good breeding, )
it was at length finally settled that thefirst three days should
Decameron in the Library of Mr. CoкE, at Holkham. ] This manuscript is
not so remarkable for the purity of its text as for the beauty of its illuminations.
It appears to have been executed towards the middle of the xvth century. Each
' Day' has a supposed portrait of the character, who presided over it, prefixed
within the initial letter of the text ; and there is an apparent truth or individuality
about these portraits which makes one believe that they are not entirely fictitious. The flowers, devices, mottos, &c. which are also introduced , partake of
the general gaiety of the decorations. In short, for an apposite and interesting
specimen of illumination, I know of nothing which can presume to lift its head'
above this charming production of early art. And if the above characters, who
presumptuously propose to themselves a RIVAL DECAMERON, should ever think
of preserving a choice copy of the fruits of their own discourse, they cannot do
better than suffer their own physiognomies to be introduced in a similar manner.
Bythe kind liberality of Mr. Coke, I was permitted to have the fac- simile
drawings ' above alluded to. They are executed by Mr. Hodgetts with great
fidelity, and exhibit almost the brilliant hues of the originals. The OPPOSITE
PLATE will convince the reader, (although it have only that degree of colouring
which good engraving and good printing can give it, ) that the style of art is
in every respect deserving of the eulogy of the connoisseur. It represents the
first six portraits only ; the limits of the plate forbidding the introduction of the
remaining four. It would, however, be a most cruel stroke inflicted upon the
tasteful reader, were I to debar him of that pleasure which he is so sure to receive
from a view of the tail- piece, ' or bottom compartment of the grand illumination
ofthe first page of the text. In the absence of those colours which diffuse so
joyous a lustre over the original, (especially the semi-circular canopy studded with
golden stars) it is perhaps difficult, if not impossible, to convey an adequate idea
of the extreme beauty of the whole : but it should be noticed that , in the
OPPOSITE PLATE, the first figure is clothed in a lilac dress ; the secoud in blue ;
xiv INTRODUCTION.
be occupied by the Discourse of PHILEMON; which should
comprehend some account chiefly ofIlluminatedManuscripts,
of Printed Books ofDevotion, and of Works ornamented with
Engravings from the period of Block- Book printing to the
middle or latter end of the Sixteenth Century-for it seems
that the party had determined upon a pretty wide range
of research, and upon bringing, within a moderate compass,
the third in green ; the fourth in green ; the fifth in crimson ; and the sixth in
green. And of the SUBJOINED ENGRAVING, the principal man is habited in a
dark blue cloke, fringed with sable-the one, to the right, in green ; the one in
the back ground, in red : of the women, the one standing is in lilac : the others
are in green, lilac, blue, and red. The cieling is ultramarine blue, with gold stars.
The sides appear to be either cedar, or oak, or chestnut. An attention to
fidelity, the essential merit of such a performance, may have cramped the power
ofthe burin of Mr. CHARLES HEATH ; but what could be, has been, accomplished.
The same eminent artist has my fifty guineas for his exertions ; and the approbation of the skilful will go a great way to redeem that sum.
SMARIA NOVELA
YPHIL
GAME
INTRODUCTION. XV
almost every topic which might be likely to interest the lovers
ofearly art and early printing.
The three following Days were consigned to the bibliographical powers of Lysander ; who chose to follow up the
subject, selected by Philemon, with Some Account of the
Origin and early Progress ofPrinting on the Continent,
bringing the subject down to the same period with which
Philemon concluded, and illustrating it with the Devices,
&c. ofPrinters. " But your three Days (resumed Lysander,
turning to Lisardo, ) must not be forgotten. What have
you to say for yourself?" " Very much, truly," rejoined
Lisardo : " I will endeavour that my three days shall
afford a rival entertainment to yours : and I purpose
choosing some account of Real and Imaginary Portraits of
Printers; of Decorative Printing; of Book-binding, ancient
and modern ; and of Book Sales by Auction which have
succeeded those described on a former occasion by yourself.
A general bravo ' attested the propriety of Lisardo's
resolution ; but Lorenzo entreated Lysander to devote the
remaining day to Literary Bibliography- for you know,'
says he, how I love the history of eminent characters,
who have cherished a fondness for collecting Books ? At
first, Lysander hesitated ; but the entreaties of the ladies
were too tender and too powerful to be resisted and so,
methodising their plan in writing, and afterwards committing it to Lorenzo's press, the arrangement stood as follows :
PHILEMON-to preside over the First, Second, and Third
Days.
LYSANDER Over the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Days.
LISARDO-Over the Seventh, Eighth, and Ninth Days.
LYSANDER Over the Tenth Day.
xvi INTRODUCTION.
The first three days discussion will be considered as
taking place in the DRAWING ROOM ; where Lorenzo had
consigned a few choice volumes (protected by glass doors
that decorated a satin-wood book-case) which were exclusively appropriated to the illustration of the subjects about
to be discussed. Philemon was inflexible as to carrying on
the discourse within that spot ; which, indeed, by general
consent, was considered to be particularly calculated for the
purpose. Immediately therefore upon the conclusion of
breakfast, on the following morning, Philemon thus opened
the Decameronic campaign.
FIRST DAY.
VOL. I. b
ARGUMENT.
Account ofsome ofthe more ancient Manuscripts written
in capital letters. Briefview of the progress ofthe Arts
of Design and Composition, in illuminated MSS. from the
Vth to the XVIth Century, inclusively.
Bartholmen Beham S 1513
First Day.
O attempt to give even an accurate outline of the progress of
the Arts ofDrawingandComposition, as those arts appear in the
Manuscripts of the Earlier and
Middle Ages, were a task infinitely
beyond my power of execution.
But while on the one hand I may
lament my inability to do justice to so interesting a subject,
on the other, I will frankly confess that almost anyattempt,
however limited or feeble, will be considered in a gracious
point of view by the circle which I have the honour of addressing. In our own country, whatever may have been the
efforts of foreigners, such a subject has never come directly
before the public. The amusing pages of Strutt doubtless
contain numerous specimens of the state of the arts in the
period just mentioned, but those specimens (of the degree
of merit of which I will at present say nothing) are selected
rather with a view of illustrating particular subjects or
XX FIRST DAY.
of
disquisitions appertaining to ancient customs and manners,
than with an exclusive reference to the rise and progress
the arts of drawing and composition. Nor will I at present
stop to enquire how far the same ingenious author was
qualified for the task here alluded to. It is quite sufficient
for us to allow that, consistently with the plan which was laid
down, the performances of STRUTT entitle his memory to
great respect ; and, borrowing the idea of Dr. Johnson, I
* the performances of STRUTT entitle his memory to respect.] In estimating
these performances, we should not so much compare them with what might have
been expected, as with what had been previously performed in our own country.
In short, till the ardent and enterprising genius of Strutt displayed itself, we
had scarcely anything which descrved the name of graphic illustrations of the
state of art in the earlier ages. It is not however my intention to take up the
reader's time with a raisonnée account of Strutt's publications ; as Mr. Nichols,
in the fifth volume of his Literary Anecdotes of the Eighteenth Century, p. 665,
has been abundantly amusing and particular thereupon. Yet the order of these
publications may be briefly marked out. The first of them was The Regal and
Ecclesiastical Antiquities of England, &c. 1773, 4to. reprinted in 1793, with a
supplement containing 12 plates : besides 60 others, common to both editions.
The earliest embellishment is a supposed portrait of Edgar, executed in the year
966 from a MS. in the Cotton Collection : Vespasian A VIII. In the year
1774-5, and 6, appeared the S volumes of his Manners and Customs, &c. ofthe
Inhabitants of England, 4to. comprising, in the whole, 157 copper-plates. This
has never been reprinted, and is the dearest of all Strutt's publications. The
Chronicle of England, in 1777-8, 4to. 2 vols. was his third performance : undoubtedly the most intrinsically valuable of any work which he had published—
and perfect copies are now of rare occurrence.
In 1785-6, appeared his Biographical Dictionary of Engravers, in 2 quarto
volumes, with 20 engravings of fac-similes. Considering that this attempt was
new in our own country, Strutt has shewn uncommon industry and ingenuity in
this work. He was not a sufficient scholar to make himself master of the notices
which had appeared in foreign works (especially among Italian authors) upon
the same subject, nor has he sufficiently illustrated the different styles of the
earlier art of engraving, by means of fac-similes upon wood as well as upon
copper-but the experiment, even as it appeared, was both expensive and
perilous, as the author published upon his own account.' A late learned work
by Mr. Ottley, connected with Enquiries into the Origin and Early History of
Engraving, 1816, 4to. gives us the proper tone and character with which such
pursuits should be brought before the public attention ; and as the same com-
FIRST DAY. xxi
will boldly affirm that he who wishes to be informed of some
of the more curious and interesting details connected with
ancient British Sports and Pastimes, Manners and Cuspetent writer is now busily employed upon the pages of Strutt's work under
description, with a view of giving a NEW EDITION of it, with large additions,
in regard both to matter and art, the curious and well-informed may easily imagine the treat which is preparing for them. It is due however to the
memory of Strutt to state, that JANSEN, in his Essai sur l'Origine de la Gravure,
1808, 8vo. has unblushingly copied a great number of his more curious facsimiles ; and thus attired himself in borrowed plumes which only shew how disgracefully they have been pillaged from their right owner. Could the
Mariette Archives, which furnished Zani with his Finiguerra plate, supply nothing
for the cupidity of Monsieur Jansen ? But let us return to Strutt.
In the year 1796-9, came forth his Complete View of the Dresses and Habits of
the People ofEngland, 4to. 2 vols. illustrated by 143 plates : usually coloured.
The work was also translated into the French language, and printed, in this
country, shortly after its publication in English. Nichols, vol. v. p. 683. Strutt's
last work, connected with the favourite study which had so early and so passionately possessed him, was The Sports and Pastimes of the People of England,
1801, 4to. with 40 plates : republished in 1810, 4to. The plates are usually coloured. These two latter works are published with more elegance and taste
than either of their precursors. Of his Queenhoo-Hall (a posthumous work,
intended to illustrate the manners of the xvth century) perhaps the less that is
said the better. Such are the publications which owe their existence to the
ardor, diligence, and perseverance of JOSEPH STRUTT. If it be asked whether
they are all equally successful, the reply must be in the negative ; and of the
whole of them, collectively considered, the sagacious critic will not fail to discover
that too much is oftentimes advanced from precipitancy, want of information, or
an unqualified deference to the opinion of others. I make no doubt that Strutt,
as he went on, and his work ' grew warm ' beneath his hands, was frequently
convinced of his inability to fill up the outline which even his own imagination had formed and when the number and extent of the formentioned works are
considered, it must be matter of surprise that ONE MAN, certainly not labouring
under the shelter of academic bowers,' could have accomplished so much, and in
so creditable a manner ! The burin of Strutt was rather rapid than vigorous or
scrupulously correct : and it may be doubted whether he has been happy in the
choice of the tint of the generality of his engravings. It is quite demonstrative
that Strutt had neither refined taste nor sound criticism in the arts of drawing,
engraving, and composition ; but when, as from a gentle eminence, we view the
field which he chose, and in which he toiled -when one thinks, too, that such a
labourer was oftentimes working for subsistence for the day that was passing
over him' that the materials he had to collect were not only frequently
scattered in distant places, but incongruous in themselves- that scarcely an
xxii FIRST -DAY.
toms, Regal and Ecclesiastical Antiquities, must devote
his days and his nights ' to the volumes of a STRUTT.
The attempt however to execute effectually, what is here
more particularly under consideration, was undertaken by a
foreigner and a Frenchman-well known by the name of
the ABBE' RIVE. * Perhaps a more capricious and mad-
"
Englishmau had turned a turf' in the same field before him-all the severer
functions of criticism become paralysed in a generous bosom, and we are compelled to admit that JOSEPH STRUTT is not only a fine fellow in his way,' but is
entitled to the grateful remembrance of the antiquary and man of taste. The
misfortunes of his life draw forth the Christian's sigh, the Christian's tear !
"
"
"
* well known by the name of the ABBE' RIVE. ] While Philemon is going on
with his justly-founded tirade against this scurrilous, saucy, but not unsagacious
author, the reader is here quietly informed of the birth, parentage, and education ' of the work, in particular, to which the said Philemon alludes. In Desessart's Siècles Littéraires de la France, 1801 , 8vo. vol. v. p. 418-19, some notice is
taken ofthe various works of JEAN JOSEPH RIVE ; but his Chasse aux Bibliographes ' is therein unaccountably omitted . That Chasse ' is especially distinguished for the foul-mouth abuse ' of the De Bures and the Abbé Mercier de
St. Leger : the latter of whom, however, was never backward in sticking the
rowels of his critical spurs into the sides of his assailant, whenever he could reach
him-and Mr. Ochéda , (Lord Spencer's erudite librarian) who was well acquainted
with Mercier de St. Leger, informs me that this latter Abbé always expressed the
heartiest contempt for Jean- Joseph Rive. As to Rive's attack upon Gui. Guill.
Guillaume de Bure ' (see the Chasse aux Bibliographes,' passim) it has only
proved the impotency as well as the scurrility of the assailant. The reputation
of the Bibliographie Instructive ' (loudly as it calls for a new edition, or superseded as some may think it by the Manuel du Libraire ' of Brunet) confers
lasting celebrity upon the name which gave it birth. But the reader is beginning
to wonder how all this bibliographical gossipping relates to the work alluded to
by Philemon? Scarcely at all. It is mere gossip and digression , if he pleases.
But now-for the birth, parentage, and education ' of the work more especially connected with Philemon's discourse.
"
•
I will be as ' pithy and pleasaunt ' as the nature of my subject will admit of.
In 1782 the Abbé Rive published a small duodecimo volume, of 70 pages, containing his Prospectus of an Essai sur l'art de vérifier l'âge des miniatures
peintes dans des MSS. depuis le 14. au 17. siècle. ' This prospectus, which is
uncommon, seems to paint the author ' to the life.' He tells us in it, that, before
him, no Bibliographer had ever published such complete notices : nor is he surprised at it for it is only by becoming grey in a pursuit that due justice can
bedone to it ! ' (p. 15)-concluding this paragraph by an account of the difficulties
FIRST DAY. - xxiii
headed writer never existed ; yet that saucy Abbé undoubtedly possessed some good qualities for the execution of
the task : and we might be induced to exercise more candour
and the importance attached to bibliographical researches. With respect to the
work to be published, he says that he shall give 26 specimens selected from
upwards of 12000 miniatures (or illuminations) which had passed under his
notice that, in consequence, their choice and variety will render them superior
to every other similar publication-that the definitions to be attached to them
would relate entirely to the elucidation of the usages, customs, and arts
represented by such illuminations ; and that the first artists of Paris, employed
exclusively for their known fidelity and correctness, should be engaged in the
work .' The work itself, in a folio form, was published by subscription. Only 80
copies were printed , each distinctly numbered by the author : 25 louis were
asked for each copy, as the subscription price, to be advanced before-hand-to
expedite the various artists engaged upon the work-(the reasons for requiring
this advance are sufficiently shrewd, and in part, convincing) and to non-subscribers, upon publication, 40 louis d'or . The work was to be completed within
a twelvemonth of publishing the prospectus : the first 13 plates to be delivered
within 6 months, and the remainder, with the text, at the termination of the
ensuing 6 months. Subscriptions were received at the author's house ; where
he was to be met with every day till 1 o'clock — and at the bookseller's, Esprit,
at the Palais Royal. ' In the course of the prospectus we are informed that the
author meditated another publication, of a similar and more comprehensive
nature. ‘ Si ma santé, qui s'épuise tous les jours, se rétablit, et si Thémis, fléchie
par les Muses, se hâte de briser les chaînes d'une affaire civile, [ he was, I fear,
always in hot water '] qui forment un obstacle à mes projets littéraires, je
pourrai entreprendre un autre Recueil dans le même genre, en parcourant les
différentes bibliothèques de l'Europe où l'on conserve de pareils monuments. Je
l'intitulerai : Voyage Calligraphique. ' p. 13. This was to be considered a Supplement to the preceding. I believe it was never taken in hand ; although,
according to Desessarts, Rive published Notices Calligraphiques et Typographiques, in 1795, 8vo.
"
"
To conclude. Of the projected work more particularly under notice, Brunet
tells us that the author never published the promised explanation, or text,
relating to the illuminations : and indeed it was probably well for his reputation ' that he did not since, in the prospectus itself, (p. 12) he has the
hardihood or ignorance to declare, that, from the xth to the middle of the
xivth century, the illuminations are almost entirely frightful, betraying the
barbarity of the period in which they are executed ! ' The reader, I trust, will
learn a different lesson from the pages of this work. In respect to Rive's facsimiles, as they appeared to me in the copy of them in the sale of the Merly
library, (no. 2172) I feel disposed to unite my voice loudly with that of
xxiv FIRST DAY.
in our criticism upon the manner in which he has performed
it, if so muchpretension on his part, had not been obtruded
upon us, and such biting sarcasm had not been bestowed
upon previous labourers in the same vineyard. Nothing
could well exceed the magnificent promises which he made—
the exclusive information which he avowed to possess -and
the splendid and seductive manner in which the public
were told his great work was to be executed. To sharpen
the appetites of the Bibliomaniacs of that day, only a
limited impression ( 80 copies) was determined to be taken
off; and each of the twenty-six embellishments (the entire
number given in each copy) was professed to be drawn and
coloured with the most rigid fidelity to the originals.
LISARDO. What was the result ?
PHILEMON. I was just about to mention it. A complete
failure. If the Abbe's production was not quite so diminutive and insignificant as a mouse, ' it certainly had no
pretensions to the form and consequence of a Lion : ' and
I can scarcely, at this moment even, repress my feelings of
indignation at the bitter disappointment which I experienced
when I obtained a copy of the Abbé's famous work (as he
thought it) at the sale of the Merly library. Most heartily
did I rejoice to get rid of it at the extravagant price for
which I had purchased it. No, my good friends, the illuminations put forth by Rive, as faithful copies of their
originals, are indeed lamentably defective ; and perhaps
such an attempt could hardly fail of being unsuccessful —
Philemon : pronouncing them to be tasteless, faithless, and therefore worthless.
In order to represent the originals, as they ought to be represented, by colours,
no doubt a very heavy sum must be demanded for each copy : and if those
embellishments, which are only beautifully but faithfully engraved, in the FIRST
DAY of this work, were as faithfully coloured, 1 am not sure that 70 guineas
would cover the expenses incurred in the completion of this said first day!
FIRST DAY. XXV
LORENZO. Wherefore ?
PHILEMON. Because we are as yet little more than mere
novices in the art of illumination, as it was practised of old ;
and what appears in the originals, selected by Rive, as fresh,
fair, brilliant, and exquisite, assumes, in the copy, the character of a mere daub. This however might be remediedbut at an immense expense : as, where the Abbé probably
gave one Louis, it would have been necessary to have given
ten.
ALMANSA. I do not exactly comprehend you.
6
PHILEMON. Simply thus. In order to publish copies with
effect, you must engage the most skilful artists; and such
artists must receive their quantum meruit '—or be rewarded according to their deserts '-a system, which I
suspect the aforesaid Abbé was not in the practice of carrying into effect. So that instead of selling his copies at 25
louis a-piece to Subscribers, and 40 louis each to NonSubscribers, he had better have asked 80 louis for copies of
the first description, and 100 for those of the second. I
admit that these sums appear enormous : but such a work is
exclusively adapted for public libraries, or for those Noblemen and Gentlemen '-whose purses, in the lively language
of Clement, are filled with pistoles ' -and surely, throughout civilized Europe, there are EIGHTY such pistoles ' pursefurnished Noblemen and Gentlemen ! Adieu now to the
Abbé: and I pray you lend a helping hand to his successor when you find him tottering along the same path, or
likely to be engulphed in the chaotic materials connected with
the progress of Calligraphy and Miniature-painting during
the earlier centuries of the christian æra.
6
BELINDA. You delight me about this early Miniaturepainting-but what mean you by the word Calligraphy ?
xxvi FIRST DAY. I
PHILEMON. That word means simply beautiful writing.
Yet I know not why I should touch upon such a subject, as
ASTLE has written a vastly pretty book upon it. *
LORENZO. Favour us only with something thereupon. It
seems to be a sort of necessary substratum for your miniature-painting superstructure. Describe briefly, GREAT
MONARCH OF THE DAY, what were the characters, or what
the mode of writing, which distinguished the earlier MSS. of
the period to which you refer.
PHILEMON. Such a pointed and solemn apostrophe is too
formidable to be resisted. Know briefly, then, (for in
brevity I must imitate the ghost of Hamlet's father) that
the earlier MSS. -by which I mean those from the fourth
to the ninth century, inclusively-are usually distinguished
* Astle has written a vastly pretty book upon it. ] The title of the late Mr.
Thomas Astle's work is as follows : The Origin and Progress of Writing, as
well Hieroglyphic as Elementary, illustrated by Engravings taken from Marbles,
Manuscripts and Charters, ancient and modern : also some Account of the
Origin and Progress of Printing,' 1784, 4to. Asecond edition, with additions '
and improvements,' appeared in 1803, 4to. Some account of the elegance and
even brilliancy of this volume, will be found in the Seventh Day' of this work,
underthat of the Books executed in the press of Mr. Bensley. Yet Casley's xvt.
plates of ancient hand writing, at the end of his Catalogue of the King's MSS.
1734, 4to. must not be forgotten ; and Mr. Astle has, in too many instances,
copied from the richly furnished volumes ofthe Nouveau Traité de Diplomatique,
1750, 6 vol. 4to.: a work, of unparallelled excellence in the study of which it
treats. Peignot (in his Essai sur l'Histoire du Parchemin et du Vélin, p. 74,
note) calls Astle's book le plus ample et le plus savant sur l'histoire de la
calligraphie ; ' and it undoubtedly is so. It treats however but incidentally upon
the subject connected with the pages of this work, Mr. Horne, in his Introduction to the Study of Bibliography, 1814, 8vo. has devoted the first two chapters of
his first part, (vol. i. ) to occasional notices of topics connected both with the work
of Mr. Astle and myself : but I could have wished that the fac-simile of the Coder
Ebnerianus had been executed upon copper, instead of wood-as De Murr, in his
Memorab, Bibl. Publ. Norimb. (latter end of vol. i. pl. 2) had previously done
it. Where ornament is concerned, the effect upon copper is more true to the
original. These plates of De Murr will be slightly noticed in the subsequent
pages.
5
FIRST DAY. xxvii
by being written in UNCIAL or CAPITAL LETTERS. * Not
that there may not be specimens of the cursive hand-writing
before the ninth-although I cannot pretend to have heard
"
UNCIAL or CAPITAL LETTERS. ] There has been a little skirmishing upon
the exact meaning of the word uncial. ' And first, to begin with Montfaucon—
or rather perhaps with ST. JEROM -quoted as he has been by writers without
end. In the preface to the Book of Job, that learned Father, after satirising the,
then general propensity to possess purple MSS. written in letters of gold or
silver,' adds vel UNCIALIBUS, ut vulgo aiunt, LITERIS, onera magis exarata,
quam codices. ' Montfaucon (rightly called by Dr. Marsh, now Bishop of Llandaff, 4 one of the best judges of antiquity that ever existed.'— Notes to
Michaelis, vol. ii. p. 708) thus remarks upon the text of St. Jerom. (We will
anglicise the passage. ) Concerning the origin of the word " UNCIAL," we cannot
determine with accuracy. The greater number of critics suppose that the letters,
mentioned by St. Jerom, were called uncial, because they were about the size of
an inch and because twelve inches, which constitute a foot, should also contain
twelve uncials. But, continues Montfaucon, if this were its legitimate meaning,
ofwhat dimensions must that volume be, which should contain only the Iliad of
Homer written in these uncial characters ? ' He then subjoins another, to him
moresatisfactory, definition , from Bernard Moneta. ' See his Palæographia Graca,
p. xj. The ardent and honest David Casley, in his useful Catalogue of the
Manuscripts ofthe King's Library, 1734, 4to. hath a shrewd and rational conjecture hereupon. At page VIII . he says, ' The Letters i, m, n, and u are usually
written, both in old and modern MSS. so as not to be distinguished , when they
come together, but by the sense. Thus the word ' minimum' is written with fifteen
parallel strokes, all alike joined together. [T. Warton stumbled upon this error
in mistaking inimicis for mimicis. ] This might easily occasion the mistake in
reading UNCIALIBUS for INITIALIBUS : of which see below.'
We will step below ' for one minute ; where we observe as follows. After
contending for initialibus,' against uncialibus by the authority of several
MSS. and by the known way of reading such ambiguous words, which is, to take
that reading which agrees best with common sense -Casley adds, ' By initialibus literis it's obvious to understand such letters as are wont to be put at the
beginnings ofbooks, or chapters, or paragraphs : wherein, if a whole book should
be written, it would be indeed rather a burden than a book, as Jerom says. And
several such old books are still remaining. But what can be made of Litteris
uncialibus? Letters of an inch length ? Who has ever read of the Ancients
writing books in such monstrous characters ? And how happens it that no scrap
of any such book is still remaining, if ever there were such ?' p. xvii. Astle
coincides with Casley ; and I trust the reader, as well as myself, is disposed to
the same coincidence. Thus much for the definition-a word now about the
antiquity or continuance of the same INITIAL OF CAPITAL LETTERS. They were
xxviii FIRST DAY.
of them --and, not that capital letters may not exist even in
the eleventh century-but, generally and perhaps soberly
speaking, the foregoing definition may be considered tolerably
correct.
introduced, in fact, from inscriptions upon monuments or other works of art,
which were always in capital letters. They are the characteristics, therefore, of
our very earliest MSS.; and continued in books for ordinary purposes ' as late as the Ixth century ; after which Montfaucon never observed any such characters- except in Books destined for the Church Service or the Choir ; for which
purposes they obtained perhaps later than the x1th century. See his Palæog.
Græca, p. xij ; but more particularly that incomparable catalogue of MSS.
known under the title of Bibliotheca Coisliniana, olim Segueriana ; p. 84-5. The
calligraphical antiquary may possibly not object to disport himself with a clever
note, in that supremely clever work, the Nouveau Traité de Diplomatique, vol. iii.
p. 59, respecting the position of Lisardo upon the antiquity of MSS. (< from the
fourth to the ninth century, inclusively ') in which these capital letters appear.
In that note, the fond conceit ' of Tertullian's having seen the autograph of
some of St. Paul Epistles —and of Aulus Gellius having seen the autograph of
the second book of the Æneid—(' which was sold for twenty little golden statues')
together with similar foud conceits '—are very rationally confuted.
Casley holds out rather stiffly for the existence of MSS. older than the vth
century ; p. VIII.: but perhaps the safer way may be to conclude generally, with
Montfaucon, (in which conclusion Dr. Marsh should seem to concur, vol. ii. p. 656.)
' Non desunt tamen qui exemplaria quædam, tertii vel quarti sæculi esse arbitrentur. Sed licet fateamur nihil repugnare, ut tantæ vetustatis Codices ad nos
usque devenerint ; nullam tamen vel certam vel admodum probabilem notam
proferri posse arbitramur, qua commonstretur alios quosvis hujusmodi libros
manuscriptos, Cæsareum Julianæ Augustæ ætate longe superare.' Palæog. Græc.
p. 185. He here alludes to the famous Greek MS. of Dioscorides ; written
in the beginning of the vith century, and of which anon. ' Yet, a little onward,
he observes that the Colbert Copy of the Pentateuch (in the royal library of
France) should seem to be somewhat earlier even than this Dioscorides, inasmuch
as it approaches nearer to the characters of ancient inscriptions. ' Montfaucon,
however, immediately afterwards qualifies this assertion, by remarking that he
can by no means speak positively upon the subject.' In his Ivth chapter, p. 217,
he assigns the St. Germain copy of St. Paul's Epistles a place among those of
about the virth century.' So much for UNCIALS, in the description of which we
have occupied not fewer than ten inches in a very pigmy type.
·
Aword or two now respecting the lower-case, or cursive type, or Tachygraphy.
Mr. Horne, in his Introduction to the Study of Bibliography, vol. i . p. 109, is
right in his main position respecting the abandonment of the capital, and the
adoption of the cursive, or lower-case letter : although I am not prepared to
FIRST DAY. xxix
LISARDO. Will you favour us with the names of a few of
the more distinguished MSS. which have this peculiarity of
character ?
PHILEMON. What a question, my Lisardo, is this to
answer ! And what, think you, will be the remarks of the
fair part of my auditory, when they hear titles or names of
men and subjects to which their previous reading furnishes
them with no clue !?
ALMANSA. Pray do not let our ignorance be an excuse
for your ineffectual discharge of the regal duties of your
situation !
PHILEMON. Am I to consider this appeal as a sober or
satirical one ?
·
deliver an ex cathedra ' discourse upon the Demi- Uncial form of letter, which,
he says, began to prevail in the 1xth century : unless it be to point out, to the
reader's particular attention, a specimen of this half capital and half lower-case
letter which appears in a fac-simile , from a MS. of Plutarch, considered by
Montfaucon to be of the 1xth century. [' noni, ut putamus, sæculi '] See his
Pal. Græc. p. 268, p. 271. The page, here last referred to, exhibits four other
specimens of similar writing executed in the 1xth century ; but, adds the learned
Montfaucon, I am of opinion that this kind of character was also in use at the
beginning of the xth century :' p. 269. From the beginning of the xth century
the lower-case type no doubt began to prevail very generally ; and, at the same
time, COLOPHONS began to take their rise. The age of MSS . written since the
1xth century (says Dr. Marsh) may be ascertained, because they have very frequently a SUBSCRIPTION expressive of the year in which they were written.'
Notes to Michaelis; vol. ii . p. 656. This able annotator refers us to Montfaucon's
Palæog. Græc. p. 42-91 ; but the entire chapter, from p. 39 to 94, is well
deserving of a colophonic investigation. Nor should the Bibl. Coisliniana, p. 83-4,
p. 141. be unconsulted upon this occasion . Reverting for one instant only to
the general adoption of the cursive, or lower-case greek letter, let the antiquary
follow up his researches into Montfaucon by an examination of the pages of
Bandini's Cat. Cod. MSS. Græc. in the Medicëan library, 1764, fol . where the
first plate, facing p. 82 of vol. i. will afford him specimens of such writing in the
xith and following centuries. I am aware, at the same time, that the pages of
Lambecius, Biscionius, and others, may regale him with similar exhibitions : yet
it must be further remarked, that Bandini, vol. i . p. 107, describes a MS. of a
portion of the Gospels, of the twelfth century, which is said to be written ' perspicuo ac pænè unciali charactere.'
XXX FIRST DAY.
BELINDA. In which way so ever you please. But I own
I should be hurt ifthe ..
LISARDO. Let us have no more of this ' disporting.' The
male part of your audience, brave Philemon, are anxious
and even ardent for uncials-whether illuminated or not
illuminated !
PHILEMON. Perhaps we had better so consider the subject, Leaving therefore the ladies to express their satisfac- ,
tion, or otherwise, at the end of the Day's discourse, shall
we make our raisonée catalogue of early MSS. according to
the foregoing distinction -or, shall we confine ourselves
strictly to chronological order ?
LORENZO. Either method will suffice : and remember that
your own decision is absolute. We have no appeal against
it-nor do we wish for any.
PHILEMON. Well, then, let the random hint of Lisardo
serve for the occasion : since, in a chronological point of
view, the difference is very immaterial : for, equally during
the fourth century are there MSS. both with and without
illuminations.
As illuminated MSS. of the fourth, or certainly the fifth
century, we may consider the famous Roman Calendar and
the Virgil and Terence in the Vatican library—so frequently
described and of the embellishments of which fac-similes
have been already before the public. Of nearly the same
dates, or perhaps half a century later, must we consider the
famous MS. fragment of the Book ofGenesis inthe Cottonian
Collection, and of the Pentateuch in the imperial and royal
libraries of Vienna and Paris. The celebrated Dioscorides,
also in theVienna imperial library, maybe classed in the same
period ; that is, towards the end of the fifth, or the beginning
of the sixth century. These MSS. with the exception of the
1
FIRST DAY. xxxi
three first mentioned, are Greek ; and be it known that
ancient art usually appears more interesting in MSS. of
Grecian literature.
From the sixth to the twelfth century there are doubtless
illuminated MSS. without end ; yet the researches of the
learned furnish us with but a scanty list of them. Portions
of the Old, or New Testament, or oftheWritings ofthe more
ancient Fathers, with sundry works of a similar character,
·
* portions ofthe Old, or New Testament, or of the writings of the more ancient
Fathers. ] What a field to perambulate—or, rather, what a region to explore ! It is
just possible however, that, before the reader plunges at once into all the graphic
criticism connected with the more distinguished MSS. about to be mentioned by
Philemon to his wondering audience, he may not object to be quietly drawn on
one side to be made acquainted with a few illuminated MSS. of not quite such
splendid notoriety. The pages of the worthies, above mentioned by Philemon,
be my lamps and staves in this calligraphic pilgrimage ! First comes the mighty
Mabillon-who seems to rejoice in making mention of that extraordinary
volume, of huge dimensions, of elegant scription, and adorned with pictures and
ornaments—which the worthy Vivianus, Abbot of St. Martin de Tours gave, in
due form and ceremony, surrounded by his brother monks, to the celebrated
Charles the Bald, about the year 850.' De Re Diplomatica, p. 364. The verses
expressly written in it denote this transaction ; and the portrait of the King, at
the head of the dedication, brings back to the reader's fancy the very moment,
as it were, when the donation took place. The volume is a great portion of the
Old Testament, beginning with the first book ofthe Pentateuch, of which a facsimile is given by Mabillon. The illumination or portrait of the King was
' caused to be engraved ' by Baluze (the head librarian of Colbert-into whose
hands this precious MS. came) in his Capitular. Reg. Francor. vol. ii . p. 1276 :
but the anxious reader may see this decoration in a book of more common
Occurrence-the Mus. Ital. of Montfaucon, vol. i. p. 70. Jansen notices this MS.
and says that De Murr published a reduced copy of the portrait in his Journal.
The latter bibliographer will also have it, in the same Journal, vol. xiii. p. 127,
that the miniatures, in the more beautiful MSS. of the Sacred Writings of the
Ixth and xth centuries, were executed by Italian artists.' Rather, I think, by
those of Greece. See Essai sur la Gravure, vol . ii. p. 201. But it would be
cruel to take the reader away from the page of Mabillon, referred to, without
whispering gently in his ear that it appears, from the same, that this CHARLES
THE BALD was a VERY DRAGON in the bibliomaniacal way-and, as I suspect,
in that department of it connected with illustrated copies ! For what shall we say
of the said Charles's PRAYER Book, marvellously written in letters of gold,
xxxii FIRST DAY.
adorn the pages of Lambecius, Mabillon, Montfaucon,
Bandini, and others. In our own country we may notice
the celebrated MSS. known under the names of Cuthbert's
upon purple vellum, and bound in ivory and studded with gems ?' This is the
warm language of Baluze to Mabillon-' cujus humanitati ( says the latter of the
former) multum debemus.' Indeed Baluze was a fine fellow for manuscripthunting ;' and in the great Colbert he had a master both willing and able
to gratify his passion to the utmost. In his auto-biography, Baluze tell us,
upon being made (without the least personal knowledge of Colbert, ex famâ
tantum sibi notum, ') librarian to the minister, that he set about furnishing the
library with a great number of the best books, especially of MANUSCRIPTS,
which were obtained at an immense expense, and with unceasing solicitude, in
Europe, Asia, and Africa. ' Glorious taste-and not wholly extinguished, I trust,
among modern European prime ministers ! Consult the Bibl. Baluziana, vol. i,
sign. a vj, recto.
Is not the present the fittest place to notice the Menologe (a Martyrology, or
Calendar) said to be executed and ‘ adorned with pictures ' under the care of the
Greek Emperor Basil Porphyrogenitus, in the 1xth century—according to Baronius- but according to the Acta Sanctorum, in the xth century. Consult the
learned treatise of Leo Allatius, De Libris Ecclesiasticis Græcorum, reprinted in
the vth volume of Fabricius's Bibl. Græc. pt. i. p. 62 : where the said Leo seems
perfectly to revel in the description of this highly ornamented book—and where
he not only demonstrates that the miniatures' are executed by different artists,
with different degrees of merit, but absolutely gives us the names of the miniature
painters ! the Cosways, Plimers, Chalous, and Hayters of the day ! -such as
Pantaleus, Georgius, Simeon, Michael the little, ' Menas, Nestor, and the two
(Michael and Simeon) Blachernitas ! The Abbé Rive, in the notes to his
prospectus, mentioned at page xxii, ante, has a particular account of this
Menologe ; which came into the possession of Pope Paul V. and was by him
deposited in the Vatican library. It contains not fewer than 430 miniatures,
with the name of one of the forementioned artists by the side of each miniature,
It was published for the first time in Greek and Latin, in 1727, at Rome, in 2
folio volumes, under the care of Cardinal Albani-with engravings of some of these
miniatures, 5 inches in height by 7 in width. This Menologe, containing only
six months out of the twelve, (viz. September, October, November, December,
January, February) was followed by the publication of a 3rd volume, from
another ancient Menologe, discovered by Pope Celement XI. in a monastery of
St. Basil, in the Campagna di Roma, which contained the remaining six months.
This latter publication was also under the patronage of Cardinal Albani. See
Rive's note, p. 44-8. But it was a great omission, in the engravings of the first
publication, not to supply the names of the respective artists who executed the
originals.
FIRST DAY. xxxiii
Latin and Saxon Gospels, the Life ofAldhelm, and the Book
ofGospels belonging to Athelstan.
LORENZO. Perhaps you will favour us with an opinion or
In strict justice, however, I ought to have previously noticed an illuminated
MS. of a Syriac Version of the Gospels, of the sixth century, according to Assemannus, in his Bibl. Med. Laurent. et Palat. Cod. MSS. Orientalium Cat :
Curante Gorio, 1742, folio. In the Paranesis ad Lectorem ' (p . 491 ) the date
of this MS. is given as of 586. The plates, illustrative of the illuminations, are
XXVI. in number ; and the figures in them are from 1 to 7 inches in height.
The whole is divided by frame-work, or pillars, terminated by capitals, having
somewhat more than semi-circular tops above : a mode of decoration, observable
even as late as the xvIIth century in the quarto Bibles of Bill and Barker.
Beneath these circles are capitals to the pillars, (which form the divisions, ) evidently of a much later date, and such as we apply to the architecture of the
xith and x11th centuries. Biscionius republished these plates, but not with
scrupulous fidelity, in his Cat. of the Hebrew MSS. in the Medicëan Library,
1752, folio, vol. ii. p. 171 : prefixing 28 pages of elaborate description. Michaelis,
although he wishes us to be very cautious about the dates of Syriac MSS.-
remarking, that they are not all of them so ancient as their dates imply—yet,
concerning this particular MS. , he seems to refer us to Blanchini with a conviction,
rather than doubt, of its antiquity. He says however that a complete catalogue
of the Syriac MSS. of the New Testament, of which certain information is to be
obtained, would be an essential service rendered to biblical criticism .' Introd. to
the New Testament,' vol. ii . p . 21, edit. 1802. The annotation of his learned
editor, upon this point, rather confirms the propriety of the original remark.
Let us pass onto the notice of a few other distinguished, and illuminated MSS.
(indiscriminately, as to their contents, but all of a serious nature) from the 1xth
or xth, to the x11th century. Montfaucon soon begins to arrest our attention,
in the early pages of his Pal. Græc. with an account of two unusually splendid
and interesting ones of the kind of which we are treating. The one, (Cod. Reg.
num. 1809) ofthe ninth century, containing the Works of St. Gregory, formerly
belonging to that lover of highly emblazoned MSS. the Greek Emperor Basil
Porphyrogenitus. This manuscript is briefly mentioned by him at p. 4 ; but at
page 110, we have an absolutely sparkling description thereof: It is written
(says he) with wonderful elegance, on all sides effulgent with gold, and crowned
with 45 illuminations or pictures !' p. 110. Mark, now, how his enthusiasm
carries him on ! Along side of this precious MS. may be placed that Catena (or
Commentary) upon the Psalms, &c. also resplendent with gold and illuminations
-unsullied by age, although executed in the xth century, and breathing all the
magnificence of the Augustan age. Ibid. At page 11, not only a very particular
description is given of the ornaments in this Catena, ( Cod. Reg. Num. 1878, )
but a most interesting fac-simile occurs of the illumination at fol . 435 : where
there appears a beautiful female figure of Night, [ NTE] with a stellated robe,
xxxiv FIRST DAY.
two upon the comparative degrees ofmerit in the specimens
of ancient art contained in the MSS. just mentioned ; and
more especially in those ofour own country?
her torch inverted, and she is looking over her left shoulder. It is perfectly
Grecian art. A figure of Esaias, with a boy having a lighted torch in his left
hand, (denoting the dawn of day) are to the right of this sable but interesting
female. The text is from the Canticle of Isaiah " - εκ νυκτὸς ορθρίζει το
πvevμà μov.' It is rarely that specimens of art, in illuminated MSS. of this
period, present us with such a treat as this. In his Diarium Italicum, p. 278,
Montfaucon tells us that he saw a MS. of the same subject, age, and handwriting, in the Vatican ; but apparently without illuminations.
In his Bibliotheca Coisliniana, p. 63-5, the same learned antiquary gives us an
account of an illuminated MS of the Gospels, of the xth century ; including a
fac-simile ofthe representation of St. John, sitting before his writing desk. This
is among the earliest extant of the innumerable ornaments called Portraits ofthe
Evangelists. I shall have occasion to make farther mention of these evangelical
representations : but must at present hasten to take particular notice of an illuminated MS. of a portion of the Works of St. Chrysostom, described at great
length, and illustrated with great splendour, from page 133 to 137 of the work
last referred to. It was executed for the use of the Emperor Nicephorus, Botoniata, at the end of the x1th century ; and contains four beautiful and elaborate
portraits of that monarch : among which, the second, of himself and his Queen,
is to be particularly commended for splendour of dress, and tenderness of physiognomical expression. I know of nothing of this period, of the same character,
which deserves to be put alongside of it : but it is possible, and even probable,
that the curious may prefer the ivth plate, which represents the same Emperor
between the Father (Chrysostom) and the Archangel Michael. The backgrounds
uniformly appear to be of solid gold ; and the colours, throughout, according to
Montfaucon's minute and admirable description, are of the liveliest characters.
Indeed these copper-plate fac- similes are quite superior to anything of their kind of which I happen, at this moment, to have the least recollection . But
thus ought such illustrations ever to be executed ! De Murr, in his elaborate
description of the Ebnerian Codex, (an illuminated MS, of the N. Testament of
the x11th century, formerly in the Ebner family-but now in the public library
at Nuremberg-see Mem. Bibl. Publ. Norimb. vol . ii . p. 100-131) refers to the
ornaments of one of the illuminations of this Coislinian, or Seguerian MS. by
way of illustrating the one under description : see p. 118.
We will conclude these ms. illumination- researches by disporting ourselves
awhile in the instructive pages of Bandini's Catalogue of the Greek MSS in the
Medicean Library : 1764, 3 vols. folio. The illustrations about to be adduced
are all of the x1th century. And first let us examine with minute attention, and
especial gratification, the beautiful fac- simile from the xvi Orations of Gregory
FIRST DAY. XXXV
PHILEMON. Willingly ; but I am not desirous that these
opinions should be considered in any other manner than as
flying words. Permit me however, in the outset of my
-
ofNazianzen, forming number v. of the fourth plate, opposite page 320. of
vol. i—just transferring, for a few seconds, our admiration of a border-ornament
from a MS. of the same Father, of the xth century ; forming no. 11. in the same
plate. But the fac- simile first mentioned representing the nativity of our
Lord, with the ablution of the infant Christ, below, and the choir ofattendant
angels above, &c .— has more than usual merit, considering the diminutiveness
of the figures introduced. The description of the MS. occurs at page 293 ofthe
same volume. At page 147 , illustrated by a copper- plate fac- simile at p. 163,
we notice a very extraordinary MS. of the Gospels, of the x1th century, containing, not only four large representations of the Evangelists, but having moreover ' almost innumerable other small embellishments, illustrative of the text of
scripture, and incorporated in the text itself-so that scarcely a page occurs
without two or more such specimens of illumination.' The fac-similes introduced
at the bottom of page 163, are rather curious than correctly beautiful. The
fac-simile of the writing, in very small lower-case, or a cursive hand, given at
page 164, shews prodigious neatness and even elegance. The last specimen to
be given from Bandini (placed however the first in order by that writer) is from
a precious MS. of the x1th century, of a Catena or Commentary upon the Four
Greater Prophets ; which MS. the said Bandini calls ineditus, integer, elegantissimus, et prorsus egregius, et omnibus bonis et laudibus cumulatissimus ' -
and which Lucas Holsten pronounces to be planè admirandus ob antiquitatem
et elegantiam,' p. 19-22. But our business just now is with Art. Well then, in
Plate 11, (from the same MS. ) inserted after p. 82, we observe a whole length
figure of Jeremiah, about 8 inches and a half high ; a roll in his left hand,
beneath his robe ; his right elevated towards the Almighty, in the clouds. The
drapery of this figure is graceful, and the expression of the countenance good ;
but the arms are too short, and there is what artists call a poverty of composition
throughout the whole. The two square borders which surround it, with an
inscription in Greek capitals, between these borders, are in a pure taste ; and this
illustration of the original may be ranked among the more creditable copper- plate
ornaments which embellish the pages of foreign bibliography. Bandini concludes
his account of this precious MS. by almost going down upon his knees to beg
and pray' that some learned and laboriously patient man ' would undertake
the publication of it-ingrafting his own immortality upon that of the work
itself:' p. 22. The colours and the gold of this MS. are exquisite.
"
To this limited (and I fear unsatisfactory) list of the earlier, second- rate, illuminated MSS. let me just notice the fac- similes of embellishments, upon a minor scale, which adorn a duodecimo Psalter, of 265 leaves, partly written in golden
letters- described in Kollarius's reprint of Lambecius : lib. iii. col . 95, &c. I
VOL. I. C
xxxvi FIRST DAY.
regal or judicial capacity, to say a word or two respecting the
art displayed in the earlier MSS. stated to be in theforeign
libraries before mentioned.
And first of the ROMAN CALENDAR : as you see the
figures of the respective months in the pages of Lambecius
and Grævius. The style of art is quite classical ; whether
suspect from the style of the armour, upon the figure of St. Gereon, that the
original embellishments are not earlier than the xith century.
What treasures, therefore, curious and enthusiastic reader, yet remain to be
explored-among foreign libraries-and connected only with GRECIAN LITERATURE !! For know that, all the Works, described in this almost interminable
note, are deposited in foreign collections, and are composed in the Greek tongue.
And further know, that ART (as Philemon has above properly observed) appears
in a more perfect form in MSS. executed in this language. Whether therefore
for extrinsic or intrinsic purposes-whether as an object of taste or of erudition—
let us hope that, abroad, the brave spirit of PROFESSOR MAIO will quickly warm
the cold, and strengthen the feeble, in researches after ancient manuscript lore :
while, at home, the sagacity and perseverance of our BURNEYS, GAISFORDS,
and BLOMFIELDS, will not fail, ere a score of years shall have run their course,
to have elicited what is most curious, precious, and praise-worthy in the vellum
treasures of Oxford, Cambridge, and London ! As to MSS. in the Latin and
French languages, connected with the HISTORY OF OUR OWN COUNTRY, from the
xth to the xivth century, there has been nothing to put in competition-whether
for criticism or intelligence with what my very excellent friend the ỏ avu
.. . .Y. . . . E hath acquired in his researches amongst these precious stores !
the ROMAN CALENDAR-in the pages of Lambecius and Grævius. ] The
reader is now about to be made acquainted with the more celebrated MSS.
abroad and at home, which contain both curious and excellent specimens of
ancient art, in the labours of THE ILLUMINATOR. I am aware however that he
will stop me on the very threshold of the inquiry, by proposing a quære or two
respecting that extraordinary volume (the prototype of our Granger, shall we
add?) of eminent Roman portraits, which POMPONIUS ATTICUS (on the
authority of Corn. Nepos) is said to have possessed-and beneath which a
quatrain or so of verses was inscribed, indicative of the achievements, in arts
or arms, of the respective characters introduced. But VARRO was a yet more
desperate collecter of portraits ! —' for' says Pliny (lib. xxxv. ch. ii. ) he had not
fewer than seven hundred notices, usually illustrated by portraits, of the more
eminent characters of his time. ' Indeed Fabricius (Bibl. Lat. Cura Ernesti,
vol. i. p. 125) gives us the title of a work expressly written upon portrait- painting
by Varro : namely, Hebdomadum, sive de Imaginibus Libri.' Brotier, in his
....
·
FIRST DAY. xxxvii
we consider the anatomy ofthe figures, or the drapery with
which they are clothed. These figures are about eight
inches in height ; and their occupations, emblematical of the
respective months, are not a little striking and curious.
The arts of design and composition appear to considerable
edition of Pliny, (vol. vi. p. 368) thinks these portraits were done with a pen ;
but the hypothesis- loving Pauw absolutely sees in them the invention of
copper-plate engraving ! O rare Professor Pauw! Jansen, in his Essai sur la
Gravure, vol. i. p. 189, &c. is rather amusing upon this subject. The Abbé Rive
has a shrewd suspicion that Varro's book was in existence at the end of the Ivth
century ; or, if not the book itself, a copy of it. Don't cite (says he) the
authority of Aulus Gellius, in opposition to me, who says the library was pillaged
and destroyed in the year 710 of Rome : which would make it half a century
before the Christian era : for Symmachus, who lived towards the end of the Ivth
century after Christ, speaks of this very book in one of his letters printed by
Carrio (Emend. et Observat. Libri. sec. Paris, 1583, 4to. ) in a manner which shews
he had turned over its leaves, and was fully acquainted with the contents of it.'
Prospectus, &c. p. 33. Happy Symmachus !
But for the above mentioned ROMAN CALENDAR. Let us hear, first of all,
what Schwarz says upon this, and other similar specimens, of ancient art in
illuminated manuscripts. Dici vero non potest, quantum hæ picturæ ad antiquitates veterumque ritus illustrandos conferre possunt . ' . .. . Inter alios autem
antiquos codices variis imaginibus exornatos, maxima certe admiratione dignum
essevidetur CALENDARIUM ILLUD ROMANUM, egregium vetustatis monimentum,
atque pulcherrimum Bibliothecæ Vindobonensis cimelium,' &c. De Ornament.
Libror. Vet. 1756, 4to. p. 38. This is excellent and orthodox of its kind. The
enterprising spirit of Lambecius discovered and published these extraordinary
specimens of expiring Roman art in his Comment. de Bibl. Imp. Vindob. lib. iv.
p. 277 : in a series of eight plates. Of course Kollarius, in his new edition of
Lambecius, republished them ; but my copy of Kollarius lacketh such desiderated
ornaments-and yet it was obtained from Monsieur A. A. Renouard, a bookseller
and bibliographer of no mean renown ! However Grævius ( vir immortalis famæ,'
says Schwarz- it does one good to mention the name of that illustrious antiquary !)
had previously republished them, with 6 pages of annotation from Lambecins, in
his Thes. Antiq. Romanar. vol. viii. p. 95, &c. They form a most interesting
series of ancient art ; being eight out of the twelve calendar months, represented
by allegorical figures, with appropriate accompaniments ; about 8 inches in
height, fully draped. Their date is supposed to be of the year 354 of Christ ; and
they are also supposed to have been expressly executed for a certain Valentinus,
during the government of Constantine, the son of Constantine the Great. And
thus much for the far-famed Roman Calendar in the imperial library at Vienna.
xxxviii FIRST DAY.
advantage in them ; and on contemplating them, we do not yet
begin to feel ourselves much removed from the era of Grecian
elegance. Secondly, of the degree of merit as to art in the
earlier illuminated MSS. of VIRGIL and TERENCE. * The
the earlier illuminated MSS. of Virgil and Terence. ] These MSS. have been
described nearly a thousand and one times ; ' but let us add another unit to
the number, unconscionable as it may seem. Suppose we begin with Mabillon ;
who places the Virgil as the first in the list of Roman writing of the second
age ' and who gives a fac-simile of the beginning of the text of the second
Eclogue. At that time Mabillon was indebted to the kindness of Cardinal
Casanata ( cujus benignitatem et eruditionem prædicat chorus litteratorum'-
adds the enthusiastic antiquary ! ) for a knowledge of the MS.; but afterwards
he was gratified by a sight of it himself, in company with his friend Emanuel a
Schelstrate, head librarian of the Vatican, when he went upon his Italian tour :
as we gather from page 62, vol. i. of his Museum Italicum. At page 63, he
says of the illuminations, that they elegantly and skilfully express ' what they
were intended to represent. Certainly this is their least praise. Yet how could
that wonderfully accomplished antiquary, Montfaucon, in his Diarium Italicum,
speaking of these very illuminations, prononuce them to be non peritæ manus ?!'
What a purgatory must his spirit be doomed to endure from such a crude and
heretical opinion ! But for the MS. itself. It is supposed by Mabillon,
Winkelmann, and Peter Burman, to be of the time of Constantine the Great.
Schelstrate has pushed it to the period of Septimus Severus : but the authors of
the Nouveau Traité de Diplomatique, vol. iii . p. 57, rather incline to place it
towards the beginning of the vth century, contrary, as it appears to me, to the
authorities before cited .
·
The Abbé Rive gives us some curious intelligence connected with it. He says
that 'Cardinal Camillus Massimi, who died in 1677, in his 58th year, caused these
paintings to be copied, and employed Bartoli both to copy and engrave them.'
Mabillon had intimated the same thing ; but Massimi's laudable passion for
antiquities is interestingly described by Rive. In the year 1677, 4to. these
engravings appeared, without the text, in 55 copper plates. There are copies of
this edition upon vellum-which Fabricius (says Rive) and few bibliognostes are
aware of Je tais ici ( adds he) l'exemplaire d'un pareil tirage que je connois,
afin que les furets bibliographiques aient la peine de le chercher là où il est
indiqué.' How like the man is this sentence ! These engravings, also without
the text, were republished in 1725 ; but more correctly, and with an increased
number of plates, from another ancient ms. of Virgil in the Vatican library,
(num. 3867) as well as with the text itself, accompanied by notes, corrections,
and various readings-under the editorial care of BoTTARI : whose preface is
well worth perusal, and whose edition of this precious fragment of antiquity is
the only one worth obtaining : as AMBROGI made a sorry use of these engravings
FIRST DAY. xxxix
embellishments in the Vatican VIRGIL are in a much better
taste than those of the Roman Calendar. There is more
of design and composition in these decorations-which are
in his pompous edition of the text of the Lorenzo- Medicëan Virgil, in capital
letters-unilluminated-but illustrated with the cuts of this Vatican MS. in
1763, folio, 3 volumes. We learn both from Bottari, and the authors of the
Nouveau Traité de Diplomatique, vol. iii . p. 57, note ( 1), that Emanuel a
Schelstrate had the highest opinion of these illuminations : ' Quinimo (says that
learned librarian of the Vatican) pictor harum imaginum videtur secutus fuisse
ideam nobilioris et antiquioris pictoris, nihilque in iis exhibetur quod primam
Romani Imperii majestatem non redoleat . It is rather surprising that Mabillon
had not seen Bartoli's first publication of the figures. Of Bartoli's accuracy
or inaccuracy I am incompetent to say a word : but I may hesitate before I
subscribe to the severe sentence of Winkelmann, that ' il s'étoit attaché à faire
paroitre toutes les productions médiocres comme venant des bons tems de l'art.'
Hist. de l'Art chez les Anciens, vol. ii. p. 492, edit. 1790. Observe, that the note
subjoined to this passage, and signed C. F. will be found in Jansen's Essai sur la
Gravure, vol. ii. p. 194 : from the end of which we learn that a bookseller, ofthe
name of Monaldini, published short descriptions of these illuminations, at Rome,
in 1782. The figures rarely exceed 2 inches in height.
Next in order comes the VATICAN TERENCE. This is thought to be of nearly
the same antiquity with the Virgil ; according to Mabillon and Montfaucon.
De Re Diplom. p. 352 : Diarium Ital. p. 278. There is some pleasant anecdote
attached to its early history. Bernard Bembo was once in possession of it, as we
learn from Cocquelines ' edition of1767, folio, 2 vol. —and had made the following
inscription upon the 2d leaf of it ;
EST MEI BERNARDI BEMBI
QVI POST EIVS OBITVM MANEAT
IN SVOS
ANTIQVISS. ANTIQVITATIS RELIQVIAE.
The accomplished Politian also wrote as follows upon the immediately succeeding leaf:
O FOELIX NIMIVM PRIOR AETAS.
EGO ANGELVS POLITIANVS HOMO VETVSTATIS MINIME INCVRIOSVS
NVLLVM AEQVE ME VIDISSE AD HANC DIEM CODICEM
ANTIQVVM FATEOR.
It afterwards came into the possession of Fulvius Ursinus ; and Erythræus, in his
Pinacotheca, p. 10, edit . 1692, hath favoured us with an amusing tale hereupon.
' Ursinus had collected many ancient MSS. in his library at a great expense ;
and a ridiculous circumstance enough occurred one day, when, being visited by
the Cardinal Toleto, he shewed him the Comedies of Terence, [the MS. under
consideration] which he affirmed to have been written a thousand years ago—
xl FIRST DAY.
"
full one-third size less than those just mentioned. I remember being much pleased, in particular, with those relating
to the history of the unhappy Dido .'... C
ALMANSA. She was, methinks, a vastly injured woman—
LISARDO. But the embellishments ...
PHILEMON. Those which describe her dying scene really
possess considerable pathos. Indeed, upon the whole, in a
graphic point of view, I prefer the illuminations of this
Virgil to those of any MS. with which I am acquainted. I
must take it for granted that they are faithfully represented
but that they were now in a very mutilated state- yet, added he, barbarous
as this MS. may seem, it is beyond all price ! Heavens, (rejoined the Cardinal)
what do I hear? Truly, I would rather have one text of Terence, however
recently printed, provided it were correct, than ten such mutilated specimens
of ancient lore, even should they have been written by the hand of a Sibyl !'
Every one present laughed excessively when they heard the Cardinal so much
depreciate what his Host had estimated so extravagantly.' Ursinus bequeathed
this extremely precious manuscript to the Vatican library, with some sonnets of
Petrarch in the hand-writing of that poet. Let therefore Fulvius Ursinus receive
our best thanks, and let him be numbered among the bravest Bibliomaniacs of
his day!
The illuminations of this MS. of Terence (of which, somewhat unaccountably,
the authors ofthe Nouveau Traité de Diplomatique, omit to take notice—although
they place the writing as high as the end of the Ivth century) were first given
to the public in an Italian version of Terence published by Mainardi at Urbino
in 1736 ; and afterwards in 2 folio volumes, by Carolus Cocquelines in 1767-
also with an Italian version. In his preface, p. 111. the latter editor remarks :
Quare romanas fere omnes Bibliothecas invisi, et terentianos MSS. Codices,
si qui erant, diligentissime perlustravi : ex quam plurimis autem duos potissimum
selegi Vaticanæ Bibliothecæ omnium, quotquot supersunt, antiquissimos, ac
nitidissimos, a Mabillonio, Montfauconio, omnibusque eruditis viris maximopere
commendatos.' Cocquelines then gives a specimen of the original text from the
Hecyra, Act. 1. Sc. 1. in capitals of a close character. The MS. is numbered
3226, and contains 113 leaves. At p. vi. the editor gives a fac- simile of
another ancient MS. of Terence, in the cursive hand : perhaps the one mentioned by Peireskius, which Montfaucon thought to be of the 1xth century.
Possibly not much more than a century later, is that very interesting MS. of
Terence, in the Auctarium of the Bodleian library, written in a handsome lowercase, or small roman character, and replete with illuminations introduced in the
margins, in an outline of bistre colour. Take the following, lover of illustrative
FIRST DAY. xli
in the foreign engravings of them : yet I own I much long
for an inspection of the originals ! I wish indeed I could
offer you any opinion upon the illuminations of a portion of
the famous HOMER, in the Ambrosian library at Milan, * and
art, of which I made a tracing from the Prologue of the Andria. The drapery has very considerable merit, and the attitude is far from being inelegant.
In respect tothe more ancient MS. , first under consideration, it must be remarked
that the figures are only about 3 inches in height, and are probably more shaded
than the originals warrant. Cocquelines' book however is but a tasteless performance.
famous Homer in the Ambrosian library at Milan. ] The name of MAIO will,
in future ages, be coupled with those of fortunate discoverers of precious MSS.
xlii FIRST DAY.
upon which Professor Maio is now exercising his critical
In his prospectus, relating to it, we are promised
to be treated with a variety of fac-similes of its numerous
acumen.
of antiquity. The Epistles of SYMMACHUS, the fragments of the forensic orations
of FRONTO, an oration of Isæus, with the promised portions of the HOMER,
above alluded to, are quite sufficient feathers in the Professor's literary cap to
make him hold up his head gallantly for the remainder of his life. If the same
Professor have not discovered, in such edited portions of the ancient Classics, all
the successful daring of Bentley, and all the recondite accuracy of Blomfield , he
has nevertheless evinced so much unconquerable perseverance and classical
taste as entitle him to our very best wishes and warmest thanks - and if
the day, in which this perishable mention is made of him, chance to be the
anniversary of his natal one, let me congratulate the said Professor, in the name
of my countrymen, and heartily wish him multos et felices ! But all this is mere
gossip and flourish ! The reader is impatient for an account of the Homeric MS.
Let him attend to what follows -collected from the Professor's own notice, and
published also I believe in the Acta Lipsiensia.
There appear to be LVIII complete illuminations ; some of which are attached
to each of the XXIV Books of the Iliad , with the exception of the id, xvith,
xixth, and xxth books. The Homeric verses unluckily are only 800 in number.
In the paintings (says the Professor) are a wonderful exuberance and variety of
imagination. For as Homer was endued with an immense power of mind, to
embrace as it were the whole of nature in his poetry, so our Artist has exhibited
scarcely less universality in his performances. Oh, that his skill had been equal
to his fertility of fancy ! Yet the subjects, although not free from faults common
perhaps to many monuments of antiquity, are nevertheless by no means despicable. They do not possess the stiffness of later ages, and they abound in representations of graceful form, acute expression of countenance, flowing drapery—
with indications even of the passions of the human mind. The symmetry of the
limbs, the light and shade, mountains and plains, are not unhappily expressed ..
but the chief excellence and merit of such ornaments are, that they convey a
perfect picture of the manners and customs of the times in which they were executed.' The Professor is then nearly carried away by a gust of inspiration '
on a more particular description of them. De Editione Fragment: rum Antiquissimorum Iliadis Homeri cum Picturis Nuncius Prodromus.
"
What shall we say then? That the Homer is of the same age with the Virgil
and Terence ? Let those who impugn such a conjecture, dispassionately state
the grounds upon which their opposition is formed. For my own part, a GREEK
CAPITAL-LETTER CLASSIC-and especially of HOMER-(only portions even of
such a poet ! ) is a circumstance of such high relish ,' that one can hardly suffer
one's enthusiasm to cool for the sake of taking out a pair of critical scales to
weigh how much of it belongs to the ivth, or vth, or vith century ! The illumi-
FIRST DAY. xliii
decorations -illustrative especially of the several deaths
described in the battles of the bard. The Professor talks of
the accuracy of its anatomical representations ; so that we
may prepare ourselves for a rich repast when his publication
makes its appearance.
Thus much for early ornamented classical manuscripts,
written in capital letters. Pursuing the order of our researches, suffer me now to make particularly honourable
mention of the famous PENTATEUCH in the imperial library
of Vienna,* adorned with 48 illuminations -which, from the
nations, I confess, promise a wide field for conjecture to range in : but the text,
it is most probable, may savour of the school of Aristarchus, and of the Augustan
age of criticism ; and thus not bring us very much nearer to the period of the
Mæonian Bard himself. However, as they say to the south of Calais-pier, nous
verrons !'
"
Among the later specimens of illuminated classics, is the ANACREON published
by Spaletti at Rome in 1781 folio, from a MS. of the xth century. This impression
exhibits fac- similes of the original, from the pencil of Ricciolini ; accompanied
by 8 leaves of paginary fac- simile. There are also two Greek texts, with a Latin
version ; but each of the texts is in a cursive hand. I have some suspicion of the
fidelity of Ricciolini's pencil ; as the fac-similes have too much of a modern air.
The library of the Royal Institution is enriched by a copy of this work, coloured
after the originals ; which was presented to it by Sir Frederick Baker, Bart.
The head and tail-piece embellishments are perfectly classical and beautiful.
"
*famousportion of the Pentateuch in the imperial library at Vienna. ] Let us
hasten to the prolific pages of Lambecius at once -or, still better, to the new
edition of his Comment. de Bibl. Cas. Vindobon. by Kollarius, 1776, lib. iii. col . 3,
with its attendant notes. Yet Nesselius, who published a Recensio Specialis ’ ·
of all the Greek and Oriental MSS. in the same library, in 1690, folio, upon the
basis of his great precursor, Lambecius, will not be without his use. First, as to
Lambecius, who absolutely pours forth burning words ' upon the subject. He
calls the volume in question a very ancient, purple-vellum MS. of a square
form, written in capital letters, of silver and gold, in the fourth century.' It
consists of only 26 leaves ; of which 24 are embellished, on each side, with paintings illustrative of the BooK OF GENESIS. The two other leaves contain a
portion of the Gospel of St. Luke, with portraits or representations of the four
Evangelists. The whole of these 48 embellishments, together with the four
Evangelists, and a specimen of the text, are engraved upon copper, as fac- similes,
in the work of Lambecius ; republished by Nesselius, and again by Kollarius.
xliv FIRST DAY.
specimens given by Lambecius, and from him copied by
Nesselius and Kollarius, we may fairly observe are not only
extremely interesting from their antiquity, but portions of
them are absolutely well designed and full of expression.
Nesselius ; but those of
Montfaucon has caused
The same plates probably served for Lambecius and
Kollarius are new, and equally feeble and faithless.
the fac-simile only of the type to be re-engraved, in his Palæographia Graca,
p. 194 ; and Astle has made the English reader familiar with a portion of this
latter fac- simile, in the 11d plate to his Origin and Progress of Writing : but the
artist has deviated from the original in Astle's representation of it, which is a
great deal too heavily executed.
Nesselius tells us that the writing of this most ancient MS. is extremely
difficult to be read ; not only because it is divested of accents, and distinction
of words, but because the letters are partly obscured, partly eaten away, and, on
account of the thinness or transparency of the vellum, scarcely any longer distinguishable. The colours of the miniatures (adds he) are divested of oil ; being
only water tempered with gum. ' vol. i . p. 49. The illuminations are in truth great
curiosities ; commencing with a representation of the eating of the forbidden
fruit, followed by the expulsion of our first parents from paradise. The Deluge
forms the third subject ; but there is no room for the notice of each subject.
The figures measure from 3 inches and a quarter downwards ; and evidently
betray the decline of art. In spite of the sneer of Reimannus, (in his Bibl.
Acroamatica, p. 62, ) respecting the want of selection,' displayed by Lambecius,
in giving us the whole farrago of subjects, ' we are much indebted to that
zealous and enterprising bibliographer for the ample and rich treat which such
a series of plates furnishes : because, from some one, more than another, the
critical antiquary may draw an inference which may serve to determine the
period when the work was executed. Montfaucon, indeed, appears strongly to
doubt its being of the age of Constantine the Great . adding, that he scarcely
thinks it coeval with the Colbert MS. (of the vith century) ; and that it is hardly
possible to know the age of MSS. executed before the viith century, when all
are written in nearly the same form of letter.' Pal. Græc. p. 193. Kollarius
however feels no embarrassment, from the wary scepticism of Montfaucon, not
only assigning to it the period conjectured by Lambecius, but, in his lib. iii. col.
510-515, he is even disposed to think that St. Jerom had his eye upon THIS
VERY MS. when he inflicted that cruel stroke of satire . upon ancient vellum
MSS. written in capital letters of gold and silver ! He also gravely states the
probabilities which induce him to draw that conclusion : -but this is rather too
violent a trespass upon chronology and common sense. Let us however grant
Kollarius all that he requires, when he says that it is quite evident that this
very ancient MS. in its perfect state, contained the whole of the Old and New
Testament as clearly appears from two leaves of the New Testament, of precisely
FIRST DAY. xlv
Akin, in point of age, if not of somewhat more remote
antiquity, is the celebrated Greek MS. of DIOSCORIDES, *
deposited in the same imperial library. I apprehend the
similar execution, which have floated like planks in a shipwreck, to our own
times, and are preserved in the same imperial library !' Thus discourseth Kollarius ; and, truly, a sight of this precious and sacred relic would, to the
anxious eye of him who here followeth Kollarius, afford a gratification and
' joyaunce ' almost passing description.' The day, peradventure, is not very remote, when that felicity may be granted to the follower of Kollarius.'
(
* the celebrated Greek MS. of Dioscorides. ] This is indeed a ' celebrated MS.'
and Lambecius deserves the everlasting gratitude of posterity for his copious,
minute, and splendid description of this most precious volume. We need not
stop at Schwarz, Rive, Winkelmann, and Jansen, but explore at once the fountain
head of intelligence in Lambecius ; and plunge into all that luxuriancy of detail,
which nine large copper-plate fac-similes, of a folio size, accompanied by 80
pages of text, cannot fail to afford every lover of classical and curious lore.
All the plates of Lambecius are repeated by Nesselius and Kollarius ; but Montfaucon has contented himself with only the vi11th and 1xth, probably as classical
as any. In the first place we have here a CERTAIN DATE : a genuine, coeval,
unquestionable subscription : telling us that this inestimable treasure was
executed by the order of the EMPRESS JULIANA ANICIA, in the year of Christ
505. A portrait of the Empress is among the embellishments. Dr. Marsh
quotes the inference of Montfaucon, (in the passage in part just extracted) from
this date, with propriety and effect. Notes to Michaelis, vol. ii. p. 656. The
MS. consists of 491 leaves, occasionally much injured ; but the binding (according
to Nesselius, pt. iii. p. 3) is in a most wretched state of fracture and decay !
Does it continue so ? or is the skill of Charles Lewis unknown at Vienna? (The
Chapter-Library at York will read a profitable lesson to the curators of the
imperial library at Vienna upon this head ! ) But our business is with the
Dioscorides. It is hardly necessary to say that the text, throughout, is written
in uncial or capital letters. The embellishments are bold and striking ; containing
heads, figures, birds, and elaborately-wrought back-grounds. The figures are
-
The critical Montfaucon is somewhat caustic upon the gossiping Lambecius.
Previously to giving his own description of this extraordinary volume, he
observes Hujus peramplam pro more suo notitiam dedit Petrus Lambecius in
Bibliotheca Cæsarea libro ii . c. ii . p. 519, unde omnia, quæ exemplaris istius vel
antiquitatem, vel præstantiam, vel fortunas varias enuntiant, excerpere libet ;
omissis aliis, quæ ad rem minus pertinent : nam Scriptor ille , sane diligens et
eruditus, digressionibus mirè gaudet.' Pal. Græc. p. 195.
It may be here noticed that Busbequeius procured this MS. during his embassy at Constantinople ( 1562) for 100 ducats ; and in one of his letters he declares
that he will not let his Imperial Master (Maximilian II. ) have any rest, till he authorise him to purchase it !' Glorious diplomatist !
xlvi FIRST DAY.
embellishments of this precious volume to be nearly as
strictly classical as those in any preceding MS.: yet I form
my judgment entirely from Nesselius, Kollarius, and Montgenerally 4 or 5 inches in height ; but the limits of this work forbid a particular
description of them. Yet let us add that the Empress Juliana is seen sitting
between two female figures, representing Magnanimity and Prudence, in the
VIIIth plate of Nesselius and Kollarius — which forms the first plate of Montfaucon, in his Pal. Græc. p. 203 : and further, that, in all the three representations of her there is an obvious variation ! What a virtue is accuracy ! The
accompaniments to this group of three females (two squares intersecting each other at right angles, the whole within a circle, with a back-ground of groups of
small Cupids, exercising themselves in various occupations) are very singular.
Nesselius speaks highly of the brilliant condition of the original. The 1xth
plate, (or 11d of Montfaucon) of a circular wreath enclosing a Greek inscription,
is prefectly Grecian art. Portraits of the ancient physicians, with that of the
author himself, are seen in the preceding plates. But detail would be endless.
Montfaucon, by devoting 17 pages of his Palæog. Græc. (p. 195-211) to this
inestimable volume shews how highly he appreciated it. May it witness,
uninjured, ANOTHER thirteen hundred years—and let no tasteful antiquary, or
classical critic, visit the library where it is enshrined without imprinting thereupon-but this language savoureth of a riotous pulse .' . . . The ample pages of
Harles's edition of Fabricius's Bibl. Graca, will inform us, in a more especial
manner, what precious gear ' is yet locked up within the damp- corroded covers
(so says Nesselius) of this inestimable volume : inter præstantissimos Codices
jure accensendus !' quoth Montfaucon !
"
We are now about to regale ourselves with an account of another MS. of
DIOSCORIDES, of scarcely less antiquity and beauty. It is the admirable Montfaucon who furnishes the treat on this occasion. In his Diarium Italicum, 1702,
4to. p. 309, he thus describes the MS. in question, in the library of St. John of
Carbonaria, an Augustine monastery, at Naples. * Codex Dioscorides eleganter
descriptus, membranaceus, characteribus uncialibus quadris, sine accentibus,
adpositis plantarum florumque figuris, minio depictis a perita manu. Hujus
auctoris nullum puto pari vetustate et elegantia exemplar exstare : [had he heard
"
* This library, observes Montfaucon, (in his Palæog. Græca, p. 212-and it is pleasant to give genealogies of libraries! ) was formerly Parrhasius's, a learned
man, and the son in law of (a still more learned man) Demetrius Chalcondylas.
Many of the MSS. contain notes in the hand writing of Parrhasius. Parrhasius bequeathed the library to Autonius Seripandus ; and hence it came into the possession ofthe Augustine monks. Montfaucon understood that, formerly, the collection of volumes had been much more extensive ; but the enterprising spirit of some Dutch bibliomaniac had thinned their ranks by means of a little aurum potabile,' which had been prescribed for the monks as a cure for particular complaints !
FIRST DAY. xlvii
faucon. The countenances, however, in some of the fac
similes of the same subject, vary so much, that we have
probably yet to learn the exact lineaments of the originals.
It remains now to make particular mention of the more
ancient illuminated MSS. in our own country : and first of
the BOOK OF GENESIS in the COTTON LIBRARY : reduced
almost to a cinder by the destructive ravages of fire. As
these fragments have been submitted to public notice,* it
of the Vienna MS. when he made this assertion ?] nam Regium quod antiquitatis
causa suspicitur, huic multum concedit ætate et pulcritudine.' [ It seems he had
heard of it, for I presmume the royal copy,' here alluded to, to be the one in the
imperial library at Vienna. But hear him further ! ] Initio mutilum hisce verbis
incipit, ΑΜΒΡΟΣΙΑ ΟΙΔΕ ΒΟΤΡΥΣ. ΟΙΔΕ ΒΟΤΡΥΣ : estque V, ut puto,
seculi.'
"
Let us next examine his Palæographia Græca, (p. 212) published six years
after his Diarium Italicum. He there qualifies a little its comparative elegance
with the Vienna copy, but seems yet inclined to give it the precedence on the
score of age. His words are these qui Cæsareo jam memorato parum
concedit ; antiquitate vero ipsi aut parem esse, aut potius anteire crederem :
character enim partim quadrus, partim rotuudus, ad formam inscriptionum
veterum propius accedere videtur.' A little below, he observes that it is of
nearly the same size and thickness as the Vienna copy. But the ILLUMINATIONS — remarks the cager enquirer-where are THESE ? Listen, enthusiastic lover of ancient graphic lore- vox faucibus hæret.' It is defective at the
beginning ; (continues Montfaucon) but I suspect that these deficient leaves contained PORTRAITS and PICTURES, like those in the Vienna copy, and that some
villain, (for so let us translate feriatus homo,' indeed I could add, with peculiar
propriety, some C* or D* ! ) whose fancy had been tickled by their elegance, has
torn them out ! The plants and trees, which yet remain, are painted with equal
elegance and truth. ' So speaks Montfaucon (his eyes, I warrant, gushing forth
tears when he wrote the sentence) in his Palæographia Græca. In his Bibliotheca
Bibliothecarum, vol. i . p . 231 , he nearly repeats what had been observed in his
Diary. There are probably more ancient and uncorrupted MSS. of Dioscorides
extant than of any other old author. The reader may, if he pleases, disport
himself with Le Clerc's Bibl. Choisie, vol. xvii. p. 356, &c. touching this Dios- coridean theme.
thesefragments have been submitted to public notice. ] The ' public notice,'
here alluded to, are the two plates engraved by the Society of Antiquaries, in their
Vetusta Monumenta, 1747 ; which plates exhibit xxI. fragments of the precious
MS. under consideration-for exceedingly precious it is , in spite of its present
pulverised, and nearly carbonised state. We must give it all the consequence
xlviii FIRST DAY.
will be here only sufficient to observe that the illuminations
consist of compositions, within square frames, of one or
several figures -in general not exceeding two inches in
we can ; for it was once in gallant size and condition, and perhaps sparkling with
every lustre which the colours of the old miniature-painters could bestow upon it.
Origen is the reputed original possessor of this Codex pretiosissimus et
antiquissimus.' But we will not stickle for its birth in the 111rd , allowing it to
be rather of the vth, or vith, century. It has graced no ignoble hands. Two
Greek Bishops (according to a note of Dr. James, the first Bodleian librarian)
brought it from Philippi, and presented it to Henry VIII. It descended to
Queen Elizabeth, who gave it to Sir John Fortescue, her Greek preceptor ; and
from Sir John, it came into the library of Sir Robert Cotton. Rivulets run into
the ocean ; and perhaps it was hardly possible for any volume, floating about at
the period under discussion, to avoid being engulphed in the book-ocean of the
said Sir Robert Cotton ! However, Peiresk obtained the loan of it from Sir
Robert, to facilitate a projected edition of the Greek Bible, by his friend Fronto
Ducæus : but the writer of the life of Peiresk (p. 103, edit. 1655, 4to.) is wrong
in adding that this MS. was bought by James I. for 1000 crowns.
Even my
friend Mr. D'Israeli will not contend for this feather in the cap of his favourite
literary Monarch. Smith, indeed, in his Bibliotheca Cottoniana Historia et
Synopsis, p. XLIV, properly notices and corrects this statement.
·
Thus far then for the history of the MS. up to the period when Smith
published his Catalogus Librorum Manuscriptorum Bibl. Cottonianæ, Oxonii, 1696,
folio. Well was it for Smith, and still better for the immediate descendants of Sir
Robert, that their heads were laid low' before the year ofour Lord 1731—for in
that same year (see the Bibliomania, p. 351) a fire destroyed a great part of
the invaluable Cottonian collection ; and among the treasures contained in itPERISHED, we may almost say, the VERY MS. UNDER DESCRIPTION ! So much so,
that only eighteen, out of one hundred and sixty five leaves, now remain-and
of these (says Casley) both the leaves, and consequently the writing in a just
proportion, are contracted into less compass ; so that now they are small capitals.'
Cat. of MSS. in the King's Library, 1734, 4to. p. viii, ix. Casley wrote only
three years after the catastrophe ; but whoever wishes to be convinced of the
metamorphosis of the large to small capitals, in consequence of the fire, has only
to compare Astle's fac- simile of the text in pl. 1. p. 70 ( which was made while
the writing was in its original state, and before the parchment was contracted by
the fire ') with the fac- similes of the same published by the Society of Antiquaries before alluded to, and the difference is woefully striking ! I presume the
illuminations to have undergone a similar metamorphosis, although we have no
representations of them previous to the period last mentioned ; namely, 1747.
Another circumstance, sufficiently unaccountable, is worth noticing. Mr. Planta,
in his Catalogue of the Cottonian MSS. 1802. folio, p. 365, says that there
FIRST DAY. xlix
height-and that these frames, sometimes 4 inches square,
are divided occasionally into two compartments. The
heads are perhaps rather too large, but the attitudes and
draperies have considerable merit ; and they are justly preferred, by the knowing in these matters, to the illuminations
of the Vienna Pentateuch of which we have been speaking.
In the second place, as to the CUTHBERT, ALDHELM, and
ATHELSTAN volumes, I am free to confess that the two
former are greatly preferable to the third. The ornaments
of the Cuthbert-book* are, as it were, so singularly tesselated
must have been more fragments saved than the XVIII. which now remain ; for
none ofthose engraved in the above mentioned plates [by the Society of Antiquaries] are here to be met with. These however are all that were found in the
year 1796. Such is the history of the MS.
The description of the treasure itself will be necessarily short. Originally, it
contained very nearly the whole of the book of Genesis. Smith ( p. 70) says
it began at the 13th verse of the 1st chapter, and ended at the last verse but one
of the 50th chapter. Some leaves however were missing in the intermediate
part, and the binder had transposed others. At the end of the last page was
the autograph of Thomas Wakefeldus. ' Grabe collated the text for his edition
of the Septuagint in 1707, and preferred the illuminations to those in the
Vienna MS -judging from the cuts of Nesselius. Everything in the formation and arrangement of the letters bespeaks the high antiquity of the MS.
which is probably of the vth century. In his description of the illuminations, in
the body of the Catalogue, p. 70, Smith calls them pulcherrimæ figuræ :' but
in his prefatory matter, p. XLV, he thus qualifies his commendation of them.
' Picturæ, quæ sacras historias singulis paginis repræsentant, coloribus satis
probe, quod vix a miniatura expectandum videretur, retentis, licet ingenium et
solertiam Artificis non valdè commendent, utpote rudi penicillo expressæ, multa
tamen curiosa in se continent, quæ non solum animum et oculos grata delectatione
perfundunt, [this is quite con amore !' ] sed quæ etiam rem antiquariam optime
illustrabunt.' Having examined these figures propriis oculis, let me honestly
add that, for drawing and grouping, they are much preferable to those in the
Vienna MS. The heads however are frequently too large ; but the draperies have
often the air even of Grecian elegance. The manner in which these illuminations
are arranged, is correctly specified by Philemon.
·
ornaments ofthe Cuthbert book. ] This very extraordinary volume seems to
have been the favourite of our English antiquaries ; and among those who have
treated upon its antiquity and worth may be mentioned Selden (Prafat. ad
Hist. Angl. Script. 1652, folio, p. xxv) Marshal (Observat. in Vers. Sax. Evang.
1 FIRST DAY.
or dovetailed, in a sort of mosaic work, within arabesque
compartments-that I hardly know how to call any thing of
the kind its equal ! The human figures are however but of
"
p. 491) and Smith ; the latter of whom (in his Bibl. Cott. Hist. et Synopsis,
p. xxxIII) breaks out into a sort of enthusiastic fit, by telling us that while he
turns and returns the vellum leaves of this wonderful volume he can hardly
persuade himself that, in giving an account of it, he can avoid a repetition of
previous statements ; yet, in some respects, he hopes to be able to present a
more complete description of it to the reader.' His account is indeed sufficiently
particular ; and Mr. Planta has contented himself with very little more than a
reference to it, and to Wanley's Catalogue, p. 250. Cat. of the Cottonian MSS.
1802, fol . p. 238.
·
The contents of the volume are simply the Latin text of the Gospels, with an
interlineary Saxon version, and the preface of Jerom, &c. The writer of the Latin
text is supposed to have been Ealdfred, and of the interlineary version, Aldred.
It is called ST. CUTHBERT'S BOOK, because it is said to have been executed for
that Saint, when he was Bishop of the Church of Lindisfarne. Ethelwald, one
ofthe monks ofthe same Monastery, ' smit with the perfection of the calligraphy,
procured an artist of the name of Bilfrith to execute the illuminations and ornaornaments, [ tesselatæ delineationes, et picturæ Evangelistarum,' as Smith calls
them] and caused the volume to be bound with gold and precious stones.' An
inscription at the end of the book, considered as coeval, records the names of
Eadfrith, Oethelwald, Bilfrith, and Aldred, as completing and ornamenting this
volume of the Gospels to God and Cuthbert.' Its age will therefore necessarily
be towards the middle of the viith century and as it stands so perfectly insulated-so completely different from every other book of an admitted later date,
executed in our own country-that Antiquary will probably have a tough knot
to untie who shall strive to overthrow its chronology. Smith continues with a
long miraculous story out of Simeon of Durham (lib. ii. c. x1. ) respecting this
precious MS. taking a voyage with the monks of Lindisfarne Monastery, when
they put to sea to avoid the ravages of the Barbarians ; of the vessel's being
nearly capsised, of the volume's tumbling overboard into the sea, and of its
miraculous escape from injury. Simeon says the volume was afterwards
placed in the Cathedral of Durham where the body of St. Cuthbert was depo.
sited ; and in his time betrayed no mark whatever of sea-water or other
injury.' He then gives a flaming account of its interior and exterior ornaments ;
the latter of which, as might have been expected, have not survived the plunder
of the reformation : and a plain, substantial, russia leather cover, is now the
effectual substitute for gold and precious stones.' Yet the more precious
gems, the specimens of ancient art within, are still without injury ; the volume
continuing to preserve its death-defying property, by having equally escaped
the ravages of fire and water. It seems to have come into the possession
FIRST DAY. li
second-rate merit. In respect to the Work ofSt. Aldhelm
upon Virginity, the small group of figures prefixed to it, in
brown-outline, is of such extraordinary merit, as to excite
of Sir Robert Cotton from the collection of a Robert Bowyer, in the time of
James I .; but who (probably a century and a half before) first removed it from
its ancient and hallowed resting place ? .. ay, how the howlings of the spirits of
Eadfrith, Oethelwald, Bilfrith , Aldred, and St. Cuthbert,' distract and terrify
that robber's persecuted ghost !
Now then for the volume itself. It measures about 13 inches and a halfin
height, by nearly ten in width. The Latin text is in a sort of demi-uncial hand,
the interlineary version being comparatively very small. On the reverse of the
first leaf is a grand frontispiece, executed in the mosaic or tesselated manner,
mentioned by Smith, and above by Philemon. It is perfectly fresh and uninjured ; and of a richness and sparkling effect which amply justify Smith in
observing-in membranis poliendis, literarum ductibus efformandis, et scripturæ
pulchritudine, vel politissimis sæculis haud impares Anglo- Saxones censeri possint!”
p. xxxiv. The prologue to the canons and calendar, the prefaces of St. Jerom
and Eusebius, &c. occupy from folio 2 to the recto of folio 8. On folio 9 commences the Calendar, within architectural compartments, which Smith says are
' accuratissime et elegantissime elaboratæ.' This concludes on folio 16. The
recto offolio 17 is blank, but on the reverse are the arguments or chapters of
St. Matthew's Gospel. Each Gospel is preceded by a whole length representation of the Evangelist ; and, opposite to such figure, is one of those grand square
Mosaic ornaments, of nearly the entire size of the leaf, incorporated as it were
with the incipient text. In St. Matthew's Gospel, however, there are three of
these ornaments ; and that on the 3rd leaf of the Gospel, or the 28th of the
volume, is as beautiful as it is extraordinary. The colours are not only vivid and
perfect as to their masses, whether great or small, but they are raised upon the
surface of the vellum, in a manner so as to resemble very curious needle or mosaic
work. Astle (Pl. xiv. p. 96) has given a fac-simile of the commencement of
St. Luke's Gospel ; which, although necessarily much inferior to the original,
sufficiently shews how ' cunningly' and cleverly the ornaments are combined, and
in what gay attire they are clothed. There is unquestionably no small portion of
gum or size mixed up with the colours, which may account for its present state of
preservation. As to the figures of the Evangelists (which have been copied by
Strutt, in the first volume of his Manners and Customs,) they are much inferior to
the ornaments. Smith not inaptly describes them as rudes, si cum hodiernis
conferantur, utpote nitore, elegantia, et symmetriâ vacuæ.' The volume consists in
the whole of 258 leaves. The vellum is stout, but the surface of every page is
smooth. I learn with pleasure (from Mr. Ellis, who presides over the MS.
department of the British Museum) that it is in contemplation to publish faithful
and particular copies of all the ornaments in this invaluable book at the expense
VOL. I. d
·
lii FIRST DAY.
doubts respecting the remote period assigned for its execution. The Athelstan-book ofthe Gospels, upon which the
Saxon monarchs are reported to have taken their coronation
oath, is dismally barbarous in the ornamental part : † and I
of the Antiquarian Society. The sooner this is commenced, the better :-for the
public begin to be weary of representations ofbroken pots and pans, spear- heads,
barrows and buttresses ! Mr. Samuel Lysons, who is really a man of taste as
well as of extensive antiquarian knowledge, might DIRECT with particular felicity
upon this occasion. In Mr. Ellis a coadjutor would be found fully capable of
rendering justice to this PROUDEST BIBLIOMANIACAL MONUMENT of the earlier
period of our history. Fortunati ambo!'
"
The Saint above accepts their votive lay
And grants them all the Fame for which they pray.'
The Poems ofNicolas Grimault ; 1691 , 8vo. p. 3.
a doubt respecting the remote period of its execution. ] Mr. Todd, in his
Catalogue of the Archiepiscopal Manuscripts in the Library of Lambeth Palace ;
with an Account of the Archiepiscopal Registers and other Records there preserved,
(privately printed, 1812, folio), fol . 68, b. ( no. 200, ) assigns this MS. , upon
general credence, to the Eighth century. I incline to consider it rather of
the xth or xith century ; for the specimen of art, above alluded to by Philemon,
is clearly of that character of which we have several instances in the periods lastmentioned. Afac- simile of the group, or specimen of art ' here discoursed of—
(which represents St. Aldhelm seated in a chair, with a group of virgins standing
by the side of him, as if approving of his work De Virginitate) adorns the first
leaf of the Catalogue just mentioned ; but it is rather a treacherous representation of the original : not containing half the grace and truth with which those
Virgins ' are adorned by the pencils of the BILFRITH (vide p. 1 ante) , MANCLAVITA TARSITUS, or PAULUS of his day ! For these latter, not generally
known, painters and calligraphists, consult Montfaucon's Palæog. Græc. p. 59-60,
and his Bibl. Coislin. p. 84. A faithful representation of the embellishment,
here discoursed of, is yet a desideratum.
•
+ dismally barbarous in the ornamental part.] The volume above alluded to is
a MS. of the Four Gospels, &c. &c. supposed, according to Wanley, to have
been compiled for the use of the Kings of England, from the time of Athelstan ;
and upon which volume, a memorandum, of the period of Richard II. , informs
us that the said Kings of England took their coronation-oaths ! Pleasing fiction !
-but fiction nevertheless. (We shall presently mention another supposed coronation oath book ! ) Wanley's conjecture about its antiquity has been questioned ;
but I see nothing to invalidate the inference that this barbarous but most curious
and interesting volume may have been executed at least nine hundred years ago.
There are the relics of gold ornament, relieved by red, upon a purple ground.
Each Gospel is preceded by a large capital initial in gold, and by a figure of
FIRST DAY. liii
fear the female part of my audience would not scruple to
express their surprise, or even loathing, at the sight of those
dirty apple-green and smoke-dried old figures intended to
represent the Evangelists ! Thus far then towards the close
of the tenth century. Of various other works, known to the
more curious only,* I profess not to trouble you with any
its appropriate Evangelist ; but the latter, of such wretched drawing and
coarse finishing, that I am not surprised Philemon should imagine the Ladies
to be disposed to turn their faces from such unseemly art. The background
of these figures is a blueish green. The recto of the first leaf, or general
title, has the capitals LIB, in a very large form, executed in gold, upon a purple
ground ; and the earlier part of the first chapter of St. Matthew's Gospel, intitled Liber Generationis Ihu, ' is written in small capitals of gold upon a dark
green ground. But the fire of 1731 has made such havoc by the crumpling
and singeing ofthe leaves, and decomposition of the colours, that one can hardly
state with accuracy the exact features of the volume. In the whole, there are 217
leaves ; including a frontispiece of evidently much later period-perhaps of the
end of the xivth century. It is described under Tiberius, A 11 : in Mr. Planta's
Catalogue ofthe Cotton MSS. , p. 31 .
various other works known to the more curious only. ] What a superstructure
may be raised upon this quiet inuendo of Philemon ! Shall I take therefore ' the
curious ' with me into a corner, and endeavour to gratify them by a detail of a
few of the various works here alluded to ? No sooner proposed than carried into
effect ! Give me your ears and eyes, ye pertinacious porers over mildewed
vellums and worm-eaten oaken covers of the olden time. Hang on high the
lamp of taste and of truth, and let its light shed a soft radiance upon treasures, which, till now, had been nearly buried in silence and obscurity-like
the unagitated surface of water in Staffa's remotest cave ! The reader immediately perceives that I am about to throw into the form of a note, what could
not, very consistently or conveniently, be made the subject of a distinct narrative
in the text ; and that what here ensues must be considered a sort of counterpart
ofthe scarcely less voluminous note at pages xxxi-iv. A future opportunity may
present itself, when complete justice shall be done-not only to the ms. treasures
hereafter described, but to such as cannot possibly come within the present pale
of description. However, to the task before us.
We have been just discoursing of Athelstan's coronation-oath book. Such
volumes, it has been observed, are not of the very rarest occurrence. In the valuable ms. library of the Marquis of Buckingham, at Stowe, which had been
almost entirely collected by the late Mr. Astle, are some treasures, of the nature
of those under description, which well merit enumeration. First, we have there,
probably one of the oldest PSALTERS extant in England. It is in Latin, with a
liv FIRST DAY.
details. Yet I should be loth to omit the notice of a singularly rare and almost unknown volume-of the period of
which we are speaking—and which has been deposited, for
the last century, in the library of his Grace the Duke of
Devonshire. No casket of jewels was justly ever half so
much prized as is the precious volume of which I speak. Its
Saxon interlineary version ; and is thought to be of the 1xth century : although
Spelman (Concil. vol. i . p. 218) makes it a century older shortly after the
second Nicene council .' There is a tradition founded upon Powell's Repertory of
Records, 1651 , 4to. p. 123, that this was the Book upon which the Kings and
Queens of England took their coronation-oath previous to the Reformation. It
belonged once to Martin of Palgrave, who lent it to Madox-and the latter told
the former that he believed in the original application of it to the use here
stated. We will not press either the belief or the mooting of this momentous
point. It is sufficient to observe further, that it was formerly entered in the
Exchequer, as a little booke with a crucifix :' and such is the estimation in
which it is justly held by its Noble Owner, that when the Duchess of
Oldenburgh visited Stowe, with her Imperial Brother, Alexander, (on their
return from Oxford , she was shewn this sombre little volume, as a relic of inestimable value ; and she afterwards placed it in the hands of her Brother in a
manner the most emphatic possible-telling him to consider it as the book which
had been formerly pressed by the hands of Alfred ! The Emperor was not insensible of its supposed worth. The amiable and learned Dr. O‘Conor, (librarian
to the Marquis) who is at present occupied in a raisonné catalogue of the
Stowe MSS. , gave me the preceding anecdote : and observed that Hearne,
Wanley, and Astle agree as to the extreme antiquity of the volume. To these,
add what appears in Leland's Itin. vol . ii . p. 57-8, respecting a very old MS.
once belonging to Shirburne Abbey, with its remarkable covers.' Of the Binding
of it-not a syllable in the present place : [ see EIGHTH DAY] only that the
brass crucifix yet remains upon the exterior cover, betraying evident marks of
its having lost an outer, and probably precious coat, from something like oscular
attrition. Note however further : that the Psalter is succeeded by excerpts from
the Latin vulgate Gospels relating to the Passion of our Saviour ; and that the
first 23, and the last 8 leaves, are additions probably of the end of the xvth
century.
In the same collection, at Stowe, is a folio volume of the Latin Gospels, of the
xth or x1th century : executed in a small lower-case roman letter, with a handsome full margin ; and bound in a manner of which the description must be also reserved for the EIGHTH DAY. But let us not glide through the period of
which we are discoursing, without noticing a small Psalter, partly Latin and
partly Saxon, of the xth century, in the British Museum, among the Cotton
FIRST DAY. lv
ARRIVS
state ofpreservation is extraordinary ; and in respect to the
style of art, and the condition of its ornaments, I am not
sure that there are two books in his Majesty's united realms
which could successfully compete with it for superiority.
There is another consideration which gives a most decided
and marked value to this precious monument ofother times.
Its age may be said to be unequivocally established ; for we
learn in it that it was executed at the command of ETHELWOLD Bishop of Winchester, and written by a scribe of the
name of GODEMANN.
MSS. [Titus D. XXVII. ] The reader will be gratified by the following interesting
specimen of early art, representing the Trinity, upon the reverse ofthe 75th leaf:
90
IVD
AS
0000
lvi FIRST DAY.
LYSANDER. You excite my curiosity powerfully.
PHILEMON. Not more powerfully than a sight of the
original would justify. * Take, however, in lieu of such
original, a few detached specimens : premising, that the
spirit ofthe compositions, as well as the truth ofthe outlines,
have been injured by a thick glazed body colour, approachArepresentation of the Crucifixion occurs on the reverse of the 65th leaf.
Mr. Planta correctly designates the volume as a small 8vo. containing 93 leaves.
On the reverse of fol. 14, is the following date : DCccclxxviii. Both the writing
and the ornaments, or miniatures, are in a brownish tint, and the latter are
always in outline. This book once belonged to Hyde Monastery, which monastery
seems to have been rather distinguished for illuminators : for in the Kalendar
6. Non. Julii,' we read Obitus WALFRICI-PICTORIS.' Those who like to
plunge deeper into the history of the art, of the period of which we are
treating, will not fail to betake themselves to the pages of Hickes's Thesaurus
Ling. Vet. Sept. (a work of incomparable erudition and beyond all praise)
wherein (as in vol. i. p. vIII, p. 144) they may contemplate less successful
attempts in the fine arts. Hickes is enthusiastic respecting the Codex Argenteus, which Benzelius gave to Wanley, and which was afterwards in the possession of Nathaniel Palmer, Esq. -and he favours us with a double-sceptered
figure, or whole-length of St. Luke, belonging to a MS. of the Dean and Chapter
of Litchfield, said to have been formerly the book of ST. CEAD.' The
Evangelist has surely never before, or since, experienced so barbarous a transformation of himself! At p. 144, we observe a large figure of Christ and a small
one of St. Dunstan, supposed to be of the xth century. (MSS. Bodl. NE. D. II.`
19.) The attitude and drapery are excellent ; and the figure of St. Dunstan, in the
back-ground, prostrating himself upon a stone or rock, has considerable merit.
Strutt re-engraved both in his Manners and Customs, vol. i . p. 105, pl . xviii.
"
But we must return to Stowe ; following our chronological order. In the MS.
library before mentioned is a very ancient and curious MS. in a small folio, or
large 8vo. size ; usually designated as the Hyde Abbey Book ; and affording
another proof of the skill of the artists employed in that monastery. There is a
superficial notice of it by Strutt (Manners and Customs, vol. i. p. 106, pl . xxviii. )
together with a fac-simile of the frontispiece-the latter much inferior to the
original for truth and expression. This frontispiece represents, above, our
Saviour, with the Virgin and St. Peter on each side. Below, are portraits of
Chute and his Queen Elfgiva, in rather elegant whole length attitudes, with an
angel over each, as if descending from above. A good deal of difficulty has
been mastered in accomplishing these attitudes, and with almost complete
* See note at page lix.
FIRST DAY. lvii
ing to the consistency of oil. You have here one of the
ornaments usually placed in the centre, or at the corners
success. On the reverse of this frontispiece is the following very interesting
group ; representing the souls of Martyrs and Saints about to enter the gates of
paradise.
Opposite, on the recto of the following leaf, is a representation of St. Peter, with
attendant angels, opening the gates of paradise. Below this latter, is a contention between devils and angels for the souls of the departed. The original outline
is in a bistre-tint, with some of the parts purposely retouched for the sake of
shade and effect. In the preceding specimen the reader will not fail to observe
that peculiar style of art which characterises the productions ofthe xth, xrth, and
frequently x11th centuries : namely, tall and somewhat disproportionate figures ;
flowing or rather fluttering draperies ; elongated hands and feet ; and a general
delicacy of expression throughout boththe faces and figures. And whoever chooses
to compare the art of the St. Aldhelm, de Virginitate (see p. lii, ante) with the
Ա الرو الاكبر
lviii FIRST DAY.
of the rectangular frame work-inclosing the commencement
of some prayer or text of scripture.
foregoing specimen, may be inclined, with myself, to consider them as nearly
contemporaneous-that is , of the early part of the x1th century.
The MS. in question, which is not a little precious, took the name of Hyde,
from its belonging to the monastery of that name; which monastery, before its
removal, was called New Minster. The greater part of it seems to have been written
before the middle of the x1th century. The principal contents of it relate to a
history ofthe foundation, and progress of the affairs, of the same monastery from
Edward the Elder to Ethelred-together with the names ofits chief benefactorswhich names were ordered to be recited every day during Mass. It also contains
the will of Alfred (published by Manning, at Oxford, 1788, 4to. ) and the names of
Saints interred in England ; ofwhich latter a similar list will be found in Hickes's
Thesaurus, &c. vol. ii . Dissert. Epist. p. 115. The remainder of its contents are
but of secondary importance. Let us here ask whether these be not treasures
worthy ofexamination and ofgeneral publicity? And whether there be not yet a
thousand similar treasures, at present neglected and unknown, which merit the
keen researches of the antiquary, and the fostering patronage of the republic of
literature? Yet what must be our indignation when we hear of some printed books,
which caprice and obstinacy alone cause to be cherished, estimated at a price
beyond all reason and common sense?! Well therefore may the author De la
Bibliomanie, 1761, 8vo. make the following observation : Il en est de même de
quelques manuscrits que le seul caprice fait conserver. Je sais qu'ily en a de
FIRST DAY. lix
Again ; let me shew you a couple of specimens of the
Saxon capitals attached to the pillars so thickly bestowed
précieux, dont plusieurs, uniques dans leur genre, sont gardés avec soin dans nos
fameuses bibliothéques, et servent à l'ornement de celles de nos souverains. Mais
combien d'autres que la presse n'a pas daigné tirer de leur obscurité, et dont la
rareté ne peut être attribuée qu'au mépris qu'on en a conçue ! Tel est, dit M. de
Voltaire dans son Temple du Gout,
L'amas curieux et bizarre
De vieux manuscrits vermoulus :
Et la suite inutile et rare
D'écrivans qu'on n'a jamais lus.' p. 66.
* a sight of the original would justify. ] I consider this ' original,' which is
perfectly in a blaze with the illuminations of the latter part of the xth century,
to be among our chief national treasures of specimens of ancient art, and by
much the most precious book in the collection of his Grace the Duke of Devonshire. It is a folio Missal, in old red morocco binding, with the initials I , S. at
the back. The fly leaf, in the hand writing of the celebrated Lord Burlington,
informs us that the scribe who executed the volume, was named GODEMANN.
Indeed we gather, from the reverse of the 4th leaf, and the bottom of the recto
ofthe 5th, that THE GREAT ETHELWOLD commanded the volume to be written,
and that the humble Godemann ' performed the office of the scribe. The lines,
designating this circumstance, are as follows in capitals of gold :
Presentem Biblum iussit perscribere Presul
Wintonia Dns quefecerat esse Patronum MAGNUS AETHELWOLDUS
Atque Patri magno iussit qui scribere librum hunc
Omnes cernentes biblum hunc semper rogitent hoc
Post meta carnis valeam celis inherere
Obnixe hoc rogitat scriptor SUPPLEX GODEMANN.
·
Some ofmy readers may possibly not be aware of the magnificence of this St.
Ethelwold. Let the recent and valuable version of the renowned William of
Malmesbury's History ofEngland, 1815, 4to. p. 172, come therefore to our aid
in this emergency. How powerful indeed the sanctity and virtue of Dunstan's
disciples were, is sufficiently evidenced by ETHELWOLD, made Abbot of Abingdon from a monk of Glastonbury, and afterwards Bishop of Winchester, who
built so many and such great monasteries, as to make it appear hardly credible
how the Bishop of one see should be able to effect what the King of England
himself could scarcely undertake '... ' How great are the monasteries of Ely,
Peterborough, and Thorney, which he raised from the foundations and completed
by his industry : which, though repeatedly reduced by the wickedness of
plunderers, are yet [A. D. 1120] sufficient for their inhabitants. ' The volume
lx
FIRST
DAY
.
among the embellishments which constitute the different
species of frame-work for titles, &c. I admit however that
still richer specimens might have been selected.
under description is indeed a splendid testimony of the taste of such a character ! ... and I make no doubt that, originally, this very book, in a clothing
of oak, adorned with carvings in ivory and beset with gems and precious stones,
was carefully deposited in some stone-excavated recess, along with the very crosier of Ethelwold himself! There have been wilder dreams ' than this. But
the curious begin to be impatient for a description of it-which must be necessarily brief and imperfect. I suspect two or three leaves to be wanting at the
commencement, as the recto of the first leaf represents the whole lengths of St.
Cuthbert, St. Benedict, and St. Gregory, beneath the title Confessorum '-the
word ' Society' or Company' being probably on the reverse of the preceding
leaf-as, on the reverse of this first leaf, we have a group of females beneath the
word ' Chorus,' and another group of females beneath that of Virginum,' on the
recto of the opposite leaf. Probably two or three groups of ' Martyrs ' preceded
the ' Confessors .' Four pages ofrepresentations ofthe Apostles (3 in each page)
follow the Choir of Virgins.'
On the recto of the 6th leaf, beneath 2 lines, not perfectly intelligible, occurs
the first contraction, similar to the above, (but much grander) of the word
' Omnipotens. ' On the reverse of this leaf the gold letters cease : hitherto the
writing being in gold, in a large bold character. A full page, throughout the
volume, contains 19 lines. The roman capital letters, whether as titles, or
initials, are uniformly in gold. The compartments or borders at the commencement of each collect, or distinct portion of the Missal, are frequently of
great boldness and beauty : being sometimes varied by pillars -of some of
FIRST DAY. lxi
You will now probably wish for a specimen of part of the
text itself. Take however only that which represents one of
the initial words. The following is a contraction for OMNIPOTENS :' the original being in gold.
MPS
the capitals of which, as well as of one of the ornaments mid-way upon the
frame-work, the reader above, has, fac-similes : the originals being coloured,
but occasionally much faded. Among the Scriptural subjects represented in this
extraordinary volume, the following are more particularly deserving of commendation :
The Annunciation : the angel excellently designed. The Nativity. Adoration
of the Magi. Baptism of our Saviour, St. John. Presentation in the Temple.
Christ's triumphant entry into Jerusalem. Angel sitting at the entrance ofthe
sepulchre, after the resurrection of Christ. This is perhaps the finest figure in the
book : andthe compartments, both here and in the opposite page, may be said to
be in a blaze of splendour. Incredulity of St. Thomas : in beautiful preservation.
Ascension : fine and splendid. Representation of the Trinity, within the letter
O. Below, in large capital letters of gold, Trinitas Vnus et Verus, &c. Descent
of the Holy Ghost : the opposite page strikingly splendid. Martyrdom of St.
lxii FIRST DAY.
LORENZO. But of the compositions, or designs
PHILEMON. Unluckily, as I before told you, these compositions are coloured over with a thick body of paint :
approaching to the consistency of oil-colour. However, the
last page of the volume furnishes us with a specimen of this
outline: yet not free from injury. It is as follows : but the
figure to the left is coloured-while the group to the right
is in an outline of a faint pink colour. Admit that there
is both spirit and truth in the composition.
Peter and St. Paul. Figure of St. Swithin, standing. Portrait of St. Aetheldrytha, patroness of Ely: very tasteful. Figure of St. Benedict, sitting.
FIRST DAY. lxiii
Let me not here forget to notice a very extraordinary
volume, with illuminations, of the period of which we are
treating, and which had before escaped my recollection. It
is the Saxon Version or Paraphrase ofthe Book of Genesis,
&c. supposed to be by CAEDMON. The illuminations are in
Death of the Virgin : which is the last historical subject. Next follows the
ornament, of which a fac- simile is just given : beneath we read
Bened. immacl. plurimarum Virginum.'
The 118th and last leaf contains the Service in Dedicatione Ecclesiæ. The age
ofthe MS. may be thus ascertained : Ethelwold became Bishop of Winchester
in 963, and died in 984 : but as he re-founded the monastery of Ely, of which
Etheldritha was the patroness, about 970—and as her figure occurs here-it is a
fair inference that it was written between that year and the death of Ethelwold.
The text letter, which is in roman lower-case, measures nearly oue quarter ofan
inch in height. The vellum is thick but soft ; and the gold is of particular purity
and consistency. This glorious book is a very harvest-field for the antiquary to
disport himself in !
Saxon version ofthe Book ofGenesis, &c. supposed to be by Caedmon. ] This very
curious MS. in small folio, is deposited among those of Junius [ No. II . ] in the
Bodleian library : it having been given to Junius by Archbishop Usher. Junius
himself published the text of it (unaccompanied by the embellishments) at
Amsterdam in 1655, 4to. About a century afterwards, a subscription was made
among the choice lovers of ancient art, and a few impressions of engravings ofthe
ornaments were struck off, only for the subscribers. The Royal Institution
library contains Astle's copy of these engravings ; and another copy is in the
library of Earl Spencer at Althorp, bound up with the printed text of Junius.
My friend Mr. Ellis, of the British Museum, is the fortunate possessor of the copper-plates ; and he has recently made happy the hearts of a few brother
antiquaries, by presenting them with copies of impressions. A word now
respecting the age and intrinsic character of the MS. Wanley, in his Cat. of
Saxon MSS. , in Hickes's Thesaurus, vol. iii. p. 77, thought it executed towards
the end of the xth century ; and Hickes determined that it was not, as bad been
supposed (by Junius and others) written by the Caedmon mentioned by Bede,
but by another Caedmon, who wrote in the Dano- Saxon dialect about the xth
century. The plates are xv in number ; and the text consists of a sort of poetical
paraphrase of Genesis and Daniel. The graphic critic will observe, in the ensuing
fac-simile, that particular style of art (noticed at page lvii ante) which is so
characteristic of the period under discussion . The above is executed in wood,
from the plate taken from Gen. iv. 4. 10, supplied by Mr. Ellis's copy. It probably possesses more merit, on the score of expression, than any other specimen
in the volume.
lxiv FIRST DAY.
outline ; and we observe in them that slender, yet not inelegant, character of drawing—which rather distinguishes the
productions of the xth and xith centuries. Take a specimen
representing the Offering ofCain.
FIRST DAY. lxv
I now hasten to make good my promise of noticing a few
of the more ancient Greek MSS. executed in capital letters,
and divested ofilluminations.
LORENZO. If you please : but the sooner you return to
art, the better.
PHILEMON. Be it so then. Of these more ancient Greek
MSS. divested of illuminations, we may consider the following among the more venerable and intrinsically valuable. In
our own country, I thank God, we can make as much boast
of precious materials, connected with SACRED WRIT, as can
any other country upon the face of the globe ! Far be it
from me to disparage and undervalue the similar treasures
of other nations. Let the Italians set a due value upon
their, I had almost said invaluable, Vatican MS.: let the
French duly estimate their Claramontane MS. —and, perhaps
ofhigher antiquity yet, let the Swedes extol, as it becomes
them, their Gothic version of the Evangelists by the celebrated Bishop Ulphilas—let each and all of these treasures
receive their full share of commendation ; for they are more
precious than fine gold.' But let ENGLISHMEN remember
that they possess two of the most venerable and precious
Scriptural volumes upon record : I mean the Greek versions
of the Scriptures known by the names of the Beza and
Alexandrine MSS.
It is difficult to decide upon the chronological priority of
these respective MSS. -but we may allow the Cambridge
volume (in other words, the Beza MS. * deposited in that
the Beza MS. ] So called, from having been presented to the University of
Cambridge by the famous THEODORE BEZA. Of a MS. so well known to the
biblical student and critic, it remains only to observe, that Beza had obtained it
from the convent of St. Irenæus at Lyons, where it had been supposed to have
lain from the time of that father'-and that the younger Henry Stephen had
collated it there, in his way to Italy, for his father's Greek Testament of 1550 :
(
lxvi FIRST DAY.
University by Theodore Beza) somewhat the seniority on the
score of age. Yet the Alexandrine treasure, in the British
Museum-deposited in that noble national receptacle with
the MSS. of the late King- (and formerly presented to our
Charles I. by Cyrill, patriarch of Alexandria) must undoubtedly be considered as pressing closely, in point of
antiquity, upon the footsteps ofthe former. To our national
so that the MS. 6. of Robert Stephen, is the one under consideration. But Dr.
Kipling, the present Dean of Peterborough, put forth, in the year 1793, two
magnificent folio volumes, printed at the expense ofthe University of Cambridge,
which contained a fac- simile of this precious MS, accompanied by learned notes.
In regard to its age and value, Dr. Marsh observes (Notes to Michaelis, vol. ii.
p. 714) that it appears, from comparing the Codex Bezæ with Greek inscriptions of different ages, that it cannot have been written later than the vith
century, and that it may have been written even two or three centuries earlier : '
and at p. 720 of the same volume, he adds, we may fairly conclude that the
Codex Bezæ is at least as ancient as the vth century.' Again, a little onward,
' no MS. can be put in competition with it [ on the score of antiquity] except the
Codex Vaticanus. ' Dr. Marsh concludes thus : If it be asked, to which of
these the precedence is due, I would answer, to the CODEX BEZA ; for the
Codex Vaticanus has accents, and marks of aspiration , which were added by
the person who wrote the MS. itself. See also Birch's Prolegomena, p. 14.
* pressing closely-upon the footsteps of the former. ] Of this venerable and
scarcely less valuable MS. , the theological world were made amply acquainted
with that portion containing the NEW TESTAMENT, which was published as a
fac-simile of the original, with learned prolegomena, by the late Dr. Woide
in 1786, 4to. Dr. Woide assigned to it a period of from the middle to the end
of the ivth century.' Michaelis thought it later by two centuries ; and his
learned annotator, the present Bishop of Llandaff, seems disposed to acquiesce
in the inference of Montfaucon, that it may be of the early part of the vith century- non nostrum est- tantos componere lites,'-although there seems to
have been little or nothing of the lis ' in the discussion . A word as to its
supposed history. An Arabic subscription implies that it was written bythe
pen of Thecla a martyress.' It afterwards, with this subscription, came into the
hands of Cyrillus Lucaris, a native of Crete, and Patriarch of Constantinople ;
whose life has been written by Smith, and briefly described by Woide in the
1xth paragraph of his Prolegomena. Cyrillus thought it written in the Ivth century, as his own subscription implies : but Wetstein has attacked this antiquity with more asperity than discretion. The question is , where did Cyrillus
find it ? At Alexandria, or elsewhere ? That he brought it immediately from
Alexandria to Constantinople, previous to presenting it to Charles I. is unde-
FIRST DAY. lxvii
credit it must also be spoken, that the learned labours of
KIPLING and WOIDE have perpetuated these inestimable
treasures, by causing fac-similes of the original texts, accompanied by learned annotations, to be executed and published ;
and you will learn with pleasure that MR. BABER, of the
British Museum, is completing the remainder of the task *
which was left unfinished by his learned predecessor Woide.
6
niable and hence the MS. bears its name of Codex Alexandrinus : but I
incline to the opinion of Dr. Marsh, that there is nothing implied in the subscriptionofCyrillus himself, that he found the MS. there : and that the Patriarch,
before he went to Alexandria, spent some time on Mount Athos, the Greek
repository and manufactory of manuscripts of the New Testament, is well known.' So that it should seem this MS. was rather an inmate of some of the
libraries upon Mount Athos ; yet it is most probable that it was written in
Egypt, because the new Syriac version having been collated with Ægyptian
MSS. of the Greek Testament, and the Ethiopic version being immediately
taken from them, have necessarily the readings of the Alexandrine edition,'
Notes to Michaelis, vol. ii. p. 658.
·
:
* Mr. Baber is completing the remainder of the task. ] In the year 1812, the
Revd. H. H. Baber published, by subscription, as a portion of the remainder
of the task ' left unfinished by Woide, THE PSALTER- from the MS. under
consideration and of this he printed 12 copies UPON VELLUM, to match with
the same number of vellum copies of the New Testament published by his
predecessor. To complete the Old Testament, in a similar manner, were an
undertaking too vast and expensive for the means of an unbeneficed clergyman.
Accordingly, the Trustees of the British Museum, (in which establishment
Mr. Baber is at the head of the printed- book department) equally to their
spirit and good sense, undertook to apply to Parliament for the protection of
Government in defraying the expenses of what remained to be executed. The
application was necessarily successful ; and Mr. Baber is now constantly and
cordially occupied in trimming his Alexandrine vessel, in the hope of reaching
a shore which may reward him for the toil of navigation . In other words, he
goes on now vigorously with the herculean task in hand ; under the persuasion
that, whatever be the result, the onus of payment is thrown upon shoulders
sufficiently broad and muscular to bear any impending weight ! Fervet opus'—
and my friend has already completed the Pentateuch ; of which, as of the
remainder, there are only 250 copies printed, in a magnificent folio size, to
match with Dr. Kipling's fac- simile of the Codex Bezæ, described in a preceding
page. The work now assumes indeed a most imposing appearance. The types,
cast in metal by Jackson, for Woide, are quite fresh and perfect ; and instead
of the contracted various readings, in the margin, being spun out by the letters
VOL. I. e
Ixviii FIRST DAY.
LORENZO. This is really most gratifying intelligence.
But resume. You spoke of certain foreign MSS. , connected
with the sacred text, as of very considerable value ?
PHILEMON. I did so. Yet let me not forget to mention,
as another similar treasure in our own country, the four
leaves of a portion ofthe Gospels, written in silver letters
upon a purple ground, also in the British Museum. It is,
to be sure, but a mere fragment ; but probably of equal
antiquity with any thing of its kind. * Nor, since we have
in full, (as Woide has given them) fac- similes of such various readings, cut in
wood, are inserted precisely in the places where they occur, filling up only the
same space with the original . The tail-pieces, or rude arabesque ornaments at
the end of each book, are also represented by means of fac- similes in wood : so
that the identity of the original is perfectly preserved. The work, when complete, will consist of iv folio volumes : three ofthe text of
the Old Testament, with a fourth containing prolegomena and notes. The
subscribers for the VELLUM COPIES are :
His Majesty's Library.
The French King's Library.
The Royal Library of Berlin.
The Archbishop of Canterbury.
The Duke of Devonshire.
The Earl Spencer.
Sir M. M. Sykes, Bart.
John Dent, Esq.
-Turner, Esq. Trin. Coll. Dublin.
Longman, Hurst, and Co. (Pentateuch only)
The Author.
(One copy undisposed of.)
I have seen the vellum copies, and they are such as do Mr. Taylor, the
printer of the work, the highest degree of credit. The red-ink titles, however,
are rather pale ; yet the production is, upon the whole, a very noble and extraordinary one : and let us wish the amiable and able editor of it all the success
and all the reputation which undoubtedly will be the result of his labours !
" These are imperial works, and worthy Kings.'
of equal antiquity with anything of its kind. ] They are indeed mere ' fragments : ' beginning with a portion of the xxvith chapter of St. Matthew's
Gospel, followed by a portion of the xxvi1th chapter, and two portions from
St. John's Gospel. Consult Mr. Planta's Catalogue, p. 562. Afac- simile ofthe text
of these fragments is found in the x1th plate of Casley ; who observes (at p. 1x)
that these four leaves may be as old or older' than the fragment of Genesis in
the same collection : see p. xlvii ante. The letters are silver, upon a purple
(faded) ground ; and they are the largest Greek capitals which I remember to
have seen.
The words, in Greek, denoting Jesus, God, Lord, Son, and Saviour,
FIRST DAY. lxix
not yet taken leave of British land, must I omit to mention,
in a manner the most pointed and satisfactory, the very
precious and valuable MS. of an ancient Greek text of St.
Matthew's Gospel, put forth by the learned Dr. Barrett of
Trinity College, Dublin ; whose biblical labours do not
appear to be so generally known and fully appreciated as
they unquestionably merit to be.
Let me now, in the enumeration of foreign Greek MSS.
without illuminations, † make only especial mention of that
semi Greek and Gothic version, of which Ulphilas, a Bishop
of the Ivth century, is the reputed author. It consists of
the New Testament, but in an imperfect state. Benzelius
made us more particularly acquainted with the Gospels,
about seventy years ago; and, within about twenty years
later, Knittel discovered a portion of St. Paul's Epistle to
the Romans-which he published with a zeal and enthusiasm
are however written in letters of gold. These are doubtless very precious fragments ; and Mr. Baber inclines to give them chronological precedency to any
previously-named MS.
the learned Dr. Barrett, ofTrinity College, Dublin. ] A particular account of
this MS. (being ofthe vith century, and comprising the Gospel of St. Matthew)
may be seen in Mr. Horne's Introduction to the Study of Bibliography, vol. i.
p. 115, &c. Afac- simile of the original, in 64 plates, with prolagomena, &c.
by the learned editor, was published in 1801, 4to. by the order and at the
expense of the University of Dublin. Note : the original vellum is of a faded
purple colour.
+ foreign Greek MSS. without illuminations.] Philemon possibly thinks any
detail about the famous Codex Vaticanus, (the basis of the Roman edition of the
Greek Bible of 1587 : see Introd. to the Classics, vol. i. p. 39) of the Pentateuch
in the Royal Library of France, and formerly Colbert's (Montfaucon's Palæog.
Græc. p. 186-8) and other more particularly distinguished and well known MSS.
to be superfluous. Indeed whoever reads Michaelis's Introduction &c with
Dr. Marsh's Notes, will find a prodigious deal of curious and learned discussion,
connected therewith, concentrated in a comparatively small space. There would
be neither end nor object in prolonging a disquisition upon this branch of the
subject when we get into the viith century.
lxx FIRST DAY.
that do his memory infinite credit. This very precious and
intrinsically valuable MS. is perhaps of equal antiquity with
either of the preceding : -and purple-vellum Greek MSS.,
says Breitinger, (if I remember rightly) are scarcer than
white crows !
C
* do his memory infinite credit. ] The celebrated MS. above alluded to, and
upon which Benzelius, and after him, Ihre and Knittel, laboured, is emphatically
called Coder Argenteus ; as the text (with the exception of the initial letters,
which are in gold) is written in letters ofsilver upon a purple ground. That text
is really a Gothic, and not a Turkish version, ' says Michaelis. It was translated from the Greek, and probably from the Latin, by ULPHILAS, in the ivth
century, for the sake of the Goths who had settled in Wallachia. The life of the
Translator (who is supposed to have invented the Gothic alphabet) is given by
Benzelius, in his excellent edition of this MS. (of the Four Gospels only) published by Lye at Oxford in 1750, 4to. In this edition, which is printed in
Gothic letters, the errors of the preceding ( 1665 and 1685, 4to. ) are corrected. '
Ihre published, in 1752, and 1755, two small essays under the title of Ulphilas
Illustrata,' which shew that even the labours of Benzelius and Lye are not freefrom
error. In the year 1763, F. A. Knittel discovered another fragment of Ulphilas
from the Codex Carolinus in the library of Wolfenbuttel : the Gospels being
deposited in the library of the University of Upsal. That fragment relates to a
portion of St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans. Knittel's account of the discovery
is now before me ; and it is most admirable and interesting : Nempe igitur (says
he) extra iocum prima frons textus mei gothici parum bella erat. Cernebam
litteras, quarum erant aliæ integræ, aliæ dimidiatæ, aliæ multis partibus vetustate
Sublucebant passim tenues scripturæ reliquiæ. Exstabant heic atque
illic altius membranis impressa, et quasi ad sempiternam memoriam fixa, notarum
vestigia atque adeo cubilia integra, pigmento flavo, fulvique auri simili, modo
vacua, modo adspersa, modo leviter tincta ,' &c. Præfat. p. 6. What follows?
The worthy Knittel takes the MS. home : embraces it with the fondness of a
lover and falls upon his knees, and prays to God that the result may be as
propitious as the commencement promised !' He then pores, with microscopic
scrutiny, over every letter of the precious text-almost loses his eye-sight-but,
in the end, completes his task with tolerable success, and by God's help enjoys
the wonted use of his eyes.' The volume bears honourable testimony to his zeal,
his piety, and his critical erudition : and with the subsequent labours of Ihre,
who published two further dissertations, as companions of Knittel's book, the
version of Ulphilas should be in the hands of every critic who would build on
a solid foundation.' So says Michaelis, vol. ii . p. 130-137. The result is, if
Ulphilas really did execute the MS. under consideration, (and of this there
seems no doubt among biblical critics) it takes precedence of every one before
described on the score of ANTIQUITY,
exesæ.
FIRST DAY. lxxi
BELINDA. Pray tell us all about them ' —as the children
say-for now that you talk of colour, and my favourite
colour too, every particle of opposition and dissatisfaction
ceases as a matter of course !
PHILEMON. Well then, at your next court-visit, let your
gown rival the emblazoned aspect of these old purple
vellums -and let stars of silver, thickly powdered' there-
* the emblazoned aspect of these old purple vellums.] The general idea seems to
be, that PURPLE VELLUM manuscripts were intended only for ' choice blades'—
let us rather say, tasteful bibliomaniacs-in book collecting. St. Jerom, as
Philemon above observes, is very biting in his sarcasm upon these ' purple leaves
covered with letters of gold and silver. For myself, and my friends (adds that
Father) let us have lower-priced books-and distinguished not so much for
beauty as for accuracy.' And in his epistle to Eustochius, he observes, ' vellums
of a purple colour are manufactured, the writing being, as it were, liquified gold.'
What ascetic language is this ! Let it be shunned by all virtuous bibliomaniacs,
both eastward and westward of Temple Bar ! Ovid, some four hundred and fifty
years before St. Jerom, had treated ' these old purple vellums,' in a more fascinating style. In his first elegy (De Tristibus) Ad Librum,' he thus melts down
a pretty quatrain upon the impropriety, or rather unfitness, of ornamental MSS
for the mournful.'
"
Nec te purpureo velent vaccinia succo :
Non est conveniens luctibus ille color.
Nec titulus minio, nec cedro charta notetur :
Candida nec nigra cornua fronte geras.
Casley (p. xiii) has quoted these verses, with sundry observations thereupon not
necessary to be here repeated. Mabillon, however, properly remarks (as has
been just intimated) that these purple treasures were for the ' Princes ' and
' Noblemen' of the times. Sed hic scribendi modus (observes he) Principibus et
Magnatibus peculiaris erat, nec tamen promiscuè ab istis usurpatus.' De Re
Diplom. p. 43. And we learn from the x11th volume (p. 549) of the Spicilegium
of Theonas, that it is rather somewhat unseemly ' to write upon purple vellum in
letters of silver and gold, unless at the particular desire of a Prince.' Ibid. The
subject also of the MS. frequently regulated the mode of executing it. Thus, we
learn from the 28th epistle of Boniface (Bishop and Martyr) to the Abbess
Eadburga, that this latter is entreated to write the Epistles of St. Peter, the
master andApostle of Boniface, in letters of gold-for the greater reverence to be
paid towards the sacred scriptures-when the Abbess preaches before her
carnally-minded auditors .' Such (adds Mabillon) is the MS. of the Gospels
given by Louis the Pious to the monastery of St. Medard ; executed in letters of
"
lxxii FIRST DAY.
upon, emulate, if they dare, the silver capital Greek letters
upon the purple membranaceous fragments which have
survived the desolations of time ! You see, I do not speak
coldly upon this picturesque subject !
ALMANSA. Nor do I feel precisely as if I were in the
frigid zone ! But proceed and expatiate.
PHILEMON. The field for expatiating is unluckily very
limited. In fact, of the more ancient MSS. before noticed,
the Pentateuch at Vienna, the fragment of the Gospels in the
British Museum, with a Psalter or two in a few libraries
gold.' He then notices several others, of the like character_in the library of St.
Germain des Près - and especially an Evangelistarium and Psalter : p. 44. A
fac-simile of the writing of this Psalter (considered to be of the vith century)
occurs as no. 1 of the plate at page 357. Montfaucou has nearly the same
notices : Palæog. Græc. p. 4-5, p. 216-228. But of the MS. of the Gospels,
once in the St. Medard monastery, and now in the royal library of France,
a friend, who has seen this precious rarity, informs me that it is singularly
curious ; especially the borders, which have a vast variety of ornament in frets,
flowers, and running patterns of foliage : with fluted and other columns, presenting variegated marble, mosaic work, &c.: and having gold letters upon a
purple ground.' Montfaucon, in his Diarium Italicum, p . 308, has a glowing
notice of a purple MS. of Homilies upon the Gospels, of the viith or vinth
century. But to what lengths would this purple ' discussion run ?
6
Yet a word or two further. Breitinger, as Philemon has properly observed,
talks about these purple MSS. with Greek scription ' being ' rarer than white
crows.' In his epistle De antiquissimo Turicensis Bibliothecæ Græco-Psalmorum
Libro In Membrana Purpurea Titulis aureis ac Litteris argenteis exarato,' 1748,
4to. after giving a very picturesque description of his MS.- membrana tota
purpura infecta nigricantis rosæ aut violæ rubore micans .' .. goes on thus :
' Sunt autem albo corvo rariores Codices istiusmodi purpurei, inprimis Græci
membranacei, et præter hunc nostrum paucissimi hactenus innotuerunt, ' p. 7.
Breitinger then goes on to notice those MSS. which have been already brought
under the review of the reader. But what a strange mistake was made by one
Hermannus Hugo, in his libellus de prima Scribendi origine ? He thought,
simple soul, that purple vellum MSS. only meant books bound in vellum of the
same colour ! See Kollarius's note, lib. iii. col. 516 , in his Comment. de Bibl.
Vindob. Yet what are all these ancient purple MSS. , for splendor and effect,
compared with the Magna Carta printed by JOHN WHITTAKER, in letters of
gold, upon a purple ground ? See the end ofthe SEVenth Day.
FIRST DAY. lxxiii
abroad, are all the MSS. which just now occur to me as
being distinguished by a purple tint-for I apprehend little
more than a tint remains. Whether the white or the purple
vellum be the more ancient, I cannot take upon me to
determine ; but it is right you should be informed that St.
Jerom denounces as coxcombs, all those who, in his own
time, were so violently attached to your favourite purple
colour !
LISARDO. I have a great respect for the literary attainments of St. Jerom ; and although, in the absence of the old
Italic version of the Greek Bible, I am willing to subscribe
to the excellence of his own, or what is now called the
Vulgate, yet in matters of taste, connected with the harmony
of colour, you must excuse me if I choose to enter my
protest against that venerable father's decision.
PHILEMON. You appear to mistake the matter. St.
Jerom imagined that this appetite for purple MSS. was
rather artificial and voluptuous ; requiring regulation and
correction—and that, in the end, men would prefer the form
or colour, to the intrinsic worth, of their vellum treasures.
Let us see :-although we are just now at fault, ' I believe.
LYSANDER. Perhaps, having described the more ancient
unilluminated MSS. , you will now entirely confine yourself
to such as are distinguished for beauty or peculiarity of
ornament-from the xth to the xvith century : leaving the
consideration of the subject of each MS. subordinate to that
of the character ofart which it displays.
PHILEMON. Not exactly so, either. But we may, at any
rate, commence our researches with a brief notice of the
style ofart observable in a few ofour Chronicles or Histories;
whether of places, persons, or things. You will find me
probably both desultory and superficial ; yet as the field is
lxxiv FIRST DAY.
rather new and extensive, you must be satisfied with a hasty
and partial examination of it.
LORENZO. Proceed, dear Philemon. We will allow you
the longest possible rope for the exercise of all the ingenuity
and frankness which you possess.
PHILEMON. This is indeed encouraging. First, therefore,
prepare to witness what appears to me to be a most favourable specimen, both of drawing and grouping, from a
topographical work executed at the very commencement of
the eleventh century. The first of the ensuing specimens
·
*
at the very opening of the eleventh century. ] The work above alluded to is
entitled, by Mr. Planta, in his Catalogue of the Cottonian MSS. (p. 36, no. 51)
Descriptio topographica aliquot regionum, &c. in Oriente. It appears to be a fragment of only 10 leaves, in the Latin and Saxon languages ; containing a plentiful
sprinkling, in proportion to its contents, of fabulous and monstrous occurrences.
The originals are in strong body colour : with the lights laid on pretty thickly in
size or gum, so as to have nearly the appearance of oil . On the reverse of the
7th leafofthis fragment, occurs the following text-illustrative of the first ofthe
above fac-similes. In sinistra parte regio est Catinorum [ Cathay ?] et ibi reges
sunt hospitales, sub se multos habentes tyrannos confines secus oceanum. A
sinistra parte sunt reges complures.' On the recto of the 8th leaf is the following
text, subjoined to the second subject above given. 'Hoc genus hominum multos vivit annos. Homines sunt benigni : et si qui ad eos venere cum mulieribus,
eos remittunt. Alexander autem Macedis cum ad eos venisset, miratus est eorum
humanitatem, nec voluit eis nocere, nec ultra voluit occidere Enviable and
matchless race-that could stop the slaughtering career of a conqueror from the
mere exhibition of humanity ! When will such a golden event again occur ?
Let copies of the portraits of this rare gentry ' adorn the diplomatic head- quarters of Petersburgh and St. Helena !
But what is the charge of which Joseph Strutt stands accused by the leniently
disposed Philemon? Simply this. In his Manners and Customs, vol . i. p. 77, pl . xiii.
he has given the second illumination, above represented, (but, I must say, with less
fidelity than the reader here beholds it) as a marriage ceremony ; and the figure,
with a bowl, he conceives to be one of the parties attached to the ceremony,
holding the benediction- water ' within the same ! Was our Joseph ' in a poetical
mood when he advanced such a solving of the hieroglyphic ? Or had he at the
time been himself newly blest ' with a wife ? It is inmaterial : for certainly the
text of the work referred to warrants nothing like the explanation ofJoseph
Strutt.
·
FIRST DAY. lxxv
represents the hospitable treatment which certain Kings,
resident in Cathay, afford to visitors and strangers.
The second exhibits the not less marked courtesy and
gallantry of the male sex towards the female, when the
latter are anxious to quit the dominions of the former. I
lxxvi FIRST DAY.
own there is a successful attempt at grouping in the composition. However, you shall judge for yourselves.
LISARDO. Have I not seen this latter in STRUTT ?
PHILEMON. You have ; and not only with a perverted
interpretation, but a comparatively faithless fac-simile. Yet
I will not stop to scold Strutt for every deviation from accuracy, whether with the pen or the pencil, which his voluminous pages display : remembering the Horatian precept-
FIRST DAY. lxxvii
... ubi plura nitent . . . non ego paucis
Offendar maculis . . . .
LORENZO. In other words, the Sun is a glorious luminary
although he have sometimes (asof late) a few spots upon
his disk !
LISARDO. A goodly paraphrase. But proceed with your
Histories, brave Philemon.
PHILEMON. Let me now surprise and delight you. In
that sombre and silent repository of rare and precious tomes
of former times-called the Archives of Corpus College,
Oxford there reposeth a MS. of FLORENCE of WORCESTER (no mean champion in the grenadier-rank of our
-
a MS. of Florence of Worcester. ] I am indebted to my excellent and
'approved good ' friend, Mr. Henry Petrie, (who hath brushed off more cobwebs
from our old ms. chronicles and histories than any man in England, since the time of Wanley - therein differing from the frighful Magliabechi, who never
would suffer spiders or cobwebs to be disturbed ! ) for the ensuing account of this
very curious and precious MS. It appears to have been written about the year
1150. The visions above alluded to (which have not hitherto occurred in
any other MS. ) are mentioned as having taken place A. D. 1130 ; and the
writer of the chronicle reports that he heard Grimbald, the King's physician,
relate the Visions to Godfrey, Abbot of Winchelcombe, who died in 1137. An
abridged account of the same thus appears in Trevisa's version of Higden's Polichronicon, according to Caxton's edition of the same, 1482, folio . Mold the
emperyce was soone forsake of her husbond Geffroy, and wente to her fader in
to normandy, there the Kyng sawe thre wondre syghtes, Fyrste he sawe in his
sleepe many clerkes assayle hym with toles and axe of hym dette, Efte he sawe
a Route of men of Armes that wold rese on hym with al maner wepen, the
thyrde tyme he sawe a grete company of prelates manace hym with theyr croyses
And at euery tyme the Kyng start vp of his bed and caught his swerde and
cryed help, as though he wold slee somme men, but he myght no man fyude.
Also a phisician grymbald by his name sawe alle these syghts, and told hem to
the kynge erly in the morow,' &c. Liber Septimus, fol . cccxlviij , rev.
It must be noticed that each of these visions has been described by the pencil
of the illuminator, and fac- similes of them have been made by my friend ; but
some discretion must be exercised in the adoption of the whole within the pages
of the present work. Certainly two of the subjects, as above given, and not the
most clumsily executed, are ornaments with which the reader has good reason to
lxxviii FIRST DAY.
IP
xiT
earlier Historians !) written about the middle of the twelfth
century, and containing Illuminations which represent the
Visions that appeared unto our Henry I. during his abode
in Normandy. What attaches no ordinary intrinsic value
to this MS. is, that the Visions, here recorded, do not occur
in any other known copy of the Historian under consideration. I shall lay fac-similes of these very curious specimens
of art before you, in the order in which I think they are the
more likely to be productive of gratification. In my humble
apprehension, more interesting specimens could with difficulty be procured ; and they are perfectly new to the
public.
M
2
O
HP XIII
100
ם
םם
lxxx FIRST DAY.
ALMANSA. Surely they are sufficiently odd ! ..
LISARDO. Rather say, sufficiently curious and instructive:
and by no means divested of a considerable share of merit.
Have you anything else of the same character, from the
same branch of research ?
PHILEMON. Not exactly. Yet let me lay quietly before
you two vastly pretty specimens of art, in the character of
supposed Portraits, from a MS. at the end of the twelfth
century. * The figure of the female has, I think, peculiar
be satisfied. The smaller one describes the King's return to England to make
atonement for his exactions. There is also a representation of the Crucifixion
in the same Chronicle ; by no means unskilfully executed. The MS. in question
is numbered D. iv. 5 ; and includes both Florence of Worcester and a continuation of him to A. D. 1140 ; where it ends -imperfectly. The colouring, except
that the back-ground is pretty strong, is nearly confined to the outlines : which
are brown, red or green, with, sometimes, a slight wash near them by way of
helping the folds, &c. Let the spirits of Fox and CLAYMUND more especially
hover round that part of the Corpus archives in which this very fine and precious
volume reposes !
* somewhat later in the twelfth century. ] Let me first make the reader acquainted with the title of an illuminated MS. of extraordinary interest and
curiosity, somewhat early in the x11th century. It was the property of the late
John Towneley, Esq. and is fully described by Mr. Evans in the catalogue of the
first part of the Towneley library, sold by auction in 1814 : under the following
title : No. 904, THE LIFE, MARTYRDOM, AND MIRACLES OF S. EDMUND, in
thirty-two singularly-curious paintings of the early part of the twelfth century,
exhibiting the Architecture, Shipping, Arms, Armour, and various habits of that
period.' It was purchased at the sale for 1681.
We now come to the MS. above alluded to by Philemon ; the notices and facsimiles from which are supplied by the same authority, to whom Mr. Evans, in
the preceding description , emphatically alludes. The figure of the female, at
folio 14, is taken from a History or Register of the Charters of the Abbey of
Abbendon : see the Cottonian Catalogue [ Claudius B. VI. ] p. 192. These
charters are real or pretended, with historical notices to connect them. As they
end in the time of Richard I. we may assign the date of about 1200 to the MS.
Let us here recreate ourselves with a small whole length of William I. seen in a
MS. of Battle Abbey, among the Cotton MSS.: Domitian II. 2. The arabesque
accompaniment is very elegant. They contain however a whole length of some
monarch (probably Richard I. ) very tastefully surrounded by what may be
FIRST DAY. lxxxi
delicacy of expression, and the drapery is both easy and
graceful. It is intended for Ethelswitha, the Queen of
called arabesque ornaments. Such a composition frequently appears in the
earlier capital initials .
lxxxii FIRST DAY.
Alfred ; and the Monarch who hath a right portly and
majestic air, is designed to represent our First Richard.
: 00
*
*
。
*
。
+
FIRST DAY. lxxxiii
BELINDA. I own these are to my mind ; and begin to
think that the art is progressively improving.
PHILEMON. Perhaps you may be deceived in such an
inference. However you will have abundant opportunity
ofjudging for yourself. I shall now however quit truth for
fiction-and human beings for four-footed animals.
ALMANSA. Strange introduction !
OR
PHILEMON. Not stranger than the very subject matter
itself. Prepare for monsters and oddities. I am about to
open the Lion's Den : in other words, to notice a couple of
terrific, but most singularly curious and interesting volumes,
entitled OF THE NATURE OF BEASTSBELINDA. Hideous title !
teresting
y
TH
ARY
LYSANDER. Cease interruption. Weare on the tip-toe of
expectation .
PHILEMON. Walk in Ladies and Gentlemen, ' and you
shall see the Lions, and a thousand four-footed oddities.
Pray examine this frontispiece-to a volume, of the character under description, in the library of St. John's College,
Oxford !* 'Tis passing strange !'
6
The volume from which the figure of William I. (erroneously called that of
Richard I. at p. lxxx) is taken, consists of tracts relating to the foundation,
endowment, and internal affairs of Battle Abbey, to the year 1176. The earlier
parts are probably of a still more ancient date, as the hand writing indicates.
The latter portion ends abruptly. The MS. is briefly noticed in Mr. Planta's
Catalogue.
in the library of St. John's College, Oxford. ] It is upwards of three years
since I took a brief notice of, and made the above fac-similes from, the volume
under description : which is, I think, somewhat older than the MS. of the same
class in the Ashmolean Museum-presently to be described. My memoranda,
however, of the St. John's Bestiarium having been irrecoverably mislaid, the
ensuingdescription of it, furnished by the kind and ready pen of Mr. Philip Bliss,
fellow of the same College, and our modern Anthony a Wood (except that he hath
a more lively, or, in the language of the ensuing account, a more ' igniferous '
spirit than his literary predecessor) willconvince the reader that nothing has been
lost by the accident. Our Bestiarium (quoth Mr. Bliss) contains at present one
VOL. I. f

FIRST DAY. lxxxv
ALMANSA. Inconceivably frightful !
BELINDA. Yet comical and interesting !
LORENZO. The story attached to it —?
PHILEMON. I know it not : and to the best of my recollection, when I examined the volume, the history of these
' strange appearances ' was unaccountably omitted. But
this brings me to a similar subject in a similar volume—of
probably somewhat later date, but of infinitely superior execution.
LYSANDER. Speak !
PHILEMON. Nothing less, in short, than that most curious
book, under the name of The Bestiarium, which is deposited
·
hundred and three leaves ; having lost, as I conjecture, about ten-which
undoubtedly contained illuminations. Among others, that of Jonas, cast from
the belly of the whale, (in all probability a fine one) is departed, I wish the
thief had been in the belly of his mother earth before the d- l prompted him
to such a breach of all that is right or literary. The book has treatises on beasts,
fish, and trees ; something on nature, and the formation of human bodies ; an
account of the stages of man's life, which are declared to be sir ; and lastly a
pretty tale of the ' lapides igniferi,' which are in quodam monte orientis.' For
my own part (resumes my worthy correspondent) I fancy they are pretty general
all over the world, if our author's history of them be correct. He says that they
do not burn as long as the male and female are longe ab se invicem '—but
when by accident they approach each other, statim ignis accenditur, ita ut
ardeant omnia quæ sunt circa illum montem.'-Therefore, adds our moralising
naturalist, vos homines dei qui istam vitam geritis separate vos longè a feminis. '
The volume concludes with a large illumination of the subject in question, which
is divided into two compartnients ; one representing the mountain in a quiescent
state, the other, in a state of conflagration. ' The MS. ( concludes Mr. Bliss) was
certainly executed for some religious house. At the end, in a hand corresponding with the capitals throughout, is an inscription - Liber Sce Trinitatis. ' . . .
remainder effaced .' Thanks to Mr. Philip Bliss ! —who weareth the mantle, with
an improved lining and new trimmed crimson edge, that once covered the ponderous shoulders of ANTHONY à WOOD, THE ELDER ! I can speak with tolerable
confidence as to the writing and style of art in the Bestiarium of St. John's
College, Oxford. Both the one and the other is much ruder and coarser than
what we observe in the MS. immediately to be noticed,
lxxxvi FIRST DAY.
•
in the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford. * It is certainly not
later than the year 1200 ; but both able and dexterous was
that artist, who, at such a period, could not only design
with skill, and finish with nicety, but lay on his massive
"
" Bestiarium-in the Ashmole Museum at Oxford. ] Hereafter followeth ' a
particular description of this singular treasure : for singular ' and beautiful it is,
probably beyond the antiquary's expectation. First, let us say it beareth the
number 1511 secondly, there appeareth upon the recto of the fly-leaf, the following inscription : This booke was gyven mee by my good Friende William Man
Esquire this thirde day of August, 1609. Pe : Harwood.' Thirdly, for the contents of the volume. The first 6 leaves exhibit representations of the Creation
ofthe World : the Deity occupying the first 3 of them, within a radiated circle,
having a background of solid gold. The 3d figure of the Deity, in the creation
ofthe moon and stars, is very brilliant. Then follows the creation of birds, fishes,
beasts, and man. In the latter, Adam is sleeping upon the top of a rock ; while
Eve is made to rise up from behind, or over the right shoulder ; and not from
the side, as is usually the case. The reverse of this latter leaf is blank. Then a
leaf, on the reverse of which is a tall whole-length figure, sitting, and radiated- with a book in his lap, on which is inscribed the word ALPHABET. The background is gold, pricked with stars, and a sort of lattice-work. This striking
illumination fills the entire page, having the symbol of one of the Evangelists at each corner.
Next follows a full- page illumination, representing the beasts receiving their
names from Adam. This is succeeded by a dry disquisition upon the nature and
names of animals, accompanied by an illumination, divided into three compartments, precisely the same in subject, as we see above at p. lxxxiv : descriptive of
the St. John's copy ; but the present illumination is on a reduced scale . On the
recto of the ensuing leaf ' Incipit Liber de naturis Bestiarum.' In the whole, 93
leaves; exclusively of those previously described, and including the treatises upon
Birds and Fishes. Among the embellishments which display the different characters of beasts, is one, of singular interest-divided into three parts- exhibiting the blood-hound in pursuit, and eventual detection , of a murderer. The dogs
have a nimbleness of appearance, and a certain grace of delineation, perfectly
delightful. But to particularise would be endless. The fac- similes at p. lxxxviii
sufficiently evince the degree of art displayed in these striking illuminations.
The colouring has little merit. It consists generally of two large portions of
red and blue, touched with white. The coat of colour is thick and shining,
approaching to the character of oil. The gold of the back-grounds is far from
being poetically expressed by Philemon . It is such as acknowledges no superiority in any ancient MS. which I remember to have seen, and may almost set
rivalry at defiance ! Within 9 leaves of the end of the volume is the treatise of
FIRST DAY. lxxxvii
coats of gold with such dexterity, that they even yet blaze
with all the splendour of their original effulgence. Never
visit the Ashmolean Museum without requesting good Mr.
Dunbar (who rejoices in the exhibition) to shew you this
keimelion of zoography. Let me now put my menagerie
in order, and beg of you to bestow a mite of approbation
upon each specimen exhibited. Know however, before-hand,
that the work also contains treatises upon Birds, Fishes, and
Stones. Among the more delicate and successful embellishments in the volume, contemplate the following : the first
representing the provocation of the asp to sting itself to
death ; and the second the stratagem practised upon the
·
•
St. Isidore upon the nature of man :' having a fine whole-length figure of the
Saint prefixed, sitting before his desk, upon which is a book entitled ' Ysidor9 de
Natura Hominis! ' On the reverse of the last leaf but one begins the treatise ⚫ De
Lapidibus ' with an illumination of the Lapides igniferi ' precisely similar to the
one just described as distinguishing the St. John's copy. This treatise appears
to end abruptly on the recto of the last leaf. The MS, is a small folio volume,
of a thick but soft- surfaced vellum, written in a stout regular gothic type ; of
which four lines extend to seven-eighths of an inch. I am not however prepared
to shew cause ' why this MS. may not belong to the end of the x11th century !
good Mr. Dunbar. ] I congratulate the idolizers of the memories of Ashmole
and Wood, the lovers of antiquity in general, and the ‹ Domini Magistri ' as well
as the Domini Doctores, ' of the University of Oxford in particular, upon the
appointment of Mr. Dunbar to the Keepership of the Ashmolean Museum.
The whole interior of that once cold and dirt- collecting repository hath been
lately warmed, cleansed, and smartened up ' in a manner worthy of the treasures deposited therein. Moths, gnats, ' mice and rats, and such small deer,' cease
to inflict their ravages upon the pictures and books : and a sort of comely and
inviting order prevails—much, no doubt, to the comfort of Mr. Dunbar, and
not less so to the credit of the Trustees of the Museum. We shall one day, and
I make no doubt shortly, receive a garland from the hands of Mr. Dunbar, composed ofthe flowers which bear perennial blossom in the library of old Anthony :
and among these flowers, (in the fashion of a book) let us have an extract or
two from that comical and cubical duodecimo, entitled Wallography, or the
Britton described, 1682, 8vo. which the pen of the said Old Anthony,' upon the
fly-leaf of the same, designateth as ' full of drollery and roguery.
lxxxviii FIRST DAY.
tiger, to arrest the progress of her pursuit after her stolen
young. They are each touched with a nice knowledge of
the subject.
FIRST DAY. lxxxix
In the latter, you observe that the Knight throws down
cylinders or globes of glass ; and the ferocious dam, wishing
to seize them, sees her image reflected -and thus, puzzled
and distracted, her course is impeded, and the tiger-robber
gets dexterously away.
LYSANDER. I own that this is vastly pretty and ingenious nor is the style of art any way contemptible.
PHILEMON. On the contrary, it has great pretensions to
elegance and accuracy. But if you could but see the backgrounds of the originals !! - solid, indurated, refulgent,
almost imperishable ! ..
LISARDO. You distract me, and at the same time make
me the most melancholy of men ! But proceed. I am
breathless with anticipation.
PHILEMON. Be composed, I entreat ... for I hardly
know howto introduce what follows to your notice. The
Ladies, I observe, start with horror and apprehension !
XC FIRST DAY.
It represents the ravages sometimes made by hungry
hyenas, upon the bodies of the dead -how they tear open
the tombs, and devour the shrouded carcases ! But see, a
more ingenious and refined species of cruelty is exercised
by the Water-serpent ofthe Nile upon the bodies of animals,
who come to bathe in the treacherous flood. The designer
of this uncommon production seems to have ransacked the
remotest corner of his brain for such an extraordinary selection of animals. The back-ground of this picture, like the
shield of Achilles from the recent forge of Vulcan, is in
a perfect blaze of splendour ! The animals themselves are
touched chiefly in colours of red, blue, and white.
FIRST DAY. xci
Yet, as you may equally observe, there are groups of
animals of a more peaceful and pleasing character. The
following, methinks, partakes even somewhat of Grecian taste.
8
&
It is time now to close our researches connected with these
Bestiaria, illuminated in the x11th century. Let us resume
a graver and not less interesting strain.
LORENZO. Have you nothing connected with Romances?
LYSANDER. Rather with Sacred subjects ·
PHILEMON. Lysander is right : for of Romances, of the
period under consideration, there are probably none existing
which contain specimens of art or even traces of illumination. As to volumes connected with the Bible, they are
equally without number and end. But let us consider only
xcii FIRST DAY.
some distinct features in this department of our present
research : I mean Gospels and Psalters ... Why I advert
to this branch of theology at present is, that I happen just
now to recollect the very beautiful and interesting MS. of
the Greek Gospels in the possession of MR. DENT,* and
* MS. ofthe Greek Gospels in the possession of Mr. Dent. ] The OPPOSITE
PLATE will give the reader some notion of the peculiar style of art which
prevails in the larger illuminations of this precious manuscript. It is the
head-piece of the Gospel of St. Matthew, and intended for a representation of
that Evangelist. Of the minor ornaments, I subjoin a fac-simile or two, not
destitute of merit. The first is a pretty specimen of the Greek capital T: and
the second (fromfol. 253, rev.) represents our Saviour washing his disciplesfeet.'
เแบก
G.Lewis Souly .
TAC -SIMILE FROM AGEEK MANUSCRIPT OFTHE GOSPELS :AD.1200
LIBRAILE
FIRST DAY. xciii
written, as I conjecture, about the year 1200. No doubt
this was once an inmate of Mount Athos ; and together with
several other, perhaps not less beautiful and interesting,
The magnificent manuscript under description is a large folio volume of the
Gospels ; or what is called an Evangelistarium. It commences with the Gospel
of St. John ; which is preceded by a splendid embellishment, divided into two
compartments—one exhibiting Christ's descent into Hades, the other the inspiration of the Evangelist ; who is sitting in the act of writing his Gospel. The
surrounding border is among the most splendid in the volume. The text is
written in two columns of a flowing Greek character ; having 21 lines in a full
column. The initial letter of every chapter is an ornamental one ; sometimes (as
in the first specimen, of the capital Greek T) extremely elegant and fanciful : in
colours of red and blue, relieved by white and gold. The titles to the chapters
are in gold. Occasionally (but rarely) there are side and bottom-margin ornaments ; as on the reverse of the 19th leaf-where we see very small figures of
the Paralytic, the Pharisee, the Scribe, &c. &c. The Gospel of St. Matthew
commences on fol . 49 ; preceded by a decoration of which distinct notice has
been already taken. The background of the figure is gold : the tops, or roofs of
the small buildings, are bright red : the intermediate tiling is blue ; and the
drawn curtain of the building, to the right of the figure, is bright red : the three
steps are of a wavy pink- coloured marble. The furniture, upon which the book
and screw are fixed , is dark brown , as well as the chair upon which the Evangelist
sits. His footstool is of gold. His garment is pale yellow, with the tunic, across
his arm, blue. The tiling, to the left, upon the first building, is blue. The
balustrade and pediment are white. The beautiful arabesque border that
surrounds it, is, generally speaking, red and blue relieved by white, on a gold
back-ground. Its present condition is sufficiently beautiful ; but originally these
ornaments must have been of a dazzling splendor.
The Gospel of St. Matthew ends on the recto of fol. 123, and is succeeded
by a blank leaf. St. Mark's Gospel follows on the recto of fol. 125 : preceded
by a portrait of the Evangelist, of precisely the same character as that of
the previous Evangelist. St. Mark ends on the reverse of fol. 216, succeeded
by two blank leaves. St. Luke follows on the recto of 219; having a representation of the Evangelist, iu a peculiar form, prefixed : with a surrounding
border of uncommon beauty and elaborate detail . Few specimens, even of
Persian art, can exceed this interesting decoration. In the course of this
Evangelist we perceive several attempts at historical composition in the way of
art ; as, on the reverse of fol. 253, appears the Washing of the Disciples Feet,
by our Saviour,' forming the second specimen in the preceding page. The
Betrayal of Christ by Judas, occurs in pretty nearly the same style, on the
reverse offol. 269 : and the Crucifixion, in like manner, on the recto of fol . 281 .
On the recto of fol. 295, preceded by a blank leaf, and having at top a very
elegant illumination-commence excerpts from the four Evangelists : which
xciv FIRST DAY.
volumes, of equal or superior antiquity, have been scattered
abroad upon the earth's wide surface to enrich the cabinets
of the curious, or gratify the cupidity of the avaricious.
What gems, ofwhich even poets can scarcely dream, are at
this moment darting their lustre in unexplored recesses !
and yet what gems, of probably superior brilliancy, have been
trampled beneath the feet of the plundering Turk ! But ah !
still more painful thought, what curious and extraordinary
specimens of the expiring art of Greece have been mangled,
lacerated, or deliberately anatomized, for the capricious
decoration of a worthless volume!
<
LISARDO. No more, no more of this heart-rending strain.'
PHILEMON. A truce then, if you please. But of the Psalter,
which may probably be considered the Parent of Missals,
Breviaries, or Hours* - let me just submit to you a very
appear to end on the reverse of fol. 335. These are succeeded by various extracts
(accompanied by very pretty head pieces, and two subjects, the Circumcision and
the Annunciation) relating to the Greek Church. At fol. 355, are extracts and
forms relating to the liturgy. At fol. 367, is a small illumination (one inch and
a half in height) of the death of the Virgin. In the whole, 378 leaves. On the
reverse ofthe last leaf, in a later hand, are directions, in Greek, to the officiating
priests for reading the Evangelistarium. It remains to add that this magnificent
and precious MS. ( allowed by the curators of the British Museum to be superior,
in condition and splendor, to any similar Greek MS. in that repository) was
procured from abroad by the enterprise of Mr. Woodburn, and sold to its present possessor for a price proportioned to its worth. As to its age, I incline to
think it (on the authorities of Montfaucon and Bandini) to be of the latter end
of the x1th, or beginning of the x11th century : and it may be further remarked
that the character, in which it is written, prevailed as late as the end of the xvth
century ; as may be seen from the fac- simile of the Psalter, printed at Venice in
1486, in the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol . i . p. 127.
* Psalter-probably the parent ofMissals, Breviaries, and Hours. ] This may be
a capricious surmise ; but positions less tenable have been maintained with all
the warmth and virulence of hypothetical casuistry. It is not a very over-strained
supposition to imagine, that some one portion, more than another, of the sacred
scriptures (and what has been more popular than the psalmody of David?) might
have been selected for the purpose of a devotional manual ; written and adorned
FIRST DAY. XCV
ancient, but not wholly barbarous, specimen of groupingrepresenting the salutation of Elizabeth and Mary-from a
volume of this description in the Gough Collection attached
to the Bodleian library. The countenances are, doubtless,
*
with all the nicety and skill of the calligraphist ! Next would follow the particular
church-service, or office of religion , as a subject for similar art—and hence the
innumerable volumes of Missals, Breviaries, Offices, and Hours. But our present
business is with the PSALTER ; of which, I will be bold to maintain, more ancient
specimens of calligraphy and illumination are to be found, than of Missals or
Church Offices.
At the same time it is but right to make mention of two very ancient church
service ' or devotional volumes, with illuminations (probably of the x1th century)
which are contained in the public library at Rouen. My friend Mr. Petrie, who
has furnished me with the notice of these curious tomes, from ocular demonstration ,' observes that both formerly belonged to Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, who had been Abbot of the monastery of Jumiege, in the middle of the
xith century. One of them is entitled Benedictionarius Roberti Archiepiscopi
Cantuarensis' -and the other Missale ad Vsum Ecclesiæ Anglicanæ, datum
ad Cenob. Gemeticense, a Roberto qui ejusdem quondam Abbas fuerat, tumque
Episcopus Londoniensis,' &c. Both books ( says my legendary lore-loving friend)
are very fine specimens of writing, gilding, and illuminating (in body colour) as
well in subjects, as in borders—which latter consist chiefly of foliage mixed with
frets,' &c. For an account of this Robert,' examine the valuable but rarely
opened pages of the Neustria Pia, p. 309 : and consult also Mr. Gourdin's dissertation upon these two very tomes, in his Mém. de l'Academie de Rouen :
where they are discoursed of in chronological order. The latter work is out of
reach ; but the former is at this moment sub oculis.'
6
* GoughCollection attached to the Bodleian Library. ] It was I think some time
in the year of our Lord 1812, when I first entered the Gough Collection' here
alluded to. The MSS. and printed books of the late Richard Gough (of monument-loving memory) were at that time under arrangement, in an oaken floored
room, light, spacious, and dry as the rain-unvisited dust of the plains of Arabia !
But the day, on which such visit was made, partook not less of the heat than of
the parchedness of the said Arabian plains ;' and well do I at this moment call to
mind the perseverance, energy, and exactness, with which the now very excellent
and able head- librarian of Bodley, the REV. B. BANDINELL, continued his labours
ofarrangement -in despite of such Arabian ' solstitial ray ! Books are sweet
friends ' at all seasons, thinks I to myself’ —but at a moment like this, place me
beside the translucent stream from gushing fountains of purest Parian marble ;
and let me gaze only upon illuminated margins of fruits, flowers, and ' frets ! '
6
Amost unseemly rhapsody ! quoth the grave and frowning reader-for if the
said ' excellent and able head-librarian of Bodley ' had addicted himself to such
xcvi FIRST DAY.
not a little grotesque ; but the folds of the drapery are
managed with considerable attention to elegance and ease
mawkish pastime, where would have been A Catalogue of the Books relating to
British Topography, and Saxon and Northern Literature, bequeathed to the Bodleian
Library, in the year MDCCXCIX. by Richard Gough, Esq. F. S. A.-which was put
FIRST DAY. xcvii
If you wish to see the progress of art, in volumes of this
description, you must carefully and leisurely survey the
numerous treasures, in which the rapturous strains of David
are contained, now deposited in the British Museum -the
immense reservoir ofwhat may be called the tributary streams
of Harley, Cotton, Soane, and his late Majesty George II.
How exquisite are the gems of this kind of which a faithful
account, accompanied by fac-similes, might be at once gratifying and instructive ! But will the public taste and public
spirit encourage hands to be put in motion' upon such a
design ? Or let us however avoid the virulence of invective !
<
LORENZO. Perhaps you will be pleased to direct us to the
examination of someparticular Psalter contained in this vast
national Book-Magazine?
PHILEMON. My recollection furnishes me just now with
only two that are particularly curious on the score of antiquity and brilliancy of execution. The first, in the early part
of the xivth century, which was snatched from the jaws of
perdition by that worthy book-wight BALDWIN SMITH, and
presented to Queen Mary, * has a vast variety of introductory
forth at Oxford in the year 1814-by the same industrious and respectable
gentleman ?! I feel the force of the interrogatory, and hide my face in shame
among the leaves of the old membranaceous PSALTER above alluded to by Philemon to which said Psalter, methinks, the reader hath good right and reason
to be forthwith introduced. It is numbered 194, at page 429 of the Catalogue
just mentioned, and is briefly described as ' PSALTERIUM ; præfiguntur orationes
quædam Charact. perantiq. 4to. membran.' The ornament, above given, occurs in
the earlier part of it. The writing is in a large coarse gothic, and the vellum is
thick and sombre. The colours are in body-at times rather highly glazedand the touch ofthe artist is firm and accurate. The volume bears strong marks
of being as old as the latter part of the x11th century. The magnificent capital
initial B, prefixed to the first verse of the Psalter, is noticed in a following page.
* worthy book-wight Baldwin Smith, and presented to Queen Mary. ] The
volume here alluded to (Bib. Reg. 2 B. VII. ) merits a particular description ;
as much from its intrinsic curiosity, as from the meagre account of it by Casley,
xcviii FIRST DAY.
illuminations, from subjects furnished by the Old Testament;
but they are in outline, and sometimes sufficiently strange as
well as meagre. Yet, upon the whole, this is a volume ofvery
p. 23. It may be called a quarto ; being about 10 inches by 7. The first 65
leaves are entirely filled with illuminations, in outline, slightly shaded, chiefly
with green and purple ; which relate exclusively to scriptural subjects, and were
apparently executed late in the x11th century. There are texts of scripture
subjoined, written in a small, close, gothic hand, in the French language. Some
of these illuminations, especially of groups of warriors, have great merit : among
which may be noticed those on the reverse of fol . 51, on fol . 52, recto, and
fol. 56—which richly deserve fac- similes ; although I suspect that Strutt has not
entirely overlooked some of these originals . There are scenes of a tender description, equally numerous and equally well executed : reminding us much of the
style of art in the marginal illuminations of the famous ROMAN D'ALEXANDRE,
in the Bodleian library ; of which in due time and place.
On the reverse of folio 66, commences a new style of art : with more colour,
and with gold back-grounds—but we only gain in splendor what we lose in
delicacy and expression. Whole length portraits of Christ, the Apostles, Prophets, &c. with a Calendar, are the succeeding contents ; when, on the recto of
the leaf opposite the commencement of the Psalter, (which immediately follows
the Calendar) we read this partly-defaced inscription , in a gothic type :
This boke was sume tyme ..
· . • and it was his wil
that it shuld by succession all way
go to the • or to
The text of the Psalter, written in a large gothic type, in long lines, (16 to a full
page) with almost every line illuminated more or less-occupies 234 leaves.
The more elaborate illuminations, with ornamented and gold back- grounds, are
almost uniformly clumsy and unsuccessful. Beneath the text however, we have the
same style of art as in the introductory part : outline delineations, but of a gay
character. Games, sports and pastimes, with scenes of hawking and hunting,
(ofno ordinary merit) are found here in abundance. The figures are from 2 to
3 inches in height. On the reverse of the 3rd of the last blank leaves, is this
extraordinary memorandum, in a gothic hand : which is also given by Casley :
Hunc Librum nautis ad exteros transvehendu datu :
spectatus et honestus vir BALDWINUS SMITHUS Londini
a portorijs et vectigalibus retraxit. atq; MARIE illustrissime anglia francia, et hiberniæ REGINE Donavit,
mense Octobri. Anno domini millesimo quingentesimo
quinquagesimo tertio. Regni sui Primo.
Hence the remark of Philemon-concerning the book being snatched from
the jaws of perdition by that worthy book-wight BALDWIN SMITH.' It remains
FIRST DAY. xcix
extraordinary interest. The second, of a date a century
later, is perhaps on many accounts more valuable. The art
displayed in it is rich, striking, and of very considerable
merit. Nor is the volume, in other respects, without peculiar
interest ; for it was once, in all probability, the property of
HENRY VI. * and I would venture no small bet that the piety
only to add that this very singular volume is bound with a large flower, worked
in tambour, upon one side of it ; which said flower might have been the produce
ofthe very needle of Queen Mary herself! —as I make no question of her Majesty
having set an extraordinary value upon the contents of the book.
once, in all probability, the property of Henry VI. ] I am not sure whether
there be not as great a fuss ' made about this precious little volume, as with
any other similar bijou in the whole Cottonian collection . It is noticed by Smith
and Mr. Planta, under Domitian XVII. supposed by them to have been executed
for the use of Richard II. The figure of a royal child, frequently occurring in the
illuminations, is also considered by them as the representation of RICHARD HIMSELF. Strutt has adopted the same notion. The sequel, I apprehend, will prove
each of these conclusions to be erroneous. But we had better commence with
Smith's animated description (p. 135) litterally copied by M. Planta. Psalterium, pulcherrimis figuris, elegantissimisque delineationibus, ornatum ; cum
hymnis, et symbolo Athanasiano. Præmittuntur calendarium, tabulæ conjunctionum lunarium cum variis phasibus lunæ depictis, cycli , et tabulæ festorum
mobilium. Illic plus quam semel extat pictura R. Ricardi 2di. genibus flexis
coram B. Virgine, Jesum in sinu habente. Liber in illius regis usum, dum puer
esset, videtur illuminatus. '
First, as to the period of the execution ofthis volume ; and secondly, respecting
the style of art which it exhibits. The first division of the subject shall be discussed in the words of a most competent judge ; and the reader shall draw his
own conclusion respecting the successful refutation, or otherwise, of the inference
of the learned gentlemen just mentioned. The sentence of this λvμabe5alos
judge is delivered in the following pithy and pleasaunt ' manner, in a letter to
one Rosicrusius. ' With respect to Rich. II. I am inclined to assume the undoubting
formula of Mr. O. of L.: all wrong :-but I have no objection to substituting
Hen. VI. for the following reasons : 1. The kalendar prefixed is French, both in
language and Saints ; very few English being among them. 2. The lunar, &c.
tables, start from A. 1420 : but as poor Richard was murdered in 1400, these
could hardly have been intended for his use ! 3. Henry VI. was crowned at
Paris, A. 1431 , when 10 years old. In one illumination we have a child-king
kneeling before the Virgin, in a surcoat and mantle of England and France, with
apparently S. Louis by his side ; (a beatified king in a robe covered with ficur de
lys) and in another is S. Catherine, seemingly his mother's patroness (her name was
FIRST DAY.
of that monarch induced him to keep this precious manual
carefully deposited in some golden or silver cabinet-under
lock and key, guarded with a dragon like vigilance .
LISARDO. Why all this fear of robbery ?
...
PHILEMON. Because this precious tome contains several
portraits of his Majesty when he was a young gentleman of
about nine years of age. You see him therein, in the most
pious attitudes, by the side of his then tutelary saint, St.
Louis. It has, however, much stronger claims upon our
admiration ; and the artist, whose moral pencil was exercised
in the embellishments of it, has achieved no ordinary effort
Catherine): in a third I suspect the Duke of Bedford to be kneeling by his side,
in a scarlet robe.
"
I am therefore inclined to suppose the book may have been executed for
Hen. VI. at the time of his coronation, in France ; and it is certainly a very
curious performance . ' Well, reader, Richard or Henry ? That is the question ! '
The answer must surely be immediate-for the latter. Strutt however had
supposed the fleur de lis gentleman, with a nimbus round his head, and therefore beyond all doubt intended for a French Saint, to have been THOMAS Of
WOODSTOCK ! A strange, conceited,' but not very witty supposition.
In the second place, as to a description of its contents, with observations upon
the style of art which it betrays. It is an octavo volume of 286 leaves ; measuring seven inches and a half by five and a half. The borders, in gold, now faded,
are very elaborate ; and a full page contains 15 lines , in a large but close gothic
type. The calendar has 10 leaves. On the reverse of the 11th leaf is the
decoration, of which the copper-plate at p. cii, (by Audinet) may give the reader a
pretty accurate notion ; as its fidelity is unquestionable. On the recto of the
12th leaf, the text of the Psalter begins. We have here an illumination divided
into three parts : of which the upper one consists of David and Bathsheba,
beneath is David playing on the harp and below, the figure of HENRY VI. a
handsome child of 10 years of age, is kneeling. The same kind of figure occurs
four times more in the course of the work : namely, on folios 49, 74, 176, and 205.
In the first instance it is nearly defaced in others it is fresh and beautiful—and
always the same in figure and countenance : yet too small (one inch in the whole)
for successful copying. Sometimes the infant monarch is presented, as at folio 49,
to the Virgin, by St. Louis ; and, as at folio 74, by St. Catherine. At folio 176,
his Uncle, the Duke of Bedford (Regent of France) is kneeling by the side of him.
The original of the second copper-plate fac-simile, given at page ciii, occurs
at folio 120, reverse ; and is, I submit, a very choice specimen of architectural
:
FIRST DAY. ci
in the generality of the performances. The borders also are
exceedingly elaborate. But as you seem to be impatient
for a glance at it, look, I beseech you, at the two following
art. On the reverse of folio 73, we observe what may be called a counterpart
of the ensuing reverend gentlemen, in the STALLED NUNS which here ensue.
The bottom portion only of the entire embellishment is given.
T
From folio 148, a series of grave subjects ensues ; including frequent representations of Death, &c. Upon the whole, this precious little volume merits
every attention for its antiquity, its beauty, and intrinsic worth : and I make no
doubt of its being guarded with dragon-like vigilance ' by those to whose preservation it is now entrusted.
: cii FIRST DAY.
specimens which I have caused to be copied, with the
greatest exactness and fidelity, for your gratification. The
colouring must necessarily be considered out of the question ; but the composition cannot fail to excite interest.
LORENZO. Perfectly striking and almost inimitable ! We
FIRST DAY. ciii
have here a sort of morality which might have given a hint
to the author of the well known subject called the Dance of
Death. The architectural accessories, in this second specimen, are rich and sparkling to a degree ! -But I trust you
are not about to shut up so interesting a volume?
civ FIRST DAY.
PHILEMON. Yes : for consider what remains to be discussed ! —and imagine, from these specimens only, what a
diligent examination of the treasures, from which they are
taken, would produce to an ardent, enlightened, and liberal
mind-backed by public encouragement, or invigorated by
private fortune! Indeed, indeed, my excellent good friends,
(for let meforget my relative situation of monarch) I cannot
but grieve at heart, when I see so many fine young capacities,
just emancipated from the indulgent discipline of a college,
and launching upon the wide ocean of human life, without
having their taste directed, their spirit excited, or the LOVE
OF THEIR COUNTRY roused, by an investigation of the performances of their ANCESTORS-by improving some of the best
qualities of the mind, in perpetuating an otherwise perishable art—and by devoting to the protection of the indigent
and ingenious, a small portion only ' of that wealth, the
lavish expenditure of which has too often ruined their constitutions, blasted their characters, and beggared their families !
LORENZO.
LYSANDER.
LISARDO. }
Bravo ! Bravo !
6
PHILEMON. ' I have said.' Let us touch a more pleasing
chord. Perhaps the present will be the fittest place to
notice a very material feature, or branch, or department
(designate it how you please) in the art of illumination,
called INITIAL LETTERS ; or, generally speaking, CAPITAL
INITIALS as these incipient letters are usually large and
ornamental.
BELINDA. I rejoice that you have reached this department
of the subject which forms the discussion for the Day. You
observe that my worthy brother, if you only look around,
has his cabinet graced with not a few of these interesting
and gigantic forms of letter !
FIRST DAY. CV
PHILEMON. His cabinet might be graced with more
unseemly ornaments !
LISARDO. I love them dearly.
ALMANSA. But you are interrupting. Proceed, great
MONARCH OF THE DAY ; and let your sceptre of authority
upon the shoulder of each revolting subject. fall
PHILEMON There will be no occasion for the infliction of
such severe punishment. My subjects are docile and obedient. Of these initials, then-which Montfaucon seems to
think were introduced as early as the eighth century* —take
the following specimens ; fromthe pages of the same learned
Capital Initials-introduced as early as the v111th century. ] Ab octavo jam
sæculo in Manuscriptis Græcis observantur literæ prægrandes, initio operum et
librorum, Calligraphorum arbitratu confictæ : ubi variis hominum, serpentum,
avium, piscium, &c. figuris, singulæ literæ repræsentantur : quarum pro specimine Alphabetum in Tabula datur.' Palæogr. Græca, p. 254. The Plate, here
mentioned, has been copied in part in the following fac- similes. The order is thus : M
K H Y
т п E
O E
In Montfaucon, the alphabet is given entire, in similar characters : but the
specific age of each letter, or of each particular class of letters, is not mentioned.
Indeed, having once ascertained nearly the remotest period of their adoption, it
answers little purpose to trace their genealogical characteristics through succeeding centuries : yet the ENSUING CUTS, in wood, and upon copper, which accompany the CAPITAL LETTER DISQUISITION of Philemon, will be considered, I
trust, as no very unsatisfactory illustration of the subject, from the x1th century.
Astle, p. 76, has given some specimens of early capital initials of a very inferior
description. I could dwell somewhat here upon the drollery and richness of
those very extraordinary capital initials, of which Lambecius has given elaborate
fac-similes, upon copper, in his lib . 11. col. 527, &c. (Edit. Kollarii) but space
and time equally forbid an enlargement of the subject. These embellishments
are quite of the end of the x1vth century, in a large and magnificent German
Bible, executed, as the colophon imports, for the EMPEROR WENCESLAUS, in
3folio volumes tantâ figurarum inauratarum ipsi contextui insertarum multitudine, adeoque eleganti, magnifico et pretioso ornatu marginali decorata et
insignita, ut absque singulari admiratione spectari nequeant.' There's tempting
description for you ! -lover of gold -embossed backgrounds, and rainbow-tinted
VOL. I. g
cvi FIRST DAY.
antiquary-as corroborative ofthe taste and fancy with which
they were oftentimes executed.
The
FIRST DAY. cvii
I shall not attempt to decide at what precise period any
of the foregoing specimens were introduced ; but we may add
that they are Greek capitals, and peculiarly characteristic of
Grecian art. As we approach the twelfth century, especially
in Latin MSS. we observe very whimsical specimens of the
grouping of human figures and of animals. It cannot be
affirmed, however, that such specimens are always in the
best style of art, nor can we readily allow of the propriety
of their introduction in volumes of a grave import-but if you
love ease and whimsicality, look at what here follows -from
an ancient MS. of St. Paul's Epistles, preserved in the library
ofChrist Church College, Oxford. * I could probably select
a more tasteful or intricate specimen ; but in what you
mantles ! The subjects treated of in the capital initials, chosen by Lambecius for
his fac-similes, exhibit chiefly the effeminate and voluptuous mode oflife of that
slothful Bohemian king ; who was dethroned in 1400 domi torpens, vino
ciboque marcens, et lucem dormiendo nocti conjungens '—but have I not almost
deprecated an enlarged account of this splendid and singular performance ?
* St. Paul's Epistles -
in the library of Christ-Church College, Orford. ] This
ancient MS. is preserved in the archive- room attached to the library under
notice. It is a very small folio, or large octavo ; having the text executed
in a lower-case roman letter, with an interlined glossary and marginal explanations : the latter in a very small and neat hand. It is written in ink now
become brown from age ; and, as I suspect, is of the earlier part of the
x11th century. The capital initials, throughout, are really exquisite ; displaying
perfect taste in the arabesque, with occasionally much successful union of the
droll and fantastical. They were originally, as their appearance still indicates,
executed in bistre-colour ; like most of the embellishments of this period.
Never had I greater difficulty in the choice of my subject - among these
bewitching decorations ! But I trust the specimen, given in the ensuing page,
does not falsify this account, nor detract greatly from the taste of the selector.
We shall make another visit or two to this highly-enriched archive-closet-in the
course of this FIRST DAY. Meanwhile, let that excellent bibliographical friend,
(the sole and fortunate possessor of the Kele-printed Christmas Carols) ycleped
the Revd. Henry Cotton, receive our best thanks for affording us, not only a
sight of but leisure to take a tracing from-one of the capital-initial ornaments
ofthe foregoing EPISTOLE PAULI GLOSSATE.
cviii FIRST DAY.
here behold, admit that there is a graceful flow of lines, in
spite of its singularity. Perhaps, however, you ought to be
informed that this fanciful ornament is intended for a P.
You may remember the specimen of grouping from the
early Latin Psalter in the Gough Collection, attached to the
Bodleian Library. The same sombre MS. furnishes us with
FIRST DAY. cix
a particularly resplendent instance of the most complicated,
yet not ungraceful, species of ornament, in the first capitalletter prefixed to the Psalms of David. Of course I mean the
B. There may be a more ancient* (and yet this possesseth a
There may be a more ancient. ] There is a more ancient, and somewhat
similar, yet greatly inferior, specimen of this B-in the valuable Latin and Saxon
Psalter deposited in the MS. Library at Stowe. The reader hath probably already
disported himself in the account of this extraordinary volume, at page liv ante.
The original ofthe specimen alluded to by Philemon, and given in the following
page, is highly painted, in a glazed body colour, chiefly in red and blue ; with
spirited touches in white by way of relief, or strong demarcation. It is certainly
the most elaborate yet graceful specimen of its kind which I remember to have
ever seen.
In this enumeration however of early-decorated Psalters, we must not, in
quest of treasures which are abroad, be wholly unmindful of those more immediately at home. The manuscript library of the RoYAL SOCIETY is enriched
by twoilluminated Psalters of even a much earlier date than the preceding ; one
of them, numbered 60, is considered by Wanley to be of the time of Edward the
Confessor. It has the calendar ornamented with some singular figures of the
signs of the zodiac, and an illumination of the Crucifixion, executed in a very
uncommon and interesting style. This book has also rectangular borders, with
foliage , somewhat in the manner of those of the Ethelwold MS. -belonging to his
Grace the Duke of Devonshire : see p. lix, ante. It should be noticed that there
is an interlineary Saxon version. The other MS. numbered 155, is supposed by
Wanley to have been executed for the greater part in the time of Cuute. It has
also a calendar, and a clever drawing, apparently of St. Benedict, seated between
two monks. This Psalter has borders with foliage, like the preceding, but with
much gold. It contains also some very bold CAPITAL INITIALS : the B among
the rest-but within the sweep or curve of a D, is the apposite representation
of David cutting off the head of Goliah. At the end of this second Psalter are
the ' Cantica Sacræ Scripturæ ; ' to which is prefixed an illumination of St. Benedict, seated, holding a staff in his right hand ; with the figure of a monk, prostrate,
at his feet-holding a book, upon which is inscribed Lib Ps. ' Other figures are
also introduced. In the text of Walter Whytleseye, apud Sparke, p. 173, we
read of a magnificent present made by Godfrey, Abbot of Peterborough, elected
A. D. 1290. Among the various gifts bestowed by him, occurs uni Cardinali,
nomine Gaucilino, dedit quoddam Psalterium litteris aureis et assuris scriptum,
et mirabiliter luminatum. ' O brave Godfrey-and thrice happy Gaucilinus !
I cannot at this moment take upon me to determine whether early Greek MSS.
of the Psalter usually exhibit similar decorations ; but, according to Hardt's
Catalog. Cod. MSS. Græcor, Bibl. Reg. Bavar. (1806-1812, 4to . 5 vol . ) vol. iv.
CX FIRST DAY.
pretty tough longevity) but certainly not a more splendid
instance of intricacy of ornament in this well-known letter.
offr
V
VIR
H
N
FIRST DAY. cxi
LORENZO. I own this is vastly curious and elaborate ;
and trust you have yet a score of them?
PHILEMON. No, my excellent host : for to exhibit other
similar instances would answer very little purpose. But
look at what I am about to place before you. We have
reached the period of CHORAL, or CHURCH-SERVICE BOOKS, *
p. 42, and vol. v. p. 21, there appears to be two MSS. of this kind, one of the
xth, and the other of the x11th century, which are described as titulis et
initialibus miniatis, charactere minuto, antiquo et nitidissimo, ' &c.
"
CHORAL or CHURCH-SERVICE Books. ] My friend Mr. Ottley absolutely
revels in the possession of the most splendid ancient fragments of books of this
description, obtained by him, in Italy, from monasteries or private individuals.
As no names are here mentioned, this general observation will be perfectly
stingless. The copper-plates which belong to this portion of the BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DECAMERON bear evidence of the wealth of my friend's collection—yet
that collection, rich and rare ' as it is, was once of still greater extent. ONE
great and glorious ' sample of ancient art, exhibited in Choral Books, Mr.
Ottley however still possesses ; which must unquestionably be considered as
the Jupiter planet of the system. In other words, it was executed by the
famous DON SILVESTRO DEGLI ANGELI, (of whom see p. cxxv, post) and is
described by Vasari as the chef-d'œuvre both of the artist and of the age.
First, for the dimensions. From the bottom of the picture to the central top,
which is pointed, for the reception of the upper part of the Virgin and her
attendant angels, there are 14 inches. In width the illumination measures 10
inches. The surrounding border, in a sort of tesselated or mosaic squares of
black, yellow, red and blue, is an inch in width.
Secondly, for the subject ; which represents the Death of the Virgin. The corpse is surrounded by all the female relations of the deceased, with the twelve
Apostles, and our Saviour in the centre ; the latter of whom receives in his
arms the departed spirit (in the form of an infant) of his mother. The countenances of this solemn yet splendid group are full of sorrowful expression ; but
in the midst of such a general and almost insupportable ebullition of grief, the
countenance of our Saviour is marked with a mildness, a dignity, and composure,
which are perfectly heavenly. Among the rest, the figure of St. John is emi- nently graceful and expressive ; and the female, at the foot of the Virgin, has a
quiet composed character not unworthy of the pencil of Raffaelle. There are
some lovely countenances among the females ; but to particularise would he
endless. Every head is surrounded by a thick and shining nimbus of gold ;
and, above, the Virgin, ' in glorious majesty,' sits enthroned with eight attendant angels-in attitudes which equally express their piety and rapture. The
whole of that space which is between the assumption of the Virgin, and the group
cxii FIRST DAY.
the very seed-plot, or nursery ground, of such whimsical
decorations. In these books, GIOTTO, CIMABUE, and a
hundred other graphic constellations of various degrees of
magnitude and lustre, diffused their grateful light ; and
below, consists of one broad, highly- raised, and indurated mass of resplendent
gold ! The entire composition, executed in body colours, much glazed, absolutely
partakes of its original freshness and radiance. This magnificent and unique
specimen of ancient art is justly and highly valued by its owner. Indeed it is
beyond all price. I had almost forgotten to notice its age ; which is of the
middle ofthe xivth century.
There are no limits here for even a brief sketch of the progress, popularity,
and final disuse, of these massive aud magnificent volumes of Church- Service :
but the reader will readily suppose that, as the art of printing became generally
exercised throughout Europe, the execution of these Choral Books, by means of
the pen and pencil, was in the same proportion disused . Mr. Woodburn, the
skilful and respectable dealer in old paintings and prints, has several very fine
specimens of them ; and several, about two years ago, were sold by auction by
Mr. Evans--but these exhibited chiefly the decorated capital initials. At a late
sale, however, by Messrs. Leigh and Sotheby, (May 1 , 1816) there were several
lots of entire volumes of these Chants and Services, of a bulk and breadth that
forbade ordinary shoulders to bear them away. They were thus described-and
I consider them to be no unapt appendage to this CHORAL NOTE. They produced
about 21. each at the sale,
933 Cantus Monastici, in atlas folio, on vellum, with Music, the capital letters
illuminated, many of them containing whole-length portraits of Bishops,
Saints, &c. in fine preservation, russia, gilt leaves
936 Codex Membranaceus in quo continentur Lectionarium antiquum, Ad calcem
Calendarium. Sec. XV. Large folio.
Several leaves illuminated, with ornaments in gold and colours, some of
the initials being adorned with male portraits.
937 Codex Membranaceus in quo continentur Beati Hieronymi Opera quædam
selecta. Sec. XIV.
Several leaves, together with the larger initials , are beautifully and
delicately ornamented.
938 Divus Hieronymus ad Mulieres, Cod. membr. Sec. XIV.
The great initial letters are similarly ornamented with those in the preceding article : the ornamented border of the first leaf is remarkably fine.
939 Liber qui dicitur Summa Confessorum seu Joannina, Cod. membr. Sec. XV.
Illuminated, and has also numerous small portraits and other devices in
the initial letters : it formerly belonged to the Monastery of St. Justin, at
Padua.
ASTOR LIDRA
LIBRA
0000000
FAC- SIMILE OF A
CAPITAL INITIAL
From a
Missal executed byFrancesco Veronesi & Giratome dei Libri.
C Atoutthe year 1480
PRINTED BY LAU
THE
STOR
NY
LIBRARY
THE
ASTO
NY
LIBRARY
FACSIMILE OF AN ILLUMINATED CAPITAL INITIAL
From a Choral Book ofthe end of the FIFTEENTH CENTURY. in the Pofcefsion ofW.Y.Ottley Esq
PRINTED BY LAHFE

FAC- SIMILE OF AN ILLUMINATED CAPITAL- INITIAL
ma Choral Book of the Middle of the THIRTEENTH CENTURY, in the pofsefsion of W.Y.Ottley Elg
1
PRINTEDBYTALE
FIRST DAY. cxiii
when you examine the two following specimens, one of the
XIIIth and the other of the xvth century, you will allow that
both the subjects are conceived with sufficient elevation of
mind ; but that the latter shews the improvement which the
lapse of two centuries has effected.
There is no doubt that the Popes and Cardinals of the
time procured the most distinguished artists to decorate
their Missals or Books of Church Service ; and pursuing
the capital-letter subject, pray behold the consummate skill
and success which characterise the pencil of GIROLAMO DEI
LIBRI-in the succeeding initial letter D, wherein Pope
Sixtus IV. and some of his Cardinals are introduced. +
ALMANSA. I am quite charmed with such specimens ;
and wish in my heart that some Girolamo, of the present
day, would introduce the portraits of YOUR MAJESTY and
Privy Council, here solemnly assembled, within the graceful
curvatures of a capital C or D.
940. Cantus Monastici, Codex membran. Sec. XV.
The ornamented initials are of the largest size : in the first St. George
is represented with the Dragon : the whole of great beauty.
943. Cantus Monastici. Sec. XV.
The initials of the different services are very large, and richly ornamented.
The reader will consider the FIRST TWO of the accompanying COPPER
PLATES, from the originals in the possession of Mr. Ottley, as illustrative of the
remark of Philemon.
The COPPER PLATE immediately following the two just mentioned, must
be considered as here alluded to by Philemon. The Pontiff, in his chair, is
robed in white . The figure kneeling is clothed in the red gown of a Cardinal.
Mr. Evans, in his account of this extraordinary Missal (which will be found fully
described in the ensuing pages) imagined that the action between the Pontiff
and the Cardinal represented the counting out of the money by the former for
the payment ofthe artist in the execution of the Missal : but this explanation is
probably rather ingenious than conclusive. The vessel, in the foreground,
seems to be filled with holy water. The entire composition is perfectly enchanting ; and there are few capital initials which will venture to arrogate superiority
over it, on the score of delicacy, grace, and beauty.
cxiv FIRST DAY.
LISARDO. The thought is not very extravagant, my
Almansa ! Let us have our Family Bible illustrated with a
similar ornament. Yet tell me are these beautiful initials
the exclusive decorations of Church-Service Books ?
PHILEMON. By no means. For see, what a lovely illustration of an O, from a MS. ofHorace, (once the property of
Ferdinand I. King of Naples, *) does the following specimen
exhibit ! I know of nothing which exceeds it.
* MS. of Horace-once the property of Ferdinand I. King of Naples. ] The
OPPOSITE COPPER PLATE illustrates the panegyric of Philemon . It is indeed
singularly elegant and beautiful ; and was obtained (as is above intimated) from a
MS. of Horace, once the property of Ferdinand King of Naples. This MS. was
purchased by me for 125l. at the sale, by auction, of the library of the late Mr.
James Edwards. It is thus spiritedly described by Mr. Evans in his Catalogue of
the same Library ; no. 263. This is a manuscript ofthe first splendour, both for
writing and illumination. It was executed for Ferdinand I. king of Naples, who
first introduced printing into his states, and was so ardent a collector of books and
manuscripts, that Mr. Roscoe relates, that the Florentines, to conciliate him in a
rupture, presented him with some fine Manuscripts of the Classics. As the Palle
of Florence are seen among the ornaments, this may be one of them .' There can
be no doubt, I think, but it is : and a more lovely folio volume never graced the
shelves of a collector. Having procured it for the mere purpose of causing the
fac-simile, here alluded to, to be engraved, I disposed of it afterwards to the
Marquis of Douglas for the price at which it had been obtained.
The frontispiece of this MS. contains figures, and is most elaborately executed ;
but the remaining ornaments are chiefly arabesque, and confined to the initial
capitals. The one, HERE GIVEN, is thus coloured. The lateral perpendicular
ornament is in gold, shaded by brown : with deepening shades of crimson. The
fruits are in their appropriate colours : but the hatched background, including
even that upon which the cobweb is painted, is blue ; somewhat darker than
ultramarine. The letter O hath a gold background ; but the square frame is in
apple-green The palle or balls are coloured in imitation of pearl. The outer
wreath is in a crimson or evening-primrose tint : the inner one, in blue-and
the inverted corners of the outer wreath are also in the same blue colour
The effect ofthe whole is perfectly beautiful ; from the soft, glowing, and equallydistributed tone of colour. The letter stands thus in the text :
DI PROFANV
VVLGVS ET
O ARCEO. LIN
GVIS FAVETE
carmina non priuf,
FAC- SIMILE OF A
CAPITAL INITIAL
From a M.S of Horace formerlyin the pofsefsion of Ferdinand I. of Naples.
PRINTED BYLA
ASTOR
TH
NY
LIBRARY
THE
ASTOR
NY
LIBRATE
THE
ASTOR
”
લા
NY
LIBRARY
cxvi FIRST DAY.
letters of a similar or even more fantastical composition, you
would not easily forget the MS. in which they are contained.
chronicle is executed in the same gothic- secretary type. The INITIAL LETTERS
are undoubtedly the attractions of the book. Those on the reverse of the 2d
leaf, and recto of the 3d, contain what were most probably intended for portraits of the Father and Mother of Francis- as I suspect the heads, in the fac
simile given, to be portraits of Francis and his Queen. What is singular, there
are several letters, as at fol. 7, rect. and rev. ) of which the outlines, in a sort of
india- ink colour, are only given ; and on the reverse of fol . 16 there are three
female faces only coloured : the rest of the ornament of this magnificent letter,
(D) nearly six inches square, being in outline. In both instances the back
ground is untouched : so that we know exactly the process or mode by which
the illuminator proceeded in his work. The backgrounds of these initial letters
are generally in a blaze of colour, of red, green, or blue. They are sometimes also
very tastefully managed, in introducing a sombre or quiet tint in the ornaments for
the formation of the letter : as the R, on the reverse offolio 26.
·
"
There are only two other illuminations, which are not engrafted upon an initial
letter. The first has been above described. The second occurs at fol. 19, rev.
and is entitled Comme larceuesque receult la saincte ampolle et la porta sur le
grant autel.' The archbishop, upon horseback, bare- headed, in a white vestment,
carries the ampole ' in his hand : the golden canopy under which he sits being
borne by clerical and lay attendants. The third illumination ( somewhat injured
however) has by much the greatest merit ; and deserves to be published as an
engraving. It occurs on the recto of fol . 21 , and represents Francis I. clothed
in regal robes, standing in the midst of his lords spiritual and temporal. The
following description, from the text, of the respective attires of this splendid
assemblage, may be considered an interesting morceau of costume-painting. My
friend, PALMERIN, in particular, will, I am sure, rejoice to peruse it. Les
Arceuesques et euesques pers de france come dit a este les vngs appres les aultres
... destre pres du roy estoyent reuestus de riches chappes leurs mitres en leurs
testes leurs croces es mains ou aultres latenoyent pour eulx F'imbrices enrichies
de grosses perles gros Rubis saphirs dyamās et aultres choses singulieres et
moult belles a voir. Le[s ] ducz et contes pres du roy a maj senestre estoyent
vestus d'un grāt manteau en couleur purpurie long jusques pres de terre fourre
dermines ouuert par le coste destre et rebraces iusques sur les paule du bras
senestre Aussi vng grant chapperon de mesme couleur et fourrure qui leur
couuroit tout le col et le desus des espaules . Les duct sur leurs bonnetz auoyent
vng chapelet dor massyf en forme de couronne ou y auoit en lieu de fleurs de
lis tout autour du bort, separeement petits trioletz seulement Ainsi quil appartient aux ducz a porter en difference des roys. Les Contes sur leurs bōnetz aussi
auoyent vng sercle dor massif en forme de couronne ou y auoit au bort de dessus
tout autour boutons dor pres lun de laultre ainsi que bien grosses perles qui est
ce que les contes doibuent porter en difference de ducz.'
FIRST DAY. cxvii
LORENZO. You need not adduce further specimens, good
Philemon as the greater part of those already given only
completes our despair of rivalry in the present times.
It only remains to observe that this extremely curious, as well as splendid,
manuscript Chronicle-being a sort of Diary of the Domestic or Private Life of
Francis I.-is executed in double columns, in a hand before described, and that
it appears to terminate abruptly on the reverse of the 29th leaf: there being
3 following leaves ruled, but not written upon. It concludes with the king's
⚫ dining and going to mass '—which is constantly mentioned in the course of the
Chronicle. The condition of the illuminations, with some few exceptions, is quite
extraordinary. This MS. was purchased by me at the sale of Mr. Edwards's
library for 100l.—with a view of making its ornaments and contents subservient
to the entertainment of the reader of this work. The reader shall judge whether
such object have been accomplished. That volume now enriches the choice cabinet
of Mr. John North ; who obtained it from me at the price for which it was
purchased at the sale.
The present seems to be a fit place to have a little further gossip respecting
CAPITAL INITIALS. The practice of introducing them, by the aid of the illuminator, was byno means wholly set aside upon the prevalence of the art of printing.
It ceased however, generally speaking ; unless in volumes (as we have just noticed)
confined to the boudoirs of monarchs and noblemen. In the library at Hafod,
its late amiable possessor shewed me, with peculiar zest, one of the most splendid
and gorgeous volumes of this description that can possibly be seen. It was
executed for Philip IV. King of Spain, in the year 1657. The binding-in red
velvet, with gold and silver filligree upon the sides, raised coat of arms in the
centre, upon silver washed with gold-forms no mean approach to the contents of
the volume! The first 3 leaves are blank : the four following contain figures,
on each side, about 7 inches high, with appropriate back-grounds, and arabesque
borders : extending, in the whole, to about 12 inches and a half in height. Each
ofthese pages is thus illuminated ; 1. A figure (qu. St. Peter?) with a cross in his
left hand, and a book in his right : red curtain behind : cherub at each corner :
beneath, the word DON. 2. A figure upon horse-back trampling upon the
dying and the dead : beneath, we read PHILIPPO. 3. Two angels over a
naked man, in the midst of roses : he is bleeding as if from the punctures ofthe
thorns. The angels are about to clothe him with drapery : beneath, QVARTO.
4. A female figure, crowned, kneeling, and looking up to heaven : dead and
dying figures around her : above, is Christ : at the bottom of the picture, POR
LA. 5. A whole-length figure of the Madonna, surrounded by cherubim- with
a child (Salvator Mundi) in her lap ; another at her side -the cherubim is in
gold and brown : very clever-beneath, GRACIA. 6. The crucifixion -very
superior, as an effort of art, to either and all the preceding. The clouds are
beautifully managed ; and the blood, gushing from the side and feet of the dying
O
FAC SIMILE OF CAPITAL INITIAL
From a MS. of Les Croniques et Gestes du Roy Francoys 1.
In thepossession ofJohn Noret Jog
Freeman sculport.
FAINTEDBY AKS
FIRST DAY. CXV
LORENZO. You are right. The composition is indeed
delicious.
PHILEMON. Let me now, as the last specimen to be
adduced, present you with something of rather a whimsical,
if not monstrous, appearance ; but as it brings down our
illustrations towards the middle of the sixteenth century, we
may fairly close the discussion of this branch of the subject.
Observe, I intreat you, what a striking melange the following
P exhibits !
BELINDA. Extraordinary indeed ! The gothic age seems
revived in it.
PHILEMON. Not exactly so, either : for know that this
formidable P belongs to a Chronicle executed expressly for
FRANCIS I . * -and if you could only see several other capital
a Chronicle executed expresslyfor FRANCIS I. ] The Chronicle here alluded to
(from which the FIFTH COPPER- PLATE capital initial, accompanying this description, is given) also belonged to the late Mr. James Edwards, and is described at
no. 672, in the Catalogue of his Library. The full title, written in blue ink, in the
gothic character, is thus : Les Croniques et gestes Des trehaulx et tresvertueux
faitz Du Trescrestien Roy Francoys Premier de ce nom. Comacees autēps de son
aduenemet a la couronne Qui fut Lan de gee nře sr. Mil. v . xiiij. Le ludj.
p[re]mier Ior . du moys Premier Io . de la sepmaye Et p[ er] Ior. de là en bōne
estraye.' Mr. Evans not inaptly describes it as a magnificent manuscript on
vellum, with splendid miniatures and highly ornamented capitals at the beginning of each chapter, of which many are six inches by five, displaying all the
richness of invention and grandeur of execution to which the art of illumination
had arrived. The first illumination occupies the whole page, fifteen inches by
ten and a half, and represents Francis on his throne, surrounded by his court,
and receiving the book from the author. The arms of Francis the First, quartered with those of his first wife, Clande de France, are on each side of the
frame-work which surrounds the picture : her arms are painted separately in a
cordon. Bound in green velvet. '
Thus far Mr. Evans : but the illumination just described, although the largest,
is perhaps the most indifferent in the volume ; and certainly not by the same hand which executed the remainder, The countenance of Francis bears no resemblance to the received portrait of that monarch. The title, just given, is over the
capital initial ( P) of which the OPPOSITE PLATE is a fac- simile. The remainder
of this 2d leaf is written in a gothic character, with golden letters. The entire
cxvi FIRST DAY.
letters of a similar or even more fantastical composition, you
would not easily forget the MS. in which they are contained.
chronicle is executed in the same gothic- secretary type. The INITIAL LETTERS
are undoubtedly the attractions of the book. Those on the reverse of the 2d
leaf, and recto of the 3d, contain what were most probably intended for portraits of the Father and Mother of Francis- as I suspect the heads, in the fac
simile given, to be portraits of Francis and his Queen. What is singular, there
are several letters, as at fol . 7, rect. and rev. ) of which the outlines, in a sort of
india-ink colour, are only given ; and on the reverse of fol . 16 there are three
female faces only coloured : the rest of the ornament of this magnificent letter,
(D) nearly six inches square, being in outline. In both instances the back
ground is untouched : so that we know exactly the process or mode by which
the illuminator proceeded in his work. The backgrounds of these initial letters
are generally in a blaze of colour, of red, green, or blue. They are sometimes also
very tastefully managed, in introducing a sombre or quiet tint in the ornaments for
the formation of the letter : as the R, on the reverse of folio 26.
·
There are only two other illuminations, which are not engrafted upon an initial
letter. The first has been above described. The second occurs at fol . 19, rev.
and is entitled Comme larceuesque receult la saincte ampolle et la porta sur le
grant autel.' The archbishop, upon horseback, bare- headed, in a white vestment,
carries the ampole ' in his hand : the golden canopy under which he sits being
borne by clerical and lay attendants. The third illumination ( somewhat injured
however) has by much the greatest merit ; and deserves to be published as an
engraving. It occurs on the recto of fol . 21 , and represents Francis I. clothed
in regal robes, standing in the midst of his lords spiritual and temporal. The
following description, from the text, of the respective attires of this splendid
assemblage, may be considered an interesting morçeau of costume-painting. My
friend, PALMERIN, in particular, will, I am sure, rejoice to peruse it. Les
Arceuesques et euesques pers de france come dit a este les vngs appres les aultres
... destre pres du roy estoyent reuestus de riches chappes leurs mitres en leurs
testes leurs croces es mains ou aultres latenoyent pour eulx F’imbriees enrichies
de grosses perles gros Rubis saphirs dyamās et aultres choses singulieres et
moult belles a voir. Le[s] ducz et contes pres du roy a maj senestre estoyent
vestus d'un grāt manteau en couleur purpurie long jusques pres de terre fourre
dermines ouuert par le coste destre et rebraces iusques sur les paule du bras
senestre Aussi vng grant chapperon de mesme couleur et fourrure qui leur
couuroit tout le col et le desus des espaules . Les ducz sur leurs bonnetz auoyent
vng chapelet dor massyf en forme de couronne ou y auoit en lieu de fleurs de
lis tout autour du bort, separeement petits trioletz seulement Ainsi quil appartient aux ducz a porter en difference des roys. Les Contes sur leurs bōnetz aussi
auoyent vng sercle dor massif en forme de couronne ou y auoit au bort de dessus
tout autour boutons dor pres lun de laultre ainsi que bien grosses perles qui est
ce que les contes doibuent porter en difference de ducz.'
FIRST DAY. cxvii
LORENZO. You need not adduce further specimens, good
Philemon: as the greater part of those already given only
completes our despair of rivalry in the present times.
It only remains to observe that this extremely curious, as well as splendid,
manuscript Chronicle-being a sort of Diary of the Domestic or Private Life of
Francis I.-is executed in double columns, in a hand before described, and that
it appears to terminate abruptly on the reverse of the 29th leaf: there being
3 following leaves ruled, but not written upon. It concludes with the king's
' dining and going to mass -which is constantly mentioned in the course ofthe
Chronicle. The condition of the illuminations, with some few exceptions, is quite
extraordinary. This MS. was purchased by me at the sale of Mr. Edwards's
library for 100%.—with a view of making its ornaments and contents subservient
to the entertainment of the reader of this work. The reader shall judge whether
such object have been accomplished. That volume now enriches the choice cabinet
of Mr. John North; who obtained it from me at the price for which it was
purchased at the sale.
The present seems to be a fit place to have a little further gossip respecting
CAPITAL INITIALS. The practice of introducing them, by the aid of the illuminator, was byno means wholly set aside upon the prevalence of the art of printing.
It ceased however, generally speaking ; unless in volumes (as we have just noticed)
confined to the boudoirs of monarchs and noblemen. In the library at Hafod,
its late amiable possessor shewed me, with peculiar zest, one of the most splendid
and gorgeous volumes of this description that can possibly be seen. It was
executed for Philip IV. King of Spain, in the year 1657. The binding-in red
velvet, with gold and silver filligree upon the sides, raised coat of arms in the
centre, upon silver washed with gold-forms no mean approach to the contents of
the volume ! The first 3 leaves are blank : the four following contain figures,
on each side, about 7 inches high, with appropriate back-grounds, and arabesque
borders : extending, in the whole, to about 12 inches and a half in height. Each
ofthese pages is thus illuminated ; 1. A figure (qu. St. Peter ?) with a cross in his
left hand, and a book in his right : red curtain behind : cherub at each corner :
beneath, the word DON. 2. A figure upon horse-back trampling upon the
dying and the dead : beneath, we read PHILIPPO. 3. Two angels over a
naked man, in the midst of roses : he is bleeding as if from the punctures of the
thorns. The angels are about to clothe him with drapery : beneath, QVARTO.
4. A female figure, crowned, kneeling, and looking up to heaven : dead and
dying figures around her : above, is Christ : at the bottom of the picture, POR
LA. 5. A whole- length figure of the Madonna, surrounded by cherubim-with
a child (Salvator Mundi) in her lap ; another at her side -the cherubim is in
gold and brown: very clever-beneath, GRACIA. 6. The crucifixion - very
superior, as an effort of art, to either and all the preceding. The clouds are
beautifully managed ; and the blood, gushing from the side and feet ofthe dying
exviii FIRST DAY.
LISARDO. Even so. Proceed therefore with such other
branch of our illumination-discussion as may seem more fit
and interesting.
LYSANDER. Suppose you enter at once upon the subject
of Decorated Missals, Hours, and Offices !?
PHILEMON. With all my heart. Yet what a piebald
topic of discussion ! What a meadow of daisies, cowslips,
and butter-cups -rather, what a garden of anemones, tulips,
carnations, and roses, of every hue and fragrance, does the
MISSAL THEME present to the enraptured fancy of the
Novice, or to the more cautious judgment of the Virtuoso !?
Be present, spirits of other times ! —of GIOTTO, Cimabue,
ODERIGI, FRANCO BOLOGNESE, SILVESTRO, and above all,
of CYBO, MONK of the GOLDEN ISLES ! *
Saviour, has a thrilling effect . The countenance also is very fine : and the general
appearance is as if it were executed upon ivory : beneath, DE DIOS. 7. Portrait
of Philip IV. in armour, with red sash and Spanish puffed breeches : legs bare :
helmet and feather on one side : a globe before him: a truncheon is in his hand ;
and a gold curtain is behind : beneath, REI DE. The 8th illumination, which
represented the royal arms of Spain, in gold, has been CUT OUT as well as the
9th, which contained the genealogical tree of the House of URDANETE.
All the preceding inscriptions are in Roman capitals, gilt, upon a dark red
ground. Then commences the text : which is only a law suit ! Each page has a
square border, 1 inch in breadth, of black exterior, and gold, red, green, or brown,
within arabesque and fanciful embellishments : Capital Initials, square Roman or
Italic text in large italic , brownish ink. The initials are broad and bold, and
exceedingly beautiful-upon various coloured grounds, relieved by gold, shaded.
Many lines, in each page, are also in small capital letters in gold, upon a ground
of red, blue, gold, green, or violet. At the end are various signatures in faded
ink. The name of the artist who executed this surprisingly magnificent volume
was FRANCIS DE HERERA DE SEVILLA. Such is the rough and rapid description which I made, with both the book and its owner sub oculis ,' about two
years ago ! Each probably is from henceforth taken from me !
* CYBO, MONK OF THE GOLDEN ISLES ! ] While Philemon is lifting up his
sceptre of invocation, and rushing onward with a sort of Sibylline inspiration to
the description of his favourite Missals and Offices, let me gently request the
reader to descend with me to these lower regions of simple narrative and sober
disquisition and, if he please, we will sit down quietly by the side of each
FIRST DAY. cxix
LISARDO. Where are we?
ALMANSA. Whither do you transport us ?
LYSANDER. Such a magnificent appellative Monk of
the Golden Islands !!'
other, and discourse pleasantly about this wondrous Monk of the Golden Islands.'
In the first place, however, if the said reader expresseth any desire to know particularly about GIOTTO, CIMABUE, and the illustrious et ceteras, above mentioned,
he may, at his convenience, betake him to the splendid publication of Mr. W.
Y. Ottley, entitled The Italian School of Design-where he shall read, to his
heart's content-charmed at the same time by fac-similes of their compositionsrespecting the two ancient wights just mentioned ; together with an account of
sundry other ancient and equally eminent brandishers of the pencil. Vasari and
Baldinucci of course will not fail to be consulted ; especially when the curious
enquirer is told that, from the pages of the latter, ( Sec. ii . Dec. 8. ed. 1686.) he
receives the following faithfully translated narrative — which hath to name,'
The Monk of the Golden Islands.
At this period [ 1370] flourished the Monk of the Golden Islands, descended
from the ancient and very noble family of CYBO of Genca,whose armorial bearings,
being a set of dies, show, (with the word Cybo [ xbos] which in Greek signifies
a die) that it is remotely sprung from Greece. According to some, our Monk
was born in the city of Genoa, in the year 1326, and from having passed his
days in piety in the Hieres isles, anciently called Stecadi, he was surnamed the
MONK OF THE GOLDEN ISLANDS. He assumed the religious habit in the
monastery of San Onorato, in the island of Lerino, which lies off the coast of
Cannes, near to Antibes. There, besides his study of monastic discipline, he
cultivated that of sacred and polite literature, and the Art of Painting ; in all
which, as we shall presently show, he made so great a progress, that, at his
death, it was a subject of doubt whether he excelled most as a monk, a theologian, a poet, an historian, or a painter. To begin with what relates to painting ;
as our more immediate object : in his time not only a superior style of design
and colouring having been discovered by GIOTTO, and propagated through
Europe, but also a beautiful mode of colouring very small figures and other
objects, which we call miniature-painting ; and of which Giotto himself had produced wonderful specimens at Rome, and elsewhere, as had also his scholars
and contemporaries, in imitation of him ; it was not surprising that our GOOD
MONK, who added to a great natural genius for painting, a superior degree
of talent in writing all kinds of hands, should take pleasure, in particular, in
the beautiful art of miniature- painting. For this purpose, then, he used in spring
and autumn, to retire for some days, in company with another monk, a lover
of similar studies, to a little hermitage he had in the Hieres Isles (in which his
CXX FIRST DAY.
LORENZO. Our Monarch is wandering —
BELINDA. Peace ! -beware of his sceptre upon your
shoulders !
monastery of Lerino had a small church) not so much for the sake of giving himself up more completely to holy exercises, as for recreation, and to afford his
mind a little relaxation from the uninterrupted labours of his profession. '
Here, at certain times of the day, he would walk abroad to contemplate,
not only the beautiful prospects there offered by the shores of these islands, the
mountains, the villages, and the sea itself; but also the herbs, the flowers, the
trees, the fruits, the rarer fishes of the sea, the birds of the air, and the little
animals of the earth ; all which he would draw, and imitate in a wonderful
manner and these drawings he would afterwards make use of to copy into
most beautiful books composed by himself, and of which we are about to speak.
The monks of the monastery of S. Onorato at this time possessed A LIBRARY,
which had formerly been celebrated as the NOBLEST and LARGEST IN ALL
EUROPE, because it had been enriched by the Earls of Provence, Kings of
Naples, and others, with the choicest books, in all sciences and arts, which could
be wished for by men of letters. This library had been thrown into confusion
and reduced to a very bad condition through the intestine wars between the
princes of Beauce, Carlo di Durazzo , Raimond de Touraine, and others, who laid
claim to the Earldom of Provence, in opposition to the Earls and lawful possessors
ofthe same. The monks therefore gave to our painter the care of this library,
and in a short time he placed the whole in its pristine order, at least as far as
lay in his power ; for he found, by a memorandum of it made formerly by one
Ermete, a noble of Provence, and monk also of the same monastery, by order of
the deceased second King of Arragon and Earl of Provence, that a great many of
the books had been taken away, and others of little worth put in their places.'
'According to Nostradamus, in his Lives ofthe Provençal Poets, ( who flourished
in the times of the Kings of Naples) our Monk found in his researches, a BOOK,
containing the names of all the Noble and Illustrious Families of Provence,
Arragon, Italy, and France, with their arms and alliances ; and also another, in
which were works in rhime of Provençal Poets, collected by the said Ermete,
by order of the above named king ; which, together with the lives and works of
other Provençal poets, down to his time (found dispersed in that great library,
and elsewhere) our monk transcribed UPON VELLUM, and having formed them
into a book, with most excellent miniatures by his own hand, he presented it
to Louis II. father of Renato, King of Naples and Earl of Provence, of which
there appeared afterwards numerous copies .
... From various books also in the library, and in other places,
our monk, after much study, composed another beautiful work on the Actions
and the Victories ofthe Kings of Arragon, Earls of Provence ; which being copied
with his own hand, in a very beautiful character, together with a volume, of the
FIRST DAY. cxxi
PHILEMON. Your monarch is not wandering-save in the
regions of truth : viewed probably through the medium of
an enthusiastic imagination. Cybo, Monk of the Golden
Islands, approach ! --and, with sundry other spirits, nearly as
' choice ' and free -aid, by your potent yet invisible interpositions, the attempt to render justice to those wonders of
the pencil of which your venerable efforts must be considered as the prototypes !
6
LORENZO. Which be the names of those other choice
and free spirits ' alluded to by our Monarch ?
LISARDO. His Majesty, I make no doubt, will readily
mention them.
PHILEMON. Most freely-if I could trust to my memory
for the recapitulation. First, however, and far more ancient
than Cybo, appear the venerable forms of DAGEUS and
ULTAN!-*
OFFICIES OF THE VIRGIN, enriched with very beautiful miniatures taken from
his fine collection of drawings, he presented to Jiolanda of Arragon, the mother
ofKing Renato, by whom they were held in high estimation .' This extraordinary
character is supposed to have died in his monastery in the year of our Lord 1408 ;
about the year, if I recollect aright, in which our GoWER (a great poetical
illuminator ! ) gave up the ghost.
And now, lover of graphic chit-chat, dids't ever peruse any thing half so
pleasing? Thank Baldinucci for the same ; and thank also (for I loath strutting
in borrowed plumage) Mr. Turner, for the treat afforded by the foregoing
version from the gossipping Baldinucci.
* DAGEUS and ULTAN. ] The reader, I apprehend, will be as prone to express
his marvel ' of these uncouth names, as the fair Almansa is above. They are
however by no means non- entities : for what saith the learned Dr. O'Conor in
his Rerum Hibernicarum Scriptores Veteres, 1814, 4to . p. clxxvii, &c ? Truly, after
quoting a curious passage from Giraldus Cambrensis (in his Topog. Hibern. 1603,
fol . p. 730) in praise of the general ' cunning ' and beauty of early Irish MSS.-
and of one of the Gospels, (called Codex S. Brigidæ Kildarensis) in particular, seen by him in the x11th century-the said learned Doctor speaks of
the abovementioned Dagæus, a monk and Abbas Inisceltraensis,' who flourished
in the early part of the vith century, and died in the year 587—a skilful
calligraphist—who not only wrote many books with his own hand, but even
VOL. I. h
cxxii FIRST DAY.
ALMANSA. What names ! —and what ' Spirits' are these ?
PHILEMON. They are both of Irish extraction ; and
shone in their days (some thousand years agone) the very
Constellations of Book-Illuminators. Nor shall the episcopal OSMUND, * of the x1th century, be forgotten in this
manufactured and ornamented bindings, in gold, silver, and precious stones !' A
word or two now for ULTAN.Ethelwolf, in a metrical epistle to Egbert, at
that time resident in Ireland with a view of collecting MSS. , thus extols one
Ultan, an Irish monk, celebrated for his talent in adorning booksEx quibus est ULTAN, præclaro nomine dictus,
Comptis qui potuit notis ornare libellos.'
And Leland (Collect. vol. ii. p. 364) designates the said Ultan as being‘Scriptor
et Pictor librorum optimus.' Harpsfield also makes honourable mention of him :
Ultanus qui politè et concianè libros sacros exscribere solebat. ' Thus much
from the erudite and instructive pages of Dr. O'Conor.
·
"
"
the episcopal OSMUND. ] The art of illuminating books was much practised
by the clergy, and even by some in the highest stations in the church . " The
famous OSMUND (says Brompton, Chron. col. 977) who was consecrated Bishop
of Salisbury, A. D. 1076, did not disdain to spend some part of his time in
writing, binding, and illuminating books.' Henry's Hist. of Gr. Britain, vol. vi.
p. 226. Again-from the same valuable pages ; although Montfaucon, De
Vaines, Peignot, and Lambinet, might easily furnish ample materials to swell
these illumination-memoranda. The illuminators and painters of this period
(XI. and x11th centuries) seem to have been in possession of a considerable
number of colouring materials, and to have known the arts of preparing and
mixing them, so as to form a great variety of colours. In the specimens of their
miniature- paintings that are still extant, we perceive not only the fine primary colours, but also various combinations of them. There is even some appearance
that they were not ignorant of the art of painting in oil, from the following
precept of Henry III. dated 1239. " Pay out of our treasury, to Ovo the goldsmith, and Edward his son, one hundred and seventeen shillings and ten pence
(equal to 881 sterling of our present money) for oil, varnish, and colours bought,
and pictures made, in the chamber of our Queen at Westminster," &c. vol. vi.
p. 227 : see also vol. x . p. 213. I have more than once intimated, in the course
of these notes, the possibility or even probability of oil being mixed up in the
colours of the more ancient illuminations ; and especially in those seen in the
Duke of Devonshire's famous Saxon Missal : see p. lix, ante.
While upon the subject of ancient calligraphy (referring the reader to Mabillon,
De Re Diplom. p. 43-to Montfaucon's Pal. Græc. p. 4 , 5 , 22 -to Bandini,
Cat. MSS. Grac. vol. i. p. 22, as well as to Astle, Casley, and Mr. Horne's
Introd. to Bibliography, vol . i . p. 84-143-for information respecting the liquid,
FIRST DAY. cxxiii
muster-roll of monastic artists. He appears to have been
rather shy of his labours ; yet I make no doubt that the
historian Brompton saw more than one precious specimen
of his pencil which hath long since perished in obscurity.
whether ofgold, or various-coloured inks, with which the calligraphists performed
their offices) let me introduce to the notice of some of the uninitiated in ancient
scription-a representation of the INK-STAND, not of Dagæus, nor of Ultan, nor
ofOsmund ; but of ST. DENIS, the first Bishop of Paris : as copied from the first
plate of Montfaucon's Palæog. Græc. p. 22. Note, however. Montfaucon does
not say it absolutely was the very ink-stand of St. Denis : but he makes the
following cautious and most wise ' periphrasis : In thesauro Monasterii S.
Dionysii in Francia, est Atramentarium remotissimæ vetustatis, ad usum olim, ut
putant, S. Dionysii primi Episcopi Parisiensis,' &c. p. 23. He then goes on to
describe it minutely: but the thing shall here speak for itself-premising, that it
is attached to a tablet, with hinges, &c. Admit, knowing reader, that the ornaments round this ink-bucket, (for so it rather seemeth to be) are at once elegant
and uncommon.
cxxiv FIRST DAY.
To revert, however, to the Italian Artists of the middle
ages. Let not the labours of ODERIGI D'AGOBBIO* be here
forgotten : an artist whose name has been consecrated, as it
were, in the immortal pages of Dante.
LISARDO. These notices delight me. Proceed with some
half- score of them !
PHILEMON. You must excuse me. I have before frankly
confessed the treachery of my memory in these matters ; and
therefore I can only further observe that FRANCO BOLOGNESE
and DON SILVESTRO† kept up the celebrity of the art, of
* the labours of ODERIGI D'AGUBBIO. ] My best bow is again due to Mr.
Turner for the following memoranda relating to this extraordinary artist, from
the Notizie de' Professori di Disegno, (Sec. I. Dec. iv. p. 54. ) of Baldinucci :
who has entered pretty largely into an examination of the few notices' extant
relating to him. Brevity must however be my object here.
ODERIGI appears
to have been a native of the city of GOBBIO, or Agobbio, in Umbria, a disciple
of Cimabue, and an excellent illuminator, but too prone to arrogate a superiority over all his contemporaries -as Dante has introduced him in his Purgatorio (Canto XI. ) thus lamenting his presumption :
' O!' I exclaim'd
'Art thou not Oderigi, art not thou
Agobbio's glory, glory of that art
Which they of Paris call the limner's skill ?'
Brother !' said he, with tints , that gayer smile,
Bolognian Franco's pencil lines the leaves.
His all the honour now ; mine borrow'd light.
In truth I had not been thus courteous to him,
The whilst I liv'd, through eagerness of zeal
For that preeminence my heart was bent on.
Here of such pride the forfeiture is paid.
Nor were I even here ; if, able still
To sin, I had not turn'd me unto God. ' (CARY. )
He is conjectured to have worked at Rome, at the same time with GIOTTO, in
illuminating books for the library in the Papal palace : but excepting some fragments of his labours, which Vasari says he possessed, all his works are supposed
to have perished.
FRANCO BOLOGNESE and DON SILVESTRO. ] Franco Bolognese was the
scholar of Oderigi d'Agobbio. He flourished about the year 1310, and illuminated many books for the Vatican library. He is said to have pursued painting
FIRST DAY. CXXV
which we are speaking, till towards the end of the xivth
century ; when BARTOLOMEO, the Abbot, and GHERARDO
a Florentine, continued it into the xvth century-at which
also, and to have been the first who introduced that art into Bologna, where he
founded a school for it. Vasari says he was possessed of specimens of his works
both in illumiuations and paintings. Baldinucci, Sec. II. Dec. i. edit. 1686. Of
DON SILVESTRO, a more enlarged account is here presented to the reader ; as
we must consider him, with his brother monk and calligraphist, JACOPO FIOREN
TINO, to have been a great Choral Book Man (see p. cx1, ante) and in many
respects of most distinguished celebrity. He is mentioned by Vasari, and by Baldinucci as being A Camaldulan Monk of the Monastery degli Angeli at
Florence-a Miniature-Painter.' The following is from the latter, ut sup.
"
It is just, that, amongst those ofwhom we have made mention, as following
the example of the famous Giotto, and applying themselves, in those first ages
of the revival of painting, to illumination, I make some mention of DON SILVESTRO, a Camaldulan monk of the above monastery ; who executed works so
beautiful for their care and design, that they deserved the applause not only of monarchs, but even of professors in the best age of art. But it must first
be known, that about the year 1340, there came into the aforesaid monastery, a
monk of holy manners named Don JACOPO FIORENTINO ; who, valuing every
moment of time which was not employed upon his monastic duties, had acquired
by great study, a style of writing in that kind of large character, which is sought
after for Choir books, (which, for the most part, are written UPON VELLUM) and
for this he was with good reason ranked amongst the most excellent writers of
this class that had ever gone before him, or even succeeded him for several centuries after. He wrote as many as twenty pieces of Choir books for his
monastery, which were the largest that Italy had ever yet seen, and also a great
number for Rome, and Venice, and particularly for the Camaldulan monastery
of Sts. Michel and Matthew in Murano ; for which reason he was not only celebrated during his life by every one who knew his great excellence (and particularly by the very learned D. Paolo Orlandini, a monk of his order, who
composed many Latin verses in his praise), but after his death, his brother monks
chose to preserve with becoming care that HAND which had laboured so piously
and so excellently for the service of SACRED SINGING !!
' Now, our Don Silvestro, (of whom we are about to speak) who was most
admirable in the art of illuminating, happening to live , at this time, in the same
monastery with Don Jacopo, was the person who, with such marvellous art and
care, adorned with his figures all the above-named books ; which being seen, as
we have said, by the greatest artists of the best ages of painting, were highly
praised and we know that his holiness Pope Leo X. coming to our city of
Florence, wished to see and examine them individually, and confessed that he
had often heard them praised by his father LORENZO THE MAGNIFICENT. And
it is said that, after having examined and admired them all, whilst they were
:-
cxxvi FIRST DAY.
period there flourished a set of professional artists, or illuminators, embodied into a society called The Corporation ofSt.
Luke. * The Society however was of Florentine extraction.
lying open onthe desks of the choir, he exclaimed in these or similar words : If
these were according to the use ofthe Romish Church, and not, as they are , of the
monastic and Camaldulan order, we would have some of them-giving an
adequate reward-for the Church of St. Peter,'-where two were already preserved, which were considered to be the work of these monks. So much was
Don Silvestro esteemed by all, and particularly by the monks, that the latter, on
his death, chose to confer on him the same honour as they had conferred on Don
Jacopo: namely, to preserve his right hand, which had performed such great works,
to eternize his memory. ' See an account of Silvestro's chef-dœuvre, at p. cxi. ante.
Where rest now the ( pickled,' is a most odious and unsavory expression ! )
embalmed right hands ' of these book-adorning monastic brothers ? I own I
should prefer them, in my cabinet, to the choicest mummy that ever had its
perpendicular resting place against the walls of the most magnificent Ægyptian
catacomb.
•
* a Society called THE CORPORATION OF ST. LUKE. ] Let us first pay due
attention to BARTOLOMEO and GHERARDO. BARTOLOMEO Abbate flourished
about the middle of the xvth century ; and died, according to Vasari, in the
year 1461. He was abbot of St. Clemente at Arezzo, and one of the finest illuminators of his time ; having executed several works for the monks of his own
abbey of Arezzo-and particularly a MISSAL, which was presented to Pope
Sixtus IV, having, in the first leaf thereof, a most beautiful representation of our
Saviour's passion. Another Missal, by him, was in the cathedral at Lucca in
Vasari's time. Vasari, vol. i . p. 354, edit. 1697. GHERARDO was a Florentine,
and painter as well as illuminator. He flourished , according to Vasari, in 1470.
We shall speedily, both in the text and notes, follow up the sequel of these
Missal Illuminators- beginning with FRANCESCO VERONESE. Now then for a
little gossip connected with
"
The Society called THE CORPORATION of ST. LUKE. This Society was first
established at Florence, about the beginning of the xivth century, and is noticed
by Vasari; vol. i. p. 129. Among the more particular accounts of it, as an
establishment at Antwerp, may be placed that given by Mons. JEAN DES
ROCHES- in his lecture or memoir upon the Origin of the art of Printing ' -read
in the Imperial Academy at Brussels (of which he was secretary) on the 8th of
January, 1777. I chose to have nothing to do, here or hereafter, with Mons.
des Roches's silly hypothesis respecting this origin, (namely, that printing was
invented by a fidler, or instrument maker, of the name of LEWIS, before the year
1350) but shall only notice a very curious document (as it is justly allowed to be
byBreitkopf, the able commentator upon Des Roches) brought forward by a friend
ofthe latter who writes to him in the following manner : Having occasion to
make an accurate Catalogue of all the persons contained in the Archives of the
FIRST DAY. cxxvii
LYSANDER. I wish you
almost forgotten Artists.
could shew us specimens of these
PHILEMON. I regret that I am unable to do so : but the
Fraternity of St. Luke at Antwerp, I found, among other things, a Book written
in a very ancient hand, containing chiefly the privileges and regulations of that
Fraternity-collated by the celebrated Cornelius Graphæus, Secretary of State,
who died in 1558. The first piece that occurs in that book (marked No. I. ) is
likewise the oldest : at least according to date. It is an act of the Senate in
behalf of THE CORPORATION OF ST. LUKE, dated the 22d of July, A. D. 1442 :
and relates to taking up the Mastership, the regulation of the Fraternity, their
apprentices,' &c. Des Roches and his friend struggle lustily for the word
Prenters,' (introduced in this act ) being intended to convey Printers of Books ;'
but Breitkopf knocks them both down with a mere bulrush in argument! He
admits, however, that, ' If the lecture of Mr. Des Roches have left no other
recommendations in elucidating the history of the invention of printing, it yet
deserves every praise for having paved the way towards a discovery of the origin
of these performances by making us acquainted with the Society of Professors of
the Fine Arts in the fraternity of St. Luke at Antwerp. ' A little further, he
goes on to observe, in a note, that, ' at the commencement of the xvith century,
in Paris and Orleans only, there were upwards of TEN THOUSAND SCRIBES ;
whose art however, by the adoption of printing, became of little use. They were
of course in a great degree destitute of subsistence.' Dict. du Gens. du Monde ;
vol. iii. p. 120. These are doubtless rather interesting anecdotes ; and I am
indebted for the preceding-not having the least knowledge of German or of
Breitkopf's text-to the politeness and liberality of Mr. Thomas Wilson ; who,
some years ago, was so kind as to translate, for my acceptance, Breitkopf's
Remarks on the History of the Invention of Printing.' That gentleman hath my
' thousand and one ' thanks for the same.
·
But we must not lose sight of our SCRIBE. It should seem, from the late
edition of our Typographical Antiquities, vol . i. p . 79, sign. a, that this Corporation of St. Luke might have been a sort of branch of a more ancient Society,
ycleped The Brothers ofa Common Life : ' [ ' Fratres Vitæ Communis'] of which
Gerard de Groot was the reputed founder, in the middle of the xivth century.
How these bretheren ' were clad, appears from a print of one of them
published by Lambinet from Heliot's Histoire des Ordres Monastiques, &c. vol. ii.
p. 339 and re-published by myself, in the pages just referred to, upon a
reduced scale. As a companion to such upright figure, take the following sitting
one of a SCRIBE, from an illumination in that most resplendent MS. of the
Romant de La Rose (MSS. Harl. no. 4425) in the British Museum : to be presently minutely described. The worthy gentleman is, methinks, ' done to the
very life '. surrounded by his desk, book, red and black inks, pouch,
penknife, and vellum slips ! Possible it is, that it may exhibit a portrait
cxxviii FIRST DAY.
Illuminators who were enlisted into what what was called
The Corporation ofSt. Luke, have been noticed by Vasari,
Des Roches, and Lambinet. I take it that they were a
of one ofthe Ten Thousand' (not Greeks ' but Calligraphists) whom Breitkopf
describes as roaming about for salt to their porridge ' towards the beginning of
the xvith century-when this very scribe ( or Author') and all his brethren were
' pushed from their stools ' by means of the Art and Craft of Printing!
Comment lacteur mue propoz
Pour son honneur et so bon loz
Garder en priant ql soit quittes
Des parolles quil a cy dittes.
Fol. Carvii. rectu.
FIRST DAY. cxxix
sort of itinerant professors -now dwindled into mere Italian
daubers, and venders of small pictures-who assail our doors
and impose upon the credulity of our servants.
LORENZO. This strikes me as a severe and perhaps unwarranted conclusion.
PHILEMON. It may be so : for I pretend to nothing
beyond a mere sketchy and superficial notice of this most
interesting subject-heartily wishing that the pen of Mr.
Ottley * may one day be devoted to its satisfactory elucidation. And so farewell to the Corporation of St. Luke !
The present is probably the fit moment to direct your
attention to some of the Productions of these Calligraphists,
Miniature-Painters, and Illuminators : for having given a
brief history of their rise and progress, we may, as a natural
and pleasing result, just throw our eyes upon, or make
particular allusions to, portions of their multifarious performances. I am well aware, my excellent friends, of the
task imposed upon me by such a declaration ; and I can
perfectly anticipate the eagerness and interest with which
you look forward to its complete and successful execution.
the pen ofMr. Ottley. ] This gentleman can never exercise his pen upon an
uninstructive topic ; nor is his graphical weapon apt to continue long idle.
When he shall have completed, to his own satisfaction, (and therefore to that of
the public) his History of the Rise and Progress of the Italian School ofDesign, and
his new Dictionary ofEngravers, he will, I trust-backed by that liberal encouragement which such a subject ought to excite-turn his attention to some account of
the early British School of Art : and give us a good thumping quarto (as a companion to his two tomes upon engraving, already published) in which such a
work may receive every advantage of illustration . The sharp- sighted reader will
perceive that I am only inviting my friend to put an extinguisher upon my own
labours ; nor need the said extinguisher ' be a very large one to cover the
FIRST DAY of this Bibliographical Decameron ! Till it be manufactured, however,
I only entreat the said sharp-sighted reader' to let the diminutive light of this
' First Day' illuminate his winter's fire- side. Peradventure it may be some time
ere Mr. Ottley's large wax-taper be in fit trim for burning !
•
CXXX FIRST DAY.
But I must draw largely upon your candour and forbearance upon the occasion ; and entreat you only to consider what hereafter follows ' as a feeble manner of putting
together even my own ideas upon the subject. Ha !-it
is as I expected : - Lisardo is almost nervous with rapturous expectation !
LISARDO. Do not banter. I am indeed quite anxious
(but by no means nervous) to witness the manner in which
you mean to indulge us with the performance of so delightful a task and I freely own my well-grounded anticipation of contemplating some of those costly productions,
whether as Missals, Romances, Chronicles, Volumes of
Poetry, Heraldry, or what not-studded and emblazoned
with all the cunning ' skill of the illuminator--which must
have been the delight of the middle ages, and are yet the
admiration of our own!
6
PHILEMON. I comprehend you. The observation, though
somewhat flourishing and rhetorical, is not undeserving of
attention. You bespeak, I perceive, the order of my narrative. A more injudicious one might have been selected ; and
I will so far gratify your vanity as to adopt your hint. Yet
let me, at the outset, just clear the way for the fifteenth
century, by observing that there are very many volumes, as
well upon Heraldry and Orders of Precedence,* as upon
upon Heraldry and Orders of Precedence. ] The language of Philemon seems
here to be somewhat obscure, and to stand in need of annotation. He is probably making allusion to a curious volume, entitled Liber de Nobilitatibus,'
executed in the first year of the reign of Edward III . preserved in the archiveroom attached to the library of Christ Church, Oxford. This volume, remarkable
for the multiplicity and oddity, rather than for the splendor and beauty, of its
illuminations, was given to the College by William Carpender, in 1707 ; formerly
a student ofthe same. On the recto of the first leaf, we read as follows : Hic
incipiunt rubrice capitulorum huius libri de nobilitatibz. Sapienciis et prudenciis
regum. Editi. ad honorem illustris. domini Edwardi dei gracia. Regis angliæ
FIRST DAY. cxxxi
religious and historical subjects-executed in the fourteenth
century of which but very limited notices (if any at all)
have reached us. And as to PETRARCHS and BOCCACCIOS
--
incipientis regnare. Anno domini ab incarnacone milesimo Tricentesimo. vicesimo
sexto.' This title is in red. The text is a coarse, slim, gothic character. Every
page seems to be surrounded with figures ; and there are men in armour,
of all sizes, and in all occupations : a huge couple are on folio 3. The gilt background, at fol . 4, is dotted , like the illuminations in the Ashmole Bestiarium.
Nearly two thirds of the book (which may be called a large octavo) are filled
with drolleries, of beasts, men, and monsters. Occasionally, whole pages are
filled with rude encounters ; and the last 7 leaves are occupied by drawings, in a
delicate black-outline, representing sieges ; in which are sundry implements of
war that remind us of the ornaments in the Valturius of 1472.
·
From Christ Church suppose we take a step to the Ashmolean Museum ? and
examine a volume, of later date, no doubt-but of a somewhat similar tendency :
and ofwhich description there are probably many hundreds, yet in the full vigor
of existence-although upwards of 300 years old ! The Ashmolean treasure,
marked 764, is a quarto, connected with chivalrous costume or detail. On the
reverse ofthe first leaf is a whole length figure, with a crown upon his head, in
the heraldic fashion. Opposite to it we read, The first fondacion of the office
ofarmys and whereof it bygan translate owte of Latyn into englis. ' (This reminds
us of Master Caxton's Faites of Armes and Chivalry,' and indeed the character
ofthe writing has a closer resemblance to Caxton's ordinary type than any thing
I remember to have seen. ) The text commences thus : Eneas by goddis grace
Besshop of Seuen to Iohn Enderbacke the kyng Secretary and beloued_brothir
mony salutacion sendeth.' ' Question to make mony men.' The first 8 leaves
are in English : on the 9th leaf the French text commences thus : Le tresnoble
et trespuissant Roy Alexandre,' &c. On the 28th leaf : Explicit lextrait de
larbre des batailles entant que touche des Armes.' Then a blank leaf. On the
reverse of the ensuing, or 30th leaf, is a fine and well- preserved illumination of
three pairs of knights, combating. Each knight uses a sword. Opposite, on
fol. 31. Cy sensuyt la facon des criz de tournois et des Ioustes. ' It begins
with the observance of the laws of chivalry by our King Arthur ; and the
remainder of the volume is devoted to the subject of which the preceding title
professes to treat. In the whole, 136 leaves. See however a very resplendent
tome, ofthe heraldic kind, among the Harl. MSS.: no. 6199 : upon the order of
the THOISON D'or.
Before we take leave of the description of books, above alluded to by Philemon,
and as we have just pronounced the words ' LArbre des Batailles,' I cannot refrain from requesting the locomotion- loving reader to glide with me through the
key-hole (as it were) of the door of the library of Hafod. There, let me take
down for his amusement, as I once did for my own, a small thick folio, of choice
vellum (written in pale ink, in a character much resembling the largest type of
cxxxii FIRST DAY.
-yet rest a moment : -surely some fairy has just put this
book-ring, containing the Sonnets of Petrarch, * upon my
finger ?
Verard) entitled according to the preceding comma-inverted words. The margins
of this MS. are unusually ample, the text being proportionably in a small compass. The illuminations make up in quality for paucity of number. There are
only three ofthem : in a fine state of preservation. The first, on the reverse of
the 3rd leaf, is nearly of the entire size of the page : angels are fighting in the
air-beneath is a tree, extending from the bottom to the top, upon which some
of the angels rest Agroup of warriors are fighting just under the branches ;
while another group, beneath them in turn, and immediately above the root of
the tree, is engaged in sharp conflict. The root is being devoured by flames,
with the heads of six warriors consuming in them ! What a splendid pun is all
this upon the title L'Arbre des Battailles !' The surrounding border is at once
graceful and brilliant. The two other illuminations are of much less dimensions,
but by the same hand, and nearly equally interesting and well finished. The
initial letters and titles to the several chapters are executed with great neatness.
This precious volume, bound in green velvet, with brass corners and clasps, was
once the property of DIANA of POICTIERS.
book-ring, containing the Sonnets of Petrarch.] Whether Philemon made a
purchase of a volume of this description , in the possession of Wr. Wurtz, when
he was lately in this country, I cannot take upon me to determine ; but most
certain it is that Mr. Wurtz (who pleased the most fastidious bibliomaniacs,
during his stay, by his unassuming and well- regulated manners) really did possess
a manuscript of Petrarch's Sonnets, written in the italic letter, in pale or brown
ink, of which the length was only ONE INCH, and the breadth thereof five eighths
of an inch. And yet this Lilliputian tome contained FIFTY LINES at least in a
page ! The text however was only legible by means of a glass . There were also
illuminations, in a good Italian taste, in bistre-colour. The Triumph of Death,'
in particular, I remember to have been of considerable merit. This most singular
bijou was cased in a binding of gold-filliagre.
·
As we are upon ILLUMINATED PETRARCHS, I cannot forego the desire of
gratifying the reader with an account of a volume of that poet, singularly distinguished for its appropriate embellishments, which is contained in the library
at Hafod ; and which account was taken during a visit made to that romantic
spot when it was animated by the presence of its late proprietor ! The memorandum runneth as follows : MS. ofPetrarch's Sonnets, &c. in octavo : red velvet
binding, in a green- leather case.
This very precious MS. is written in the cursive or italic character-a little
stiff and upright ; and may possibly be anterior to the date of the first printed
edition-1470. A table of 7 leaves , without any illumination, precedes the text.
Then follow 2 leaves of green vellum : on the reverse of the 2nd of which is one
of the three large illuminations which are of singular execution. A border, with a
FIRST DAY. cxxxiii
BELINDA. You are the most favoured of earthly Monarchs ! I am almost disposed to rob you of it. At any rate
let us minutely examine it. Wonderful indeed !
sort ofIonic pillar on each side, and a frieze at top, with arms beneath, encircle
the painting. Along the frieze or architrave, we read FRANCISCI PETRARCAE
FLORENTINI POETAE CLARISSIMI ;' in small capitals. At bottom, a Cardinal's
cap and tassels surmount and surround a coat of arms, supported by cupids,
sitting each on a cornucopia. The arms are a shield, gules, with a black eagle on
the upper division, &c. &c. On the bottom division , to the left of the picture,
at top, stands a winged horse (or pegasus) on the summit of a rock, from which
issues a stream of water. At the foot of the rock, sits a figure with rays round
the head, of feminine expression, but probably intended for Apollo. He is
playing upon a fiddle. Opposite sits the poet, laureated, as if catching the
inspiration of the god, and about to commit his thoughts to paper. In the
centre is a large tree, with the figure of Cupid standing upon the head of Laura,
whose arms are made a part of the branches of the tree. A river runs below,
and a city is in the back-ground. The opposite page has an arabesque
ornament. The head of the poet is in the centre of the first letter V[or].
This first sonnet is in capitals of red, purple, gold, and blue. The arms, with
only the upper part of the shield, are below. Another large illumination,
similar to the first, but upon white vellum, much covered with back-ground,
illustrates the sonnet written upon the reverse of fol. 116, beginning
arrow.
Standomi un giorno solo a la fenestra.
It is singularly curious. The third illumination is exccuted upon a lilac ground,
and is more elaborate than either of the preceding . Upon a rock, at top, an
ancient figure is shewing Petrarch (whose book is in his left hand) the triumph
ofLove below. Cupid is in his car, which is in flames, about to discharge his
An old man, with a crown upon his head, is on one side, having his
arms tied behind. Two young couple precede the car. Behind (at bottom of
the picture) are couples in joyful procession : the central pair is very graceful.
The opposite page is slightly executed in the arabesque style. This beautiful
MS. has been cropt, from the numerals being at the extremity of the upper
margin.
In the same care- soothing library there is a very pretty folio MS. of the
Decamerone ofBoccaccio ; translated into French by the well known ' Laurens de
premierfaitfamilier au Bureau Dampomartin citoien de Paris.' Consult the Bibl.
Francoise de la Croix du Maine, &c. vol. ii . p. 32, vol. iv. p. 576. It is written in
abrownish ink, in double columns, apparently of the time of Charles VI. of France
The borders are unusually elaborate ; and the illuminations, containing generally
small figures, are both striking and brilliant. The first group, sitting upon the
grass, about to hear the commencement of the tales, is very beautiful : the
Empress of the first day (Pampinea) is in the act of being crowned. The art
cxxxiv FIRST DAY.
LYSANDER. We will pass on, if you please, to the Order
of the Day. Shall Missals be the first note to touch, in
your approaching calligraphical concert ?
PHILEMON. Missals ' -with all my heart. Yet, as a
volume of anterior execution, and as partaking in some
degree of the warblings of the muse, pray let me introduce
to your especial notice a vastly pretty group of femalesfrom a ponderous tome of the works of CHRISTINE DE
PISA, * in the British Museum. I observe that the Ladies
however I suspect to be either Flemish or French. The condition of the volume
is most desirable . This precious MS. , bound in green velvet, was also in the
collection of DIANA OF POICTIERS. The reader of course will not fail here to
refresh his memory with the notice of that most lovely of all lovely Manuscripts of
the Decameron (belonging to Mr. Coke) given at p . xiii, ante.
the works ofCHRISTINE DE PISA. ] The ponderous tome,' above alluded to,
is among the Harleian MSS. (no. 4431) in the British Museum : and contains,
in the whole, 398 leaves. It is a vellum MS. written in a small gothic letter, in
double columns. On the recto of the first leaf, in a large hand, is the following
autograph : Henry Duke of Newcastle, his booke, 1676. On the recto of the
second leaf, above the text, is the ILLUMINATION of which the larger and more
interesting portion is presented to his audience by Philemon. It appears to me
to possess considerable merit ; especially in the grouping, which is really not
unworthy of some of the happier efforts of Stothard. Beneath this illumination,
of the authoress presenting her book to the Queen of France, we read the
following strains -and let not the reader disdain ' to peruse them ; for the
famous Duke de Berry, a tremendous bibliomaniac about the period of their
composition, (1410) gave not less than 200 crowns, to Christine herself, for a set
of that Dame's Balades,' &c. The fact is extant in choice print,' thus : (taken
from the original inventory in the year 1416) Vn liure compilé de plusieurs
Balades et ditiez, fait & composé par damoiselle CHRISTINE [ de Pizan ] escrit de
lettre de court, bien historiée : acheté de ladite damoiselle deux cens escus, prisé
40 livres parisis .' Peignot's Curiosités Bibliographiques, p. xv. So that, by this
time, I imagine the reader to be quite impatient for the verses subjoined to the
aforesaid illumination, Les voilà !
"
Tres excellent de grant haultesse
Couronnee poissant princesse
Tres noble Royne de france
Le corps enclin vers vous madressce
En saluant par grant hublece
Pry dieu quil vous tiengne en souffrance
FIRST DAY. CXXXV
are absolutely envious of the head-dresses of their sex at the
commencement of the Fifteenth Century! Allow, at any
rate, that the grouping and its accessories are pretty and
interesting.
0
Lonc temps viue, et apres loultrance
De la mort vous doint la Richece
De paradis qui point ne cesse.
Ahearty, pious, and appropriate salutation : and the artist, in the above picture, bas
cxxxvi FIRST DAY.
BELINDA. We admit the justice of both these latter
observations ; but can by no means acknowledge our envy
at the perfection of the head-dresses of the same stately.
group !
PHILEMON. As you please. Having now then brought
you just within the pale of the xvth century, I proceed to
an account of MISSALS executed chiefly within that period.
And first for the notice of that resplendent and costly tome
ycleped the BEDFORD MISSAL ! * The Spirit of John DUKE
suited the action to the word.' The remainder of the illuminations, by more than
one hand, are not only much smaller, but of greatly inferior merit to that which
is above given. The general condition of this interesting tome is such as to
rejoice the heart of the worshipper of the memory of CHRISTINE DE PISA :
while an excellent account of the contents of it, will be found in the Cat. of the
Harl. MSS. vol. iii. p. 144. See, too, the Typog. Antiq. vol. i . p. 75-6.
* ycleped THE BEDFORD MISSAL. ] When the reader is informed that the
late Mr. Gough (as above alluded to by Philemon) published a quarto volume
(in 1794) of 83 pages-descriptive of the contents of this really unrivalled
Missal-he cannot expect even a full or satisfactory detail of its multifarious
graphic embellishments within the compass of a moderate note : and no limits
are left for a very immoderate one. Upon the whole, however, after dipping into
Gough, I know not how to present the reader with a more spirited or interesting
delineation of its general features, than what appears in the language of Mr.
Evans, in the Catalogue of the Library of Mr. Edwards ( 1815, 8vo . ) its enthusiastic possessor for the preceding nine and twenty years. At number 830 of
this catalogue we read as follows :
THE CELEBRATED BEDFORD MISSAL or book of Prayers and Devotional
offices, executed for JOHN DUKE OF BEDFORD, Regent of France ; containing
59 miniature paintings, which nearly occupy the whole page, and above a thousand small miniatures of about an inch and a half in diameter ; displayed in
brilliant borders of golden foliage, with variegated flowers, &c. At the bottom
of every page are two lines, in blue and gold letters, to explain the subject of
each miniature : a circumstance perhaps only to be found in this expensive
performance-but what enhances the value of the MS. in this country is, that it
has preserved the only portraits remaining of the noble pair who formerly
possessed it ; JOHN of LANCASTER, DUKE of BEDFORD, Regent of France, and
ANNE of BURGUNDY, his Duchess, interspersed with their mottos ; an elegant
expression of the gallantry of that time, on his part-" A vous entier ;" and on
her's " J'en suis contente; " and also the portraits of HENRY 5th of ENGLAND
and CATHARINE of FRANCE. Nothing can exceed the strength of character,
FIRST DAY. cxxxvii
ofBEDFORD, REGENT OF FRANCE, be present to unlock all
the hidden springs of harmony !'-as I open the concert
alluded to. I observe you comprehend me in a trice ; and
and high finishing of the portraits. Mr. Gough pronounced them the finest
example of the art, of that period, he had ever seen. Vertue engraved the
portrait of the Duke from this painting. Another interesting characteristic in this
fine MS. is the attestation of its being presented by gift of the Duchess, and by
order of her husband , to King Henry the VIth, when he went to be crowned in
France, and was spending his Christmas at Rouen. The Monogram of the
Attestor (IS) is JOHN SOMERSET ; styling himself Domini regis ad personam
servitor et sanitatem vitæque conservationem consulens. This is confirmed in
Hearne's Vita Henrici 6. per T. de Elmham ; where he is called physician to
the King ; and that he was a favourite , appears from a grant of the manor of
Ruislip to him for life, by Henry VI. See Lysons's Environs, vol. v, page 258.
This rich book is 11 inches, by seven and a half wide, and two and a half thick ;
bound in crimson velvet, with gold clasps, on which are engraved the arms of
HARLEY, CAVENDISH , and HOLLIS, quarterly. It was the property of Edward
Lord Harley, Earl of Oxford and Mortimer, who bought it of Lady Worsley,
great grand-daughter to W. Seymour, second Duke of Somerset, who was
appointed governor to the Prince of Wales, by King Charles the First. It
descended from Lord Oxford to his daughter, the Duchess of Portland, and
was purchased at her sale, May 24th, 1786.'
•
Such a description, with the previously- known character of the volume, was
sufficient to inflame the ardour, and sharpen the weapons, of the most indifferent
book-knight : while it animated the thorough- bred ' with a degree of mettle
approaching to madness ! Accordingly, on the day of the sale of the Missal,
there ' pricked forth, ' from the lists, two well- known bibliomaniacal champions :
one, ycleped the MOST NOBLE THE MARQUIS OF BLANDFORD-the other
having to name ' JOHN NORTH, ESQUIRE.' The surrounding Book- Knights
were silent spectators : knowing the courage and daring of these adventurous
champions. At length, after inflicting upon each other divers huge and lusty
strokes,' the first- named champion gained the prize for the sum of 687l. 15s. ' of
lawful money of Great Britain :' but the defeated knight is reported to have exclaimed, in retiring from the combat, ' Another such victory, and ...' Let me add
that this contest reflects equal credit upon ' victor and vanquisl.ed.' I now return
to the volume itself-for the reader, I dare think, is prepared for an immoderate ' note. Mr. Gough, in his quarto pamphlet, before-mentioned, published
6
* Mr. Evans has noticed to me a singular coincidence. The back-windows of Mr. Edwards's house (which was the old manor-house) at Harrow, looked upon
this very manor of Ruislip ! Thus the late owner of the BEDFORD MISSAL might contemplate the spot which was granted ' to the VERY PERSON who attested the donation of it to its original and REGAL POSSESSOR !
cxxxviii FIRST DAY.
are preparing to turn over the leaves of the enchanting
volume under description ; which is, really, and in truth, a
most precious and praise-worthy monument-not only of the
state of art at the opening of the xvth century, but of the
"
four copper-plate fac-similes from it. One, of the Duke of Bedford, as given
in this work, with its surrounding ornaments-(the latter obliged to be omitted
for want of room) : the second with the Duchess kneeling before her tutelary
' patroness and name-saint St. Anne ' also with its surrounding ornaments : the
third, of the legend of the changing of the arms of France, from three toads to
threefleur de lis, in the reign of Clovis, A. D. 500, as represented in tapestry,'
&c. These latter figures are very small ; and the surrounding ornaments are
full of historical subjects. Mr. Gough thought that the portrait of Henry
the Fifth here represents the figure of Clovis. ' Cela se peut :' but the face is
too small (not the eighth part of an inch) to make the circumstance of any
moment. Afourth plate, given by Gough, is a fac- simile of the attestation of
the Missal being presented by gift of the Duchess, and by order of the Duke, to
King Henry VI. by one of the king's servants, who appears to have been his
physician.'
<
Upon the merit of these four plates, on the score of accuracy, I will not pretend to sit in judgment ; but the first of them, representing the Duke, &c.
cannot be faithful if the praise of fidelity belong to the present representation of
the same subject. What then is to be the result, and upon which is the reader
to choose ? I will only simply observe, that the ACCOMPANYING PLATE is
executed by Mr. George Lewis, from a drawing made by himself-line for line,
and stroke for stroke, from the original—that this drawing was allowed, by the
late owner of the Missal, to be completely successful :' and the reader may be
assured that one and the same spirit of fidelity has influenced both the pencil
and the burin of Mr. George Lewis. Palmam qui meruit, ferat !' Note further ;
that Mr. Gough's plate, or plates, are only in outline—with a prodigious deal of
the characteristic ornaments of the original wholly omitted. I am aware that
there are some few copies of Mr. Gough's book with the plates coloured : but
these I have always considered as the sorriest possible representations of the
originals ! Who, of the modern sons of men,' could successfully imitate the
delicate hues, the radiant colours, and the dazzling gold, of this wonderful
volume ?! The attempt would be either folly or madness. Therefore it is , that
one sober tint, either brown, or black, is more satisfactory than the piebald
colours of an indifferent modern illuminator. In respect to minuteness and
delicacy, I may be allowed to notice the very masterly style in which Mr. Lewis's
plate is executed. One word more, and I have done. This extraordinary
volume, which belonged to the Duchess of Portland, daughter of Lord Oxford,
was purchased (as above-mentioned) by Mr. Edwards, at the sale of the gems,
pictures, and antiquities, of the Duchess, in 1786 (see no. 2951) for 213l. It
m
GLewis Sculp
ILLUMINATION FROM THE BEDFORD MISSAL 3
In theperijnen ofthe . Haque of Starsford.
PRINTED BYLANEL
THE
ASTOR
LIBR
THE
ASTOR
NY
LIBRARY
FIRST DAY. cxxxix
noble and fostering spirit of the aforesaid Regent in particular ! Most of you, I believe, were present at the late sale
of this unrivalled Missal-and Gough, as you may remember, has written a pretty stiff quarto volume upon it : yet
much as you may have seen and read, appertaining to it, I
will not suffer you to depart without calling your attention
to the copy which I have caused to be taken of the principal Illuminations ; namely, the Regent himself kneeling
before his Tutelary Saint, St. George. *
LORENZO. Most singular, most splendid, and most interesting !
PHILEMON. Even so : and after all that has been thought,
said, and written, respecting the Missals in this country,
give methe BEDFORD VOLUME ! The Breviary, companion
of this precious tome, † is no doubt yet in existence ; and
the style of art, which it particularly developes, was very
prevalent at the period of its execution. Among other specimens, the LAMOIGNON MISSAL, now in the Hafod
was obtained against the bidding of his present Majesty. During Mr. Edwards's
possession of it, he was twice or thrice offered 500 guineas for the same; but
the result proved the discretion with which these offers were declined. To an
Englishman, the BEDFORD MISSAL is the proudest and most interesting monument existing of the early art of book-illumination !
See the OPPOSITE PLATE.
+ Breviary, companion of this precious tome. ] My friend Mr. H. Petrie has
supplied me with the notice of a Breviary after the use of the Church of
Sarum,' among the MSS. of the Royal Library of France (no. 273 ?) which
contains many beautiful small illuminations, together with some large subjects.
It was executed in 1434, and belonged to John DUKE of Bedford, Regent of
France. It follows therefore that the conjecture of Philemon is supported by
fact. But will, or rather can, the Missal and Breviary of the same Regent ever
again become the property of the same person? The chances are as an hundred
to one against such an occurrence.
Lamoignon Missal-in the Hafod Library. ] At page cxxxii ante, the reader
has been introduced to a few of the Hafod Treasures ' through the medium of
a description taken by myself on the spot. In general, views of nature, taken in
VOL. I. i
cxl FIRST DAY.
Library, and numerous other volumes, (although not of a
religious cast of character) are apposite illustrations. But we
are now approaching the time of MASO FINIGUERRA ....
LISARDO. Surely that great artist never executed a Missal,
or other Book ?—
PHILEMON. You interrupt me. I was about to remark,
by introducing the name of Finiguerra, that subsequent
a similar manner, are thought to have more of truth and spirit about them, than
compositions drawn from fancy, or from recollection only. Whether the same
inference apply to book- views, I dare not take upon me to determine : but I will
venture upon submitting another book-sketch executed in a similar manner. It
relates to the Missal above alluded to by Philemon ; once in the LAMOIGNON
COLLECTION. This lovely Missal comes the nearest in execution, as well as in
style of design, delicacy of vellum, and general characteristic appearance, to that
ofthe BEDFORD, of any which I have ever beheld. The larger subjects, or illuminations, are surrounded by fanciful borders ; having circles, in which figures,
or groups of figures, are introduced-illustrative of the main subject or larger
illumination. Some of these are exceedingly elaborate ; and every page of text
has a delicate border, in which drolleries , or serious subjects, are introduced
with equal felicity. The condition of the Missal is perfect. Mr. Johnes
admires, and with justice, the large figure of St. Jerom (the last illumination but
one) sitting and writing : with a cardinal's hat on the floor, and a lion before
him. The last illumination reminds us strongly of the style of execution seen in
the Bedford Missal. At top, is a crucified Christ, supported by the Father, with
a Dove between them : emblematic of the Trinity. Cherubims surround them.
Below, the Patroness, to whom the Owner dedicated the work, is kneeling upon
a blue cushion, with closed hands, looking stedfastly at the cross . Her female
attendant is behind her ; also kneeling, and reading in a devout manner. A
white dog is walking before the Patroness. (The costume is of the earlier part
of the xvth century) . Figures, representing the cardinal-virtues, and intertwined
with foliage and flowers, constitute the border : the whole full of beauty and
effect. The text (beginning with the first chapter of St. John) is in a large
gothic letter. The dimensions of the volume are 10 inches three-eights, by 7
and a half. Although the edges are gilt, with coloured ornaments, and have an
old appearance, I suspect that this lovely volume was originally full 2 inches
taller. Aug. 2, 1815.' If I remember rightly, the wretched DE ROME was
the binder. Thus much for the third book- sketch-taken in Hafod library in the
month and year aforesaid.
the name of FINIGUERRA. ] It might indeed very naturally have been supposed that some of those illuminators, who lived subsequently to Finiguerra,
FIRST DAY. cxli
artists, benefiting by his example, might, in their productions of the pencil, have displayed purer taste and more
accurate drawing and composition. But, on the contrary,
would have profited by the beauty of his productions ; but the truth is, as
Philemon above observes, that, towards the end of the xvth century, there are
too many retrograde movements in art to warrant us in drawing such an infe
rence : nor can any one, however he may justly delight himself with the facsimiles published by Zani and Mr. Ottley, (and more especially with the remarks as well as the fac- simile of the latter) have, I had almost said, any, but
certainly not anything like an adequate, idea, of the brilliancy and perfection ofthe
sulphur casts (as they are called) of MASO FINIGUERRA. One ofthese sulphurs
(and only two are known to exist) has recently enriched the very choice library
of the Right Hon. Thomas Grenville . It had been formerly in the cabinet of
Signor Seratti ; and per varios casus ' (not necessary here to describe) it found
its way into that land flowing with milk and honey,' commonly known by the
name of GREAT BRITAIN. How many similar curiosities-as gems, pictures,
books, and statues, have recently taken the same direction, we will not stop to
enquire-nor is it at all necessary (however the fact may be known to a ' chosen
few' ) to mention how much of the said milk and honey ' Mr. Grenville was
compelled to produce in order to obtain possession of such a treasure. Suffice it
only to remark, that, in more skilful hands, or under more discerning eyes, it
could not possibly be placed. But the reader is impatient for the sulphur, and thus he hath an account thereof.
It is the self- same sulphur (or composition, like plaster of Paris, with a delicate yellow tint, upon which the subject, in black, is impressed or taken off-)
from which the copper-plate impression of Zani, from Mariette's collection, now
in the French Museum, was copied : but Zani's impression is defective in that
part (the extremities or upper border) where this is perfect ; and the present is
slightly defective in that part (the centre) in which it should seem that Zani's is
comparatively perfect. Of the two, however, there can be no question respecting
the superiority of condition of Mr. Grenville's sulphur ; and it is not a little
curious that such varieties, as to condition, should appear in representations of
the same subject. The subject is as follows ; taken from a ms. memorandum
accompanying the sulphur : The subject represented is the ASSUMPTION OF
THE VIRGIN, who is crowned in heaven amidst the rejoicings of saints and
angels ; and although only measuring about five inches by three and a quarter, it
contains in all forty-twofigures. It can hardly be expected that in the course of
3 centuries and an half it should have escaped altogether the ravages of decay;
still it is, upon the whole, in a very entire state, and is particulary interesting
from being quite perfect in that part where the impression in the French
Museum is mutilated ; this latter, on the other hand, supplies some trifling
deficiencies in the sulphur cast.'
cxlii FIRST DAY.
as we approach the latter part of the Fifteenth Century, we
find such a predominance of Flemish taste, and extravagant
decoration, that it grieves one to think the examples of
earlier and better artists seem to have been thrown away. I
must make, however, one or two glorious exceptions.
LISARDO. Which be they ?
PHILEMON. First, and foremost, let us doff our bonnets '
to the illustrious names of FRANCESCO VERONESI and
GIROLAMO his son ! The magnificent and matchless Missal,
which owns them as the artists who have immortalized it ,
The fineness of some of the lines which are pourtrayed on the sulphur is quite
astonishing. They have been minutely confronted with the engraved par, and
correspond with it to the greatest nicety. The effect of the whole is most lively
and brilliant, bearing altogether a strong resemblance to an engraving upon ivory.'
The truth is, nothing can exceed the prodigious power of expression which
appears in the minutest countenances-whether of agitation, as in the angels
blowing the trumpets, above ; or of softness and resignation, as in the attendant
angels below. In the elegance of the attitudes , and folds of the drapery, we
observe all the grace of Raffaelle and all the breadth of Masaccio. The copperplate impression affords no idea even of the truth of the features of the respective
countenances ; which necessarily implies the total absence of original expression.
Had CLOVIO Copied such a gem, and introduced it into some missal, for one of
his royal masters ! -how many purse-strings would have been unloosed to gain
possession of such a treasure !?
The magnificent and matchless Missal which owns THEM as the Artists who
have immortalised it . ] What will not the reader be led to expect from this
gorgeous style of description ? Let Mr. Evans, however, first make known the
general splendor and importance of this Missal, from the description of it which
appeared at no. 246, in the Catalogue of the Library of Mr. Edward Astle, sold
by him in January, 1816.
This magnificent Missal is unquestionably one of the very first and grandest
exertions of the art of illuminating books. It appears to have occupied several
years in preparation ; and acquires a singular interest, as the miniatures form an
epoch in the annals of the art, and constitute a land-mark between the ancient
and modern school of illumination. The more ancient paintings were executed
by FRANCISCO, called " DA I LIBRI, " from his extraordinary talents in painting
miniatures in books, and by his son Girolamo, who was the instructor of Giulio
Clovio. The miniature of the Presentation of Christ in the Temple, is subscribed
with the name of FRANCISCUS VERONENSIS at full length ; a very unusal circumstance, but arising no doubt from the conscious pride which the artist felt in
FIRST DAY. exliii
is, at this moment, as it were, before me. For you, my
amiable auditors-for Belinda and Almansa-I rob it of
this amethyst, and of that emerald : which, for lustre, shall
contemplating the success of his exertions. It is indeed a chef-d'œuvre of the
art sufficient to immortalize the painter, whether we consider the beauty and
excellence of the composition, the gracefulness of the attitudes , or the delicacy of
the finish ; all, and every part is exquisitely beautiful, and vindicates his claim
to the cognomen, bestowed upon him by the admiration of Italy. Girolamo, it is
known, successfully emulated the paintings of his father. Vasari is quite
animated in the description of his talents. I think his exertions are particularly
discernible in the paintings of some of the borders, they correspond remarkably
with what Vasari has said frequently occur in the works of this artist, namely,
representations of ancient cameos, precious stones, jewels, and fancy pieces. It
is impossible to view the large painting of the crucifixion, without feeling the
profoundest reverence for the talents of the painter. Among the later productions is the exquisitely beautiful painting of the Celebration of the Mass. The
portraits of the Pope and the Cardinals attending him, are admirable performances. The last of the miniatures represents the Pope in the act of remunerating
a Cardinal [see the third plate at page cxiii , ante] we may infer he is paying for
this Missal, and from the quantity of money introduced, he appears to have justly
appreciated the merits of the work. The arms of Sixtus IV. are placed under
the painting of the Celebration of the Mass, and occur in other places with the
Cardinal's hat above them : we may therefore conclude it was commenced for
him while he was a Cardinal, and finished after his elevation to the tiara , or else
it must have been done for his nephew the Cardinal Giuliano, who bore the
same arms, and was afterwards Pope, by the title of Julius the Second.' The
reader will not be surprised to learn that such a treasure produced, at the sale,
the sum of 3071. I had seen it, in 1804, when it was bought in for 231l. Mr.
Esdaile is the present fortunate possessor of it.
Let my own tale now be told respecting this very singular and magnificent
volume. It was in the year 1814 when I borrowed it of Messrs. White and
Cochrane for the purpose of having the accompanying plates engraved, and of
making an elaborate description of its illuminations : as I then considered, and
still do consider, the specimens ofart, contained in it, altogether ofa most extraordinary nature. To allay any nervous sensation, on the part of its then owners, it
was insured by me, during the time of detention, for 450l. Thus the artist, Mr.
George Lewis, went to work with confidence and glee ; and my own slumbers
were wholly undisturbed- ' quoad hoc.' Here followeth a description of the
handy works' of Messrs. FRANCESCO and GIROLAMO, in the Missal aforesaid,
which is bound in ancient red morocco, fastened by silver-wrought clasps, and
measures 14 inches and half long, by 10 inches and half wide. A full page
contains 12 lines, in a broad faced gothic letter, nearly half an inch in height.
cxliv FIRST DAY.
challenge the brightest hues that sparkle in the casket of
the jeweller ! And yonder string of pearls, large, entire,
and glossy- as if wet with the ocean wave-place it my ...
The Tabula Missarum prime partis missalis pontificialis ,' occupies the first leaf.
I shall advance at once to the notice of the Illuminations ; designating the artist
by whom each subject was executed ; and premising, that the pictures of
Francesco are in water colour, and those of his son in body colour. It may be
also worth further observing, that the tints, used by FRANCESCO, are generally
pink, lilac, purple, or green ; with a peculiar touch of the pen, by which he marks
the folds of drapery and the anatomy of the human figure. That this artist is
oftentimes extravagant, must be readily admitted ; but amidst all his wildness of
fancy there is a delicacy of expression, and crispness of touch, that render his
performances strikingly original and characteristic. No mau ever produced more
power of colouring, as a water-colour painter-which is evident even from the present condition in which they appear : but in their pristine state his performances
must have glowed with a lustre ofwhich we can hardly have an adequate conception. His gilding, less firm and resplendent than that of Girolamo, partakes of
the soft and attractive tone in which he has contrived to work up his subjects to
the highest pitch of delicacy and expression. Girolamo, both in his body
colours and gilding, is perfectly uniform : bold, rich, and sparkling-but his taste
has comparatively the air of a Flemish painter.
First Illumination. By GIROLAMO.
The capital initial I. ( Incipit prima pars Missalis secundum vsvm romane
curie in quo continentur Missæ quæ per pontifices consueverunt celebrari' ) which
is about 4 inches in height, is within a rich border. At bottom, a tent with a
golden canopy. In the centre of it, a Cardinal's hat ; beneath which is an oaktree with acorns ; all in gold : on one side of the trunk S, on the other D. The
back-ground is ultramarine, in part deeply shaded. An angel, on each side the
tree, with one hand holding up the curtain covering the arms, and with the other
holding up the curtain on each side ofthe tent. At the foot of each angel, a child
is playing on a guitar, each in a graceful attitude . Beneath, the illumination is damaged : prevailing colours of border, purple, lilac, and red. On the
reverse,
Second Illumination. BY FRANCESCO VERONESI.
Prodigiously elaborate, occupying the whole page. What appears to be the
letter N, forms the principal object. Within, 6 robed male figures : of which
5 are upon their knees ; the central one with hands elevated, having a naked
figure, apparently a female, balanced in the centre of the hands : a rich canopy
(the colours somewhat faded) before this figure : another canopy, to the left, in
the back-ground. The lines which constitute the letter (N) are filled by human
figures on each side, grouped, or linked together, in the most graceful manner.
At top, are a peacock and two doves, in lilac colour. Above the whole, are
FIRST DAY. cxlv
LYSANDER. Remember, the Ladies are the property of
Lisardo and myself ! But I can forgive you ...
LORENZO. Jealousy is a green-eyed monster,' saith
Shakspeare. Yet proceed : and do not suffer the caustic
gravity ofthe worthy Lysander to throw a damp upon the
pearls, precious stones, and cameos. To the left, from the bottom, is a border of
nearly 3 inches in width, crowded with figures in the most fantastic and
beautiful attitudes : these are relieved by architectural ornaments, pencilled with
surprising delicacy : in the centre are the arms (by Girolamo) as described in
the first illumination , but on a smaller scale . Beneath the above central, or principal illumination, having 2 lines of text between, is a most magnificent and elegant
specimen of art ; with vases of fruit, and three recumbent children at bottom.
To the right, are two figures supporting a rich vase. The whole forms a perfect
specimen of the variety, peculiarity, taste, richness, and expression of the genius
of the artist. Unluckily the left border is rather tarnished by the stain of sea
water ; but the eye of the virtuoso has abundant gratification in what is left
entire. After 8 pages of text, we come to the
Third Illumination. By GIROLAMO.
To the left of the initial capital I (3 inches) our Saviour is giving instructions
to his Disciples. Border of flowers at top, to the left, and at bottom : slight
ornaments to the right. The whole, fresh and uninjured, and sparkling with gold
and ultramarine ; it is however among the least elaborated illuminations. Again,
after 8 further pages of text, we come to the
Fourth Illumination . By THE SAME.
Exceedingly rich and gorgeous, and in the finest state of preservation. At
top, forming the circular part of the letter P (upwards of 4 inches and a half in
height) is the Almighty in the sky : below, the figure of Isaias : to the right,
7 male figures. At bottom, in a circle of 2 inches and three quarters, is what
appears to be the Apostles (8 figures) expecting the descent of the spirit. To
the left, and at bottom, is a broad border : to the right, narrower border. Then
4 pages of text, before the
Fifth Illumination . By THE SAME.
Three small figures, Christ replying to the messengers sent by St. John the
Baptist. The illumination, 2 inches and a quarter. A very rich and elegantlyimagined border. In the centre, to the right, two boys (each playing a musical
instrument) full of expression. Prevailing colours of border, purple, lilac, and
green in good preservation ; but the gold sparingly introduced. Another 4
pages oftext, and we reach the
Sixth Illumination. By F. VERONENSIS.
Remarkable for the extraordinary grace and beauty of the border : the left
cxlvi FIRST DAY.
glow of description which such an extraordinary volume
seems to produce.
PHILEMON. I crave pardon of my subjects. You will
however readily anticipate my notions respecting the extraordinary Missal here alluded to. In fact, that Missal was
executed by the two eminent artists before-mentioned, expressly for POPE SIXTUS IV. whose portrait, as is conceived,
side and bottom of which are composed of children fantastically grouped, of a
portion of which the following is a most interesting fac-simile :
The border at top, and to the right, is narrower, and filled by fanciful ornaments,
exhibiting equal taste, and coloured chiefly in green. At the bottom of the text,
is a capital initial G, nearly three inches and a half in height, and nearly 4 inches
in width. The lines, which form the letter, are filled by the most elegant and
tasteful arabesque ornaments, and are coloured in green : within the letter, is a half
length of St. Peter, holding the keys with his right hand, and a book (pressed
to his breast) with his left. Like almost all the figures of FRANCESCOVERONESI,
the present exhibits a disproportionate length as well as slenderness of limb. The
FIRST DAY. cxlvii
thus occurs in one of the marginal decorations. Although
these wonderful specimens
of ancient art be, occasionally, injured in several
places, yet, collectively,
there is nothing to put in
competition with them !
Even the grotesques enhance the value of the volume; andthe frequent betrayal ofa remnant ofwhat
is called the gothic taste,
connecting the oldwith the
new school ofart, gives additional interest to the performance.
whole is in delicate tint, but in fair preservation. Two pages of text only follow,
when we come to the
Seventh Illumination. By FRANCESCO and GIROLAMO.
The border, in purple, red, and green, is by the former : the illuminated capital
initial I (2 inches and a quarter) is by the latter : St. John the Baptist, seated
on a bank, is discoursing with three men. The left side of the border very delicate and fresh ; terminating, at bottom, with a fine mask, over which is a lion's
skin. A horse, to the right, in a whimsical attitude. The left border has suffered
injury and the bottom has been retouched (clumsily) in dark red. We glance
over 5 pages oftext, and reach the
:
Eighth Illumination. By GIROLAMO.
Very splendid ; but the green back-ground, on the outside of the border, is
somewhat faded, and injures the effect of the piece. The capital initial R, at
bottom (about 4 inches square) exhibits one ofthe best specimens ofthe powers
of Girolamo's pencil. The whole is fresh, brilliant, and striking ; although a little too vivid for nature In the air, a half length figure of the Almighty, clothed in
purple and white, holding a ball (the globe) in his left hand, and elevating his right. On each side of him, is a cherubic attendant. Beneath, is the infant
Saviour, irradiated with glory : on either side of him an angel, in white, with wings
ofgold, in graceful attitudes of adoration. Below, is a fine sweep of landscape ;
glowing with the rays of a warm setting sun. The embossed gold on the outside
is in the highest preservation. After 3 pages oftext, comes the
cxlviii FIRST DAY.
Yet the specimens of beautiful and even Grecian taste which
prevails-the arabesque borders, now fanciful and now grave
-the incrustations of gems and precious stones-the onyx,
Ninth Illumination. By GIROLAMO.
Less splendid and interesting than the generality. An illuminated I, inclosing
a representation of St. John preaching in the wilderness : 2 inches and threeeighths by 3 and a half. After 3 more pages of text, we are struck with the
Tenth Illumination. By THE SAME.
Very splendid and in fine preservation, with the exception of a trifling injury,
or smear, over the lower parts of two very graceful figures of boys or cherubs, at
the bottom of the lower border. The principal illumination is an O ; nearly
5 inches in width by 3 and seven-eighths in height. Within, is a beautiful and
highly preserved whole length of St. Andrew the Apostle : his right hand resting
upon a cross, and his left holding a book. The Apostle is looking intently
upon his book; having more than an ordinary expression of countenance. The
border throughout is rich and magnificent. Four pages of text succeed, when we observe the
Eleventh Illumination. By THE SAME.
. Comparatively trivial, but in good taste. The illumination (2 inches and fiveeighths by two and a half) is the calling of St. Peter and St. Andrew. A great
stain at bottom. After 3 pages of text, we observe with peculiar interest the
Twelfth Illumination. By F. VERONESI.
On looking at this elaborate and exquisitely executed illumination, filling
almost the entire page, the first sensation that strikes us is—that of regret : the
sea water having almost defaced the lower part, and probably absorbed, or caused
to fly, the numberless delicate touches (chiefly in white, upon a lilac ground)
which are introduced in the upper part between the lines of text. The border is
brilliant and beautiful to a degree ; of which the chief colours are green, crimson,
and purple. The principal illumination exhibits the embracing of Mary and
Joseph . A glory surrounds the heads of both. These figures are preposterously
tall, and the draperies of them too much marked by foldings. They are within
the letter S, nearly 5 inches square, (the first word being ' Salue ') and the marking
of the lines of the S is distinguished and adorned by a profusion of precious stones
and shells, &c. A little to the right, below, is a beautiful group of three children,
much damaged. In its original state, coming fresh from the pencil of Francesco,
this production must have had an exquisite effect. Six pages of text follow ; and
then the
Thirteenth Illumination. By GIROLAMO.
Border, fresh and splendid. Illuminated L 2 inches and a half by 2 and a
quarter. An old man with 5 youths- 1st. ch. of St. Matthew illustrated . After
turning over 7 pages of text, comes the
FIRST DAY. cxlix
sardine, ruby, emerald, amethyst, pearl-in sundry compartments of borders, or ornaments of capital initials -these,
Fourteenth Illumination. By GIROLAMO.
This is among the very choicest and most successful of Girolamo's pieces.
The border throughout is light and tasteful ; and the figures of 3 cherubs, at top,
and a child playing upon a guitar, on the left, below them, are extremely delicate and interesting. The base of the border is in better taste than the generality
of Girolamo's productions. The chief illumination, not less than 5 inches square,
is within the letter D ( as appears by the context) and represents the Shepherds
hearing the glad tidings of the birth of Christ. What gives it perhaps better
effect-there is no figure seen in the sky from whence the annunciation is
supposed to proceed : the anxiety, the fixed attention, and attitudes of the three
shepherds, are admirable. The back-ground, a mountainous country, is almost in
a perfect style of colouring ; and very much beyond what is usually seen in
distant landscapes executed in opaque or body colour. The embossed and
burnished gold, around the letter, seems to retain all its original splendor. The
whole is in charming preservation. Next come 3 pages of text-and the
Fifteenth Illumination. By THE SAME,
Of a more quiet and simple character. The principal illumination, nearly
4 inches by 2 and a quarter, represents Augustus Cæsar issuing the edict for
general taxation. He is sitting in a chair of state, and four figures are before
him : the whole neatly executed, and in perfect preservation. The border is
simple, rich, and in good taste. We turn over 6 pages of text, and look with
delight on the
Sixteenth Illumination. By F. VERONESI.
Full of splendor and taste, and having a most singular effect : but unfortunately
damaged and retouched. There are only 2 lines of text above, and 3 below, the
principal illumination : and the entire space between these lines is covered with
a layer of burnished gold. The chief illumination is a P: the tail of which is
9 inches long ; the circular part is 5 inches and a half, by 5 and a half; and
within is a representation of Christ in the Manger. TheVirgin, gracefully kneeling, with her arms folded, is on one side ; and Joseph is sleeping at a distance,
reclining upon his right hand. Two angels are above the manger. The marking
of the letter is filled by complicated groups of animals, children, and adults.
The letters, U, E, R, on the right side , are most elaborately executed upon a
purple back-ground. The border, on the right side and below, is beautifully
arabesqued ; but much damaged. There is something, at first sight, very complicated and extraordinary in the whole of this magnificent illumination. Six
pages of text follow : when we come to the
Seventeenth Illumination. By GIROLAMO.
One ofthe most beautiful and delicate of his performances. The infant Saviour
is enshrined in glory. An angel, on each side, in blue vestments, is kneeling, in
cl FIRST DAY.
(minor decorations, I grant) these, of their kind, know of
no superiority in any contemporaneous Missal !
the act of adoration. One of the least elaborate of his borders : but the whole
is in perfect preservation. We observe 5 pages of text, and recreate ourselves
with the
Eighteenth Illumination. By F. VERONESI.
One of this artist's finest works. Esther, Mordecai, and Ahasuerus, with
attendants, are within the letter C. The lineal formation, or marking ofthe letter,
is beautifully executed ; especially a winged boy to the right. The foregoing,
which are the principal figures, are full of grace and expression ; but exhibiting
the usual disproportionate length of limb. The colouring of Esther's robe has
all the delicacy of Clovio and all the warmth of Titian ; but it is perhaps a little
too pinky. The surrounding border, forming the frame work of the page, is
equally classical and fanciful ; while the two groups, oftwo children each, beneath,
have never been surpassed. The whole page has, however, a tarnished appearance. After 5 pages of text, follows the
Nineteenth Illumination. By FRANCESCO and GIROLAMO.
Arich and finely flowing border ; but the two ornaments beneath, introduced
by the pencil of Francesco, shew the superior taste and delicacy of that artist.
Ofone of these ornaments I subjoin a fac-simile, in the colour in which the original appears, but necessarily of less crispness of execution.
FIRST DAY. cli
But let us proceed to the higher branches of art, of which
this extraordinary performance affords such abundant specimens. In the groups of figures, there is, amidst all the
The prevailing colours in Girolamo's border are purple, lilac, and ultramarine.
The illuminated letter, I, represents a small group of Jews addressed by our
Saviour. Next follow 5 pages of text; and the
Twentieth Illumination. By GIROLAMO.
Aninteresting and fresh looking illumination. The principal letter, I, represents
St. John the Evangelist, in fine preservation : nearly 4 inches square. The
surrounding border is exceedingly elegant and splendid. In the centre of the
right border is the supposed portrait of Pope Sixtus IV. above given by Philemon ;
but I have some doubts of its identity. That the reader however may be better
enabled to form his own judgment upon it, he is here presented with an excellent
engraving of the head of the same Pontiff, drawn and engraved by G. Lewis,
from a bronze medal in the possession of the late Mr. James Edwards.
PON
MAX
SA
We may merely take a glance at the following illumination (the Twenty First)
and stop a few minutes only at the
Twenty-second Illumination . By GIROLAMO.
In beautiful preservation and delicately executed. The principal illumination
(within the letter P) represents the Circumcision. There is unusual grace and
clii FIRST DAY.
intricate, harsh, and angular folds of drapery, at times,
much expression and even pathos. Look at this representation of Mary Magdalene at the foot of the cross-in the
splendor of effect in this interesting page. The smaller capitals ( PUER NATUS
EST NOBIS) are elaborately adorned. Three pages of text follow. Then the
Twenty-third Illumination. By GIROLAMO.
·
The least elaborate in the whole book ; but by no means the least graceful.
The christening, or calling his name Jesus,' is the principal illumination. The
border is worth copying ; being unconfined by a straight line-2 pages of text
follow, when we approach the
Twenty-fourth Illumination. BY GIROLAMO.
Among his most magnificent productions. The illumination, 6 inches by 5,
represents the Adoration of the Magi : very fresh and not unhappily conceived.
There is a profusion of embossed gold throughout ; and the border partakes of
the general splendor. The half-length figure below, in a white garment, crowned
with a scroll, is mean, and what is called gothic. The two angels, above, to the
left, are as graceful as this latter is forbidding : nor must our attention be
wholly withdrawn from this small angelic figure at top. Four pages, and the
Twenty-fifth Illumination, (not deserving of particular description) follow : after
which succeed 24 pages of text-and as a compensation for so many unadorned
leaves, we reach, and contemplate, with delight and amazement, the
Twenty-sixth Illumination. By F. Veronesi.
The PRESENTATION, one of the most exquisitely finished pieces of illumination
in existence ! It is full of figures ; crowded but not confused : the colours are rich,
or gay, or tender, as the subject appears to require. The subject is introduced
within the letter S. The exterior is much injured, and the ornaments upon it are
entirely defaced. The artist's name is at full length below : see p. cxlii . The
border, consisting of 6 ornaments, is only on the left : it is therefore less profuse
than usual, and, by such means, does not kill the enchanting effect of the picture.
It is also in the very best taste of the artist. I have heard that 100 guineas
were once offered for this illumination . Need more be added ? Five pages of
text follow ; then the
Twenty-seventh Illumination. By THE SAME.
The Presentation in small : only 2 inches and six eighths by 1 and seven
eighths. The Virgin and Simeon in attitudes as before. The border is wonderfully beautiful-having a greater variety of colour for back-ground than usual.
Not an ornament in it but what is deserving of a careful and highly finished copy.
For fancy and taste it can have no superior. Then follow 72 pages of text ; with
numberless beautiful capital initials. At length we reach that eighth wonder of
the world-the
Twenty-eighth Illumination. By F. Veronesi.
The CRUCIFIXION ; from the lower part of which, at the foot of the cross, the
FIRST DAY. cliii
magnificent representation of the Crucifixion !? Was ever
mental agony more powerfully expressed ? In the original,
ensuing figure of Mary Magdalene is taken. The Virgin, in a red garment, is
nearly 5 inches in height : the mother ofthe Virgin is in purple-they stand on
each side ofthe cross, above the figure of Mary Magdalene. The crucified Saviour,
about 4 inches and a quarter, is yielding up the ghost.' The character of his
head is most expressive. Two cherubs, or small angels, in green, are catching,
in a cup, the blood that streams from each of the hands of Christ ; below one of
them, a cherub, in red, catches the blood from the side ; also in a cup. On each
side, a little below, is a group of similar infantine characters. Again, below, an
infantine angel catches the blood, in a cup, which flows from the feet. The above
fac-simile shews the lower part of the cross ; as well as the beginning of the
inscription -— AB OLYMPO ' - alluded to by Mr. Evans. But no power of
engraving can express the magical manner in which the golden locks of the
agonised Mary are made to flow over her shoulders ! Almost every hair is articulated by the surprising minuteness of touch of Francesco's pencil. The illumination occupies the entire page, being nearly 15 inches in height. The whole
presents a blaze of splendor and force of expression hardly conceivable.
Opposite to this miracle of art is
The Twenty-ninth Illumination. By GIROLAMO.
The artists have here put forth their respective strengths, apparently in competition with each other. We have before us the most elaborate of Girolamo's productions. The principal picture, St. Gregory celebrating the Mass (5 inches and a
halfby4 and a half) is in exquisite preservation ; and although in the gothic style,
has great expression. There are nine principal figures, of which Sixtus is the most
prominent ; and ten heads are looking over a green drapery, dividing those people
from the rest. Nearly in the centre, is the Pope's seat, covered with green. Sixtus
is in white and gold. The surrounding compartments, by way of ornament, are
far preferable to any other similar production of this artist. The entablatures,
the children, the flowers, and the general tone of colours, are exquisite . There
are six lines oftext, (including the top illuminated line) in the centre. These Two
ILLUMINATIONSfacing each other, of such magnificent dimensions, such elaborate
finish, and such superb colouring -seem for a moment to absorb us in extatic
admiration ! Next follow 37 pages. Then a blank leaf : when we reach the
Thirtieth Illumination. By GIROLAMO.
A part of this very interesting illumination presents us with the letter D;
of which a highly finished fac- simile has been already presented to the reader :
see p. cxiii ante. The border is minute and beautiful . To the right, two angels are
singing from a scroll, with musical notes. Below, are eleven cherubic heads, in
red, round the Lamb in glory : the colours radiant, and the composition richly
deserving of a fac-simile. At the top of the border is a small half length of the
Creator.
cliv FIRST DAY.
the hair is entirely golden-and touched with a minuteness
and brilliancy quite astonishing. Indeed I know of nothing
which unites so much radiance with such extreme delicacy
ofexecution.
After 10 pages of text, and the Thirty-first Illumination (which is rather a
secondary performance) follow 29 pages (mostly with musical notes) which con- clude the volume. There is not room for another word. Yet all hail to the
owner of such a matchless treasure !!!
FIRST DAY. clv
LORENZO. Conceiving what must be the effect of the
original, I am free to confess my unbounded admiration of
this specimen !
:
PHILEMON. You seem to speak the sentiments of the
party yet the fingers, you observe, have a harsh effect, and
savour of the gothic taste before-mentioned. But of all its
ornaments, whether in the shape of borders, capital initials,
or detached groups, there is nothing which can exceed the
composition of the Presentation in the Temple by the aged
Simeon. It happens also to be perfect. The countenances,
especially of the Virgin and Simeon, afford the finest contrast possible of tenderness, modesty, and natural grace,
with age, anxiety, and prophetic sagacity. But an entire
morning might be well devoted to this Missal ; and so,
exhorting you never to let slip an opportunity of turning
over its leaves, and minutely examining its excellences, I
proceed to the notice of other specimens of the character of
which we are discoursing.
We now approach the latter period of the Fifteenth
Century, and the reign of our Seventh Henry in particular.
I believe you are all pretty well informed of the propensity
and even passion of that monarch for books . The splendid
remains of his library, in the British Museum, are alone a
demonstration of his bibliomaniacal character : yet that
Museum, vast, rich, and well-furnished as it is, wants one
gem in particular, connected with the subject of which we
are discoursing, to render its acquisitions nearly complete.
That gem, however, can never with propriety leave its
present resting-place. I would be understood to make
especial allusion to the Missal, once the property of
Henry VII. * which has for a century enriched the Cavendish
* Missal, once the property of HENRY VII. ] There is probably some truth in
the general position of Philemon, that THE LIBRARY OF HENRY VII. once
VOL. I. k
clvi FIRST DAY.
Collection, and is at this moment highly treasured, as
it deserves to be, by his Grace the DUKE OF DEVONshire.
contained, among other books, a great number of Offices, Hours, Missals, and
Breviaries. Be this as it may ; certain it is, that His Grace the Duke of Devonshire possesses, in the above treasure, animatedly described by the Monarch
of the Day,' a very curious, lovely, and interesting volume, of an octavo size,
but once of ampler dimensions. The reader without further delay shall be
introduced to a pretty thorough acquaintance with it. In the first place, its
exterior is full of promise : we observe the ancient brown-leather covers, with
its stamped, ornamented compartments, and the motto, ' DONA. NOBIS PAC[EM] '
introduced into a modern back and binding, by the late C. Hering, with peculiar
taste and felicity. Such approaches do the heart of the tasteful bibliomaniac
absolute good. On the recto of the 1st leaf, lo and behold the following interesting memorandum !
This book giuen be K. Henry 7 of England
to his daughter Margaret Q. of Scotland &
mother to the lady Margaret Douglas
who also gaue the same to the Archbishop of St. Andrews.'
Next follows the Calendar. On the recto ofthe 14th, and succeeding leaf, appears
Henry's own hand-writing; as hereafter follows —concluded by the gigantic autograph ' of the monarch above alluded to.
-
Remembre yo" . Kynde and
louyng fader. in yor
good prayers ....
Gymky
By
FIRST DAY. clvii
You are briefly to know, therefore, that this Missal contains
not only the gigantic autograph of Henry VII. , but his own
express donation of it to his daughter Margaret, afterwards
Queen of Scotland ; and whose daughter, in turn, as
solemnly bestowed it on the Archbishop of St. Andrews. By
This is the memorandum of Henry on giving his daughter the volume. On the
reverse ofthe 15th leaf, is a large Head of Christ, highly coloured, but with the
chin disproportionately short : it is surrounded by a blue radiated back-ground,
within a border of flowers. The illuminations, common to missals, follow : but
many of them are in half- lengths, of a larger size. Among the smaller ones are
the martyrdom of St. Thomas a Becket, and a figure of St. George (fol. 31 , rev. )
on borseback, completely armed, fresh in colour, and vigorous in design and
expression. Now, gentle reader, prepare for evidence of the donation (on the
reverse of fol. 32) before mentioned. In the hand-writing of the austere but
daughter- loving Henry, we read again as follows :
Pray for your louyng fader that gaue
you this booke and I geue you att all
tymes godds blessÿg and myne.
(Autograph as before. )
On the reverse of fol . 156, and last leaf of text, we read a memorandum of equal
interest. It testifies the donation of the book by MARGARET, (the fac- simile of
whose autograph is subjoined) the Grandaughter of Henry, to the Archbishop
of ST. ANDREws.
My good lorde
ofsaynt Andrews
i pray you prayfor
methat gaufe you
thys buuk yours
too my powr
Margaret
We proceed to two other ms, memoranda, and then gently shut up the volume.
On the recto ofthe following (blank and last) leaf, are Lord Burlington's initials :
on the reverse, we read as follows ;
April the 23d, 1718.
This book was for above 70 years in the hands of Mons. le Pin a Magistrate of
Bruges and after his death, in ye year 1717, purchased from his Executors
by me GEORGE WADE.
clviii FIRST DAY.
some chance or other, it got abroad, where it was purchased
by the celebrated General Wade, and by him was given to
his friend Lord Burlington, about a hundred years ago.
LORENZO. Singular indeed ! But have you no specimen
of the style of art which it displays ?
PHILEMON. None It is, generally speaking, in the
Flemish style; in the most lovely condition ; and the borders,
if I remember rightly, are among the most perfect and delicious of their kind. Indeed, although in respect to extraordinary art, there be nothing exactly unique to mention,
As an interesting key-stone to this beautifully-constructed bibliomaniacal arch,
we read, at the end, the following brief and pithy notice :
given to me by General Wade.
Burlington
The calligraphy is somewhat indifferent. The letter is large and gothic, but the
ink is faded. The illuminations are fresh, perfect, and joyous : the borders
sometimes exhibiting all the brilliancy of a flower-garden , and sometimes, in its
fruits, almost realising the luscious ' picture of the poet ; ' presenting '
the downy peach ; the shining plum ;
The ruddy fragrant nectarine ; and dark,
Beneath his ample leaf, the luscious fig.
The vine too here her curling tendrils shoots ;
Hangs out her clusters ..... (Thomson's Autumn, v. 675-9. )
But quo musa tendis ? To balance (as painters call it) all this gaiety and luxuriancy-and to remind the pious reader that there are more important things
for human observance and human enjoyment, than hare-bells and grapes-the
moral artist has introduced, in several of his borders, deaths-heads—touched (if an
apparent Hibernicism may be indulged) to the very life ! These ghastly emblems
of mortality are generally found in borders of Flemish Missals of the period in
which the present was executed. And thus say we farewell to the Missal, once
the property of Henry VII. which has for a century enriched the Cavendish
collection, and is at this moment highly treasured, as it deserves to be, by his GRACE THE DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE !'
FIRST DAY. clix
yet, as regards general beauty, and the particular interest
attached to this volume, I am quite certain that his Grace
of Devonshire would never even endure the thought of exchanging it for any specimen-however rich, rare, and
exquisite ! Indeed, this Missal, and the Saxon one, written
at the command of the Great Ethelwold, of which you may
not have yet forgotten the description, are, I verily conceive,
Book-Treasures, in the DEVONSHIRE COLLECTION, of such
interest and singularity that the wealth of either Ind '
should never be said to outweigh them in value !
LISARDO. Bravo ! I fully accord and sympathise with
everything you say hereupon. Proceed with your era of
Henry the Seventh.
PHILEMON. Indeed I have no particular formula or data
connected therewith ; but there must be many volumes, of
the Missal kind, which were once in that monarch's collection : * and it was about his period too, if I do not greatly
err, that the fashion began to prevail of introducing large
subjects in small volumes.†
many volumes of the Missal kind,-once in that monarch's collection . ] To
confirm both the conjecture of Philemon , and what has been advanced in the
preceding note, the reader is hereby informed ' that, among the Royal MSS.
in the British Museum, (Bibl. Reg. 2 D. XL) there is a thin folio volume of
Hours, of exceedingly delicate vellum, with a noble bottom and side margin,
having a small text of only 18 lines-once the property of Henry VII-which exhibits vastly pretty side borders of fruits and flowers ; worth the attention of
any artist to copy, who is in pursuit of specimens of this nature. This beautifu!
book is imperfect at the beginning and end, and several leaves appear to be
missing in other parts. Note ; Casley, p. 37, carries this division of the royal
MSS. only to 2 D xxxix. He therefore appears to have overlooked the present volume ; for a knowledge of which I am indebted to Mr. H. Ellis.
+ large subjects in small volumes. ] Among the Harleian MSS. (no. 2936) is a
small octavo volume of Hore particularly illustrative of the department of art
above alluded to by Philemon. It contains all the excellences and all the defects of the style in question . Generally speaking, this style is harsh and offensive :
for when the artists, employed in illuminating books, increased the size of their
clx FIRST DAY.
LYSANDER. I do not exactly understand you.
PHILEMON. Simply thus. In devotional volumes of an
octavo, or even sometimes of a duodecimo size, you shall
see comparatively large subjects, but generally half- lengths,
introduced so as to occupy nearly the whole page."
LORENZO. Do you happen to possess any specimen in the
portfolios brought with you in your baggage-waggon ?
PHILEMON. A droll conveyance for fac-similes of Missalilluminations ! But it so happens that I do possess a specimen-and a very striking one too-of the kind here alluded
to ; which completely exemplifies the style of art that I wish
to submit to your consideration. The Missal from which it
is taken, represents various leading events in the life of our
Saviour such as his Birth, Adoration of the Magi, Circumcision, Crucifixion, &c.—but among these larger subjects, there are none, if I remember rightly, which has
a more characteristic appearance, which more emphatically,
as it were, marks the touch and manner of composition of
-
figures, their defects seem to have increased in proportion. They had not sufficient knowledge of anatomy, nor sufficient management of light and shade, to
render their larger performances so perfect as their smaller pieces appear to be.
The book here particularly referred to is an exemplification of what we are
speaking of. The border-ornaments are numerous and rich ; but in the larger illuminations, they are only introduced at the bottom, and generally in one colour,
relieved by gradations of shade. Sometimes we observe in them very pretty
arabesques ; but instead of calligraphy , we must be permitted to read kakography,
as to the writing-which is in a roman character. Of its kind, however, this is
rather a curious volume, with an occasional tenderness of touch not common in
specimens ofthis character. Among the twelve larger illumiuations, we observe,
at fol. 66 rev. and fol. 67 recto, that eternal subject of graphic exercise--' David
and Bathsheba.' As the figures are large half-lengths, we are prepared for
extreme disgust. The countenance of Bathsheba, however, for once, happens to
have (mirabile dictu ! ) a beautiful expression, But her total ' lack of apparel ' hath
not escaped the severe notice of some former possessor of the volume-who has
left the following ' marginal gloss ' thereupon, as a testimony of his utter abhorrence of such unseemly art : Pudet ! Va ! Va ! ' In the whole, 109 leaves.
FIRST DAY. clxi
the artist, than that of our Saviour cleansing the Leper ;
and which is here placed before you. The original graced
the collection of the late Mr. Edwards. *
graced the collection ofthe late Mr. Edwards. ] My respectable neighbour,
(and indefatigable collector of rich and rare ' gems, in the department of bookilluminations ) Mr. Bliss, is the present possessor of the volume here alluded
to. It was purchased at the sale of Mr. Edwards's library ; and is described
summarily, but satisfactorily, at no. 825 of the Catalogue of the same. It is a
thick broad duodecimo of HOURS OF THE VIRGIN; containing 13 larger illuminations the subjects being in half-lengths, as above ; and thirty-one borders of
fruits and flowers, &c. Two of these borders, one representing the latter
sufferings of our Saviour -and the second, the genealogy of the Virgin-
clxii FIRST DAY.
BELINDA. There is something, methinks, very striking in
this manner of representing a subject-especially in smaller
volumes of devotion ; and I confess that my religious ardour
would be rather quickened than cooled if my own PrayerBook were embellished in a similar manner !
PHILEMON. I am not sure that this is quite orthodox, on
your part yet it cannot be denied that the giddy are oftentimes reclaimed, and the indifferent made serious, by spectacles of the like nature : especially when they adorn our
chambers, or temples of worship, in the character of finished
paintings... But this is digressive.
ALMANSA. Have you any thing else, of the same kind, to
keep alive the admiration which we all feel by such exhibitions of ancient art ? Be assured I shall have copies of them
introduced into my own Prayer Book—whether heresy or
orthodoxy be the result of such a measure !
·
"
are entitled to especial notice and commendation for the neatness and even
minuteness of their finishing. It is not however on account of the borders-nor
of the general excellence of the larger illuminations, of this volume, that I venture
to congratulate my aforesaid respectable neighbour and indefatigable collector
of rich and rare gems in the department of book-illumination '—but on account
(as indeed the above specimen may testify) of the distinctive or peculiar character
ofart which the latter display. Never were ' Flemish Lads and Lasses ' more
completely represented. Every character should seem to be a portrait : especially as in The Descent ofthe Holy Spirit,' and the Announcing of the Birth
of Christ ' the latter consisting only of two Shepherds-one of whom, with the
bagpipe under his arm, exhibits extraordinary individuality of character. In the
' Adoration of the Magi,' the two kings have very expressive physiognomies,
and the subject is treated with something of diguity: but the ABOVE COPPER
PLATE (executed by the faithful burin of Mr. Samuel Freeman) undoubtedly
gives us, in the Christ, the finest countenance in the volume. The other figures
partake of that poverty, or meagreness of execution, before alluded to : the
turbaned figure, behind the woman , has the face muffled or concealed- probably
from fear of contagion from the leper. The garment of Christ is gray ; the leper's
turban is white : and the figure just mentioned has a gold turban, with the
descending drapery in crimson. In the females, as in The Annunciation, ' and
Salutation,' there is considerable delicacy of expression. The condition of this
curious little volume is most desirable. It was sold for S6l. 15s.
FIRST DAY. clxiii
LISARDO. These are the ebullitions of mere female sensibility !
ALMANSA. And what has made Lisardo such a grave
and solemn judge on a sudden?
PHILEMON. I must not suffer this graphic conflict to
proceed : as I am sure, in the end, whether your Prayer
Books have, or have not, copies of such embellishments as
have been this day submitted to you, your orisons will proceed from benevolent and pious hearts. So, with the waving
of my sceptre, I dispel all controversy upon this head !
The same waving of the sceptre hath called forth another
devotional tome, executed in the period in which we are
now supposed to be gossipping ; but, in point of variety,
richness, and number of embellishments, I hardly know
where or how to class it. It is the Roman Breviary possessed by MR. DENT, * of which I now speak : -and perhaps
-
Roman Breviary possessed by Mr. DENT. ] During the sale of the library of
the late Mr. Edwards, and more particularly just before the day on which the
BEDFORD MISSAL was disposed of, Mr. Dent, (as Philemon has above correctly
observed, ) with all the parental fondness of the Owner of a choice treasure,
brought down the Breviary under consideration-in company, I believe, with his
Royal Highness the Duke of Gloucester —to see how far and how successfully
a comparison of it, with the aforesaid Missal, would help to enhance or depreciate his own. The thought was a very natural one, but the action was probably
a little indiscreet : as no lover of beautiful art would wish to see either the one
or the other book adumbrated by the comparison ! For my own part, it seems
to me that the two volumes can hardly be brought into competition with each
other ; as their ages and styles of art are essentially different ; and as, in respect
to the interest which an Englishman ought to feel, there can be no question
about the superiority of the Bedford Missal.
My present business, however, is with the Roman Breviary possessed by
Mr. DENT.' In the description of it, not a syllable shall be advanced, which,
according to my humble apprehension, is not warranted by every tittle of the
case.' This Breviary is without doubt a most resplendent and beautiful volume ;
and the interlocutors above are justified in the fine things ' they are pouring
forth in commendation of it, from the specimen of art above adduced, and from the
animated language of Philemon. It is about 9 inches in length, by nearly 6 and
clxiv FIRST DAY.
you may remember, just previous to the sale of the Bedford
Missal, about two years ago, how the enthusiastic owner of
the said Breviary brought down ' his rival treasure to com- 6
a half in width. The binding of it is singularly choice ; it being the original—
exqusitely covered, in a dark chocolate- colour calf, with minute arabesque ornaments, in blind tooling. The back is modern, but appropriate ; and the interior
is also in perfectly good taste -by the late C. Hering. This Breviary contains
523 leaves ; every page having more or less of ornament ; so that, collectively,
here is such a body of illumination, as hardly any Missal, or other Breviary,
can venture to match. No doubt these pages are executed with various degrees
of skill ; and it is quite evident that three artists, at least, have devoted their
pencils to the decoration of the volume. Let us now therefore enter upon a
description of this multifarious art-exhibiting tome. The Calendar is surrounded
by broad borders, in which the various occupations of the season, as usual, are
depicted : but the Calendar is the sorriest part of the volume- and we pass over
it rapidly to fol. 8, rev. and 9, rect. where we observe very elaborate but
Flemish art. The latter decoration exhibits King David upon his death-bed. A
physician is examining the urinal : an angel is descending from above to receive
his parting spirit. The colouring is brilliantly perfect. The recto of fol. 29,
representing the Nativity, gives us the first refreshing specimen of the better art
contained in this Breviary. The head of Joseph has peculiar dignity of expression. The colouring throughout is sober and subdued ; yet it has evidently
received some injury.
The Adoration of the Magi, by the same superior artist, occurs on the recto of
folio 41. The head of Joseph is here again a very fine piece of painting : his
habit is a deep chocolate colour. The background is very picturesque : being a
large temple in ruins. At folio 63, the Almighty, in the act of forming the
World, is floating in the air : a papal tiara is upon his head. Let us designate
this costume, in the gentleness of our hearts, a SLIGHT anachronism ! On the
reverse of fol. 100, and recto of fol. 101 , occur four small pieces, representing
the night- scenes of the Passion, Seizure, Betrayal, and Arraignment, of Christ.
Six similar small pieces, exhibiting the remainder of the striking events of our
Saviour's life, up to his Crucifixion, immediately follow. The borders are sometimes vividly splendid. Subjects from the Bible, by the same artist, (decidedly different from him who executed the subjects on folios 29 and 41) within
highly-wrought and elaborate borders, continue. Among these subjects, that
representing the Rich Man and Lazarus, on folio 252, recto, is most singularly
treated. The future destinies of the two characters form also distinct subjects
of delineation. The rich man, naked and squallid, is tumbling upon a black
globe, or ball, from which issues the fire of Hell to receive him : and this, too,
precisely by the side of a marble terrace and ballustrade-which flauks the
chamber wherein he is banquetting, and around which the musicians are
FIRST DAY. clxv
pete with that magnificent and matchless volume ! But there
was nothing in common between the two volumes to make
such comparison of any use or validity. For they were of
arranged-making the air re-echo to their trumpet-symphonies ! Above, forming
a powerfully-speaking contrast to the infernal scene below, is the spirit of
Lazarus received into Abraham's bosom-amidst a choir of angels ! Below, the
same character, with his clap-dish (see this mode of treating the appearance
of Lazarus—which was the usual one-represented in a wood-cut, of about
the same date, in the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. iv. p. 414) is approaching the
banquet-room of the Rich Man--a dog jumping upon him as if to forbid his
entrance.
"
In respect to borders of flowers, of a larger growth,' let that which encircles
the page of folio 263, reverse, receive every praise. It is also fresh and
uninjured. Yet the border which surrounds the subject of Solomon delivering his
Proverbs, at folio 260, recto, has probably a more striking effect. On folio 293
we observe a very spirited representation of the Martyrdom of St. Andrew. On
fol. 297, rect. is a figure intended for the Portrait of St. Barbara, sitting : the
countenance is highly wrought, but the head is too large ; the usual defect in all
Flemish art of this period. This figure is by much the largest in the volume. The
martyrdom of the same Saint is represented, in small, in the background. On the
recto of folio 309, we are delighted with the beautiful representation of St. John
writing his Revelations in the island of Patmos. The figure of the Saint, above
EXHIBITED to his audience by Philemon, carries its own commentary with it !
It is engraved by C. HEATH from an excellent copy by GEORGE LEWIS. A
portion of the picture (from a consideration of the greatly increased expense)
has been reluctantly omitted. It consists of visions of angels in the air, and two
knights on horseback, by a river's side, below. The landscape, above the bank
whereon the Saint sits, is touched and coloured with equal freedom and truth.
Upon the whole, this is the choicest illumination in the volume ; and we instantly
recognise the pencil of the same artist who has previously (as at folio 29 and 41)
charmed us by such admirable specimens of his skill. His pencil appears but once more in the volume.
On folio 314 reverse, is a brilliant little bit, representing the Murder of
Thomas a Becket ; within a fresh and sparkling border. On folio 348, is the very
unusual subject of a representation of St. Thomas Aquinas : having a crucifix
before him-an angel above, and two monks below. On the recto of folio 354
we are charmed with a vastly pretty illumination of the Genealogy ofthe Virgin;
the back- ground is like scarlet fresh from the hands of the dyer ! On folio 365,
recto, begins a new, and much inferior style of art-as to the scriptural or
legendary subjects introduced. The borders, however, are occasionally still more
rich and imposing ; as at folios 404, 405, 408, 412, 414, 418, 419, 421 , 427,
431, &c. containing arabesques, with buds, or fruit, or precious stones, with a
clxvi FIRST DAY.
different periods, as were also the calligraphy and the character
of their ornaments. If I do not therefore go the full-length
back-ground of dark green, crimson, or blue. On the recto of folio 481 , are some
Deaths' Heads (a favourite ornament) executed with great delicacy and effect—
but slightly injured. On the recto of folio 368, is a peculiarity worth noticing :
the space, which ought to have been filled by a representation of St. Catharine,
is left blank. Mr. Dent, I trust, will endeavour to get it supplied by a copy
from some other clever figure, of the same character, executed about the same
time. At folios 436-7, we discover the GRANDEST ILLUMINATIONS in the
Breviary. The first folio has the reverse entirely filled with heraldic embellishments, representing the royal arms of Ferdinand and Isabella impaled, and
emblazoned with all manner of appropriate decoration : the whole, as it were,
beneath the protection of the wings of the royal eagle —with the motto
' SUB UMBRA ALARUM PROTEGE NOS.' Opposite to this blaze of splendor
(being the recto of folio 437) we instantly recognise, at top , the pencil of the
artist before so much praised, in the composition of the Assumption ofthe Virgin :
a small, delicious, and perfectly enchanting specimen of art-in the finest possible
state of preservation . Below, to the right of another rich piece of heraldic
blazoning, (wherein we observe the arms of France quartered, on a blue ground)
in letters of gold, in the gothic shape, we read the following very interesting
memorandum : Dme. Elisabeth. Hispaniar[ um]. et . Siscilie. Regine. &c. xpianissie. potentissie. semp[ er ] auguste. supreme. Dně sue. clemetissime Franciscus De
Roias eiusdē maiestatis huïllimus seruus. ac. creatura, optime de se merite . H[ ic]
... marin .. Hi . ex. obsequio . . . obtulit.'
The latter part of this inscription is defaced, and I will not shew the folly of
an awkward attempt at its restoration. From this important memorandum, or
document, it is quite indisputable that one FRANCISCUS DE ROIAS, a Spaniard,
caused this splendid volume to be executed for his royal mistress, Elizabeth
(or Isabella) of Castille. Now as Ferdinand began to reign in 1474, and as
Isabella died in 1504, we shall not long hesitate about the date of the execution of this Breviary. Let us say therefore somewhere towards the end of the
fifteenth century. Who Franciscus de Roias was-? this deponent sayeth and
knoweth nothing. Had he caused many similar tomes to be executed ? If so, I
wish they were reposing by the side of the present. I have not, however, yet
done with the present tome. There are, as at folios 407 and 491, some
pretty small female whole-lengths, with head-dresses of diadems or nets, and
coloured with great delicacy and effect. Perhaps their heads are somewhat too
large ; but, as a whole, they form very interesting specimens of splendid female
costume. It only now remains to observe, that the text of the volume is in a
good style of calligraphy. The inks are red and black ; and the character is a
small neat gothic, each page being executed in double columns. And thus much
(no stinted measure-I trust its owner will say ! ) for the Roman Breviary possessed by MR. DENT!
FIRST DAY. clxvii
1
of admiration expressed by the Owner of the treasure now
particularly alluded to, it is, because, having seen very many
specimens of the like character, and wishing to exercise
honestly the regal office which you have elected me to fulfil ,
I am disposed to speak of it exactly as its various merit
seems to my humble judgment to justify.
It betrays at least three different styles or characters of
art ; and ofthese, unluckily, there are the fewest specimens
ofthat which I conceive to be of the highest order. However,
what does appear of this latter kind, if we except slight
injuries, is really enchanting : and I hasten to lay before
you a portion only of one of the few specimens here alluded
to-which, could you but see the whole, you would allow
to be among the most perfect of its kind. It represents
St. John in the Island of Patmos writing his Revelations.
Above, in the original, are visions in the air-delightfully
managed.
clxviii FIRST DAY.
ALMANSA. Beauteous representation of the Saint ! I will
have him also for my liturgical collections.
LISARDO. I yield ; and can no longer resist the temptation of a similar embellishment.
ALMANSA. Victory !
LORENZO. Order ! Order ! Finish your account of this
charming Missal.
PHILEMON. It only remains to observe that every page,
of the thousand pages which it contains, is, more or less,
decorated with border-ornaments ; and some of these decorations are absolutely as vivid and fresh as if they had been
executed during the present Regency. You see, in a prodigious number of them, fruits, flowers, insects, precious
stones, or arabesques, finished with a charming precision,
and in perfect tenderness of colouring. And what gives it
no small value is, that it contains elaborate heraldic illuminations, and an inscription which shews the volume to have
been executed either by the pencil, or at the costs and
charges,' of one FRANCISCUS DE ROIAS -for Isabella the
Queen of Ferdinand, who was King of Spain and Sicily.
BELINDA. Precious monument of upwards of three centuries execution ! And in original vigour too -unknowing
decay !?
PHILEMON. Not exactly so ; for there are, in too many
instances, tokens of injury which must have arisen from the
sheer carelessness of some former possessor. At present,
Bramah's lock and key properly guard it from the hands
of the profane ! While we are warmed with the notice of
these treasures, executed chiefly by Flemish artists, let me
place quietly before you-taken from a similar treasure of
still more generally perfect art * —a specimen or two from
a similar treasure, of still more generally-perfect art. ] The public are not
FIRST DAY. clxix
an extraordinary volume, of a small octavo size, which, only
lately, hath challenged the admiration of the curious. What
is singular, and of which I do not remember another inwholly unacquainted with this similar treasure ' ; as a very animated, and not
violently over-charged, description of its beauties will be found in the Catalogue
of Messrs. Longman, Hurst, and Co. 1816, 8vo. no. 6284. That account begins
with stating that the beauties of this volume are of a description so dazzling,
that words alone cannot convey the ideas requisite to form a conception of its
singular attractions. ' This may be true ; but the dazzling ' price attached to it
-Two Hundred and Fifty Pounds-naturally begets a supposition that its
' attractions ' ought to be of a very singular ' nature indeed ! I will be free to
confess that, as a specimen of Flemish art, take it for all in all, ' I have never
seen its'like ' before or since . There is however a somewhat curious piece of
secret history belonging to this attractive' octavo. It was left as a legacy to a
charitable institution ; that is to say, Messrs. John and Arthur Arch, booksellers,
were first in possession of it, for the purpose of accounting to the trustees of the
charity for the produce of the sale thereof : and Four Hundred Pounds was the
original dazzling ' price affixed to it, by one, or more, of the said trustees . At
my suggestion, Messrs. Arch conveyed it to His Grace the Duke of Devonshire ;
with the idea that its extraordinary merit might possibly induce that nobleman
to become its possessor. But the owner of the Henry VIIth Missal (described at
p. cliv, ante) needed not an additional specimen of fine Flemish art ; and His
Grace declined the proposed acquisition. While in the possession of Messrs.
Arch-as the trust-owners of the volume appeared to be fearful of the air of
heaven visiting it too rudely'- Mr. Hodgetts (the artist who made the copies
from the Boccaccio of Mr. Coke-see note at p. xiii, ante) was sent to make
copies of the originals for the purpose of the ANNEXED ENGRAVINGS. Mr.
Hodgetts completed his task faithfully. The larger portrait has a dark green
back-ground : the countenance of the man is pallid , but of a brownish hue. His
hat is black, as is the scarf upon his shoulders ; the pudding sleeves beneath are
brown; but the arms are clothed in crimson sleeves, relieved by a yellowish tint.
The same dress appears in the smaller picture : the altar is draped in red crimson, with a green border : the stool is a brown oak colour : the monument beneath
the feet of the man is brass : the visionary appearance of the lower part of the
crucified Saviour is touched according to nature : the back-ground is blue and
stone-colour.
6
"
But-the ' secret history.' Thus then it is. On a sudden, without any specific
notice, and without any alleged reason, this bijou of Flemish illumination- art
was whistled out ' of its snug resting place in the cabinet of Messrs. Arch-and
found itself, to its utter surprise, among the treasures of Messrs. Longman and Co.—
who, on their parts, had nothing to do with its previous destination , but received
it, as a matter of course, on return, as an article for sale. From 400l. it leaped
down to 250l. in value : yet this latter was much too high above the earth ' to
clxx FIRST DAY.
stance, it is preceded by a Portrait of the Patron, apparently, who rewarded the artist for his execution of the
volume. Allow with me that there is at least a great deal of
character, or individuality, in this Portrait ; although it
may not exactly remind us of the countenance of the
Belvidere Apollo ! *
LORENZO. Singular indeed ! He shall have a place in iny
interminable Collection of Portraits. I wish we knew his
render its situation secure ; or, rather, its removal certain. Mr. John North, of
whose cabinet of bijoux the reader will have pretty strong evidence in the pages
of this FIRST DAY, ' went, also at my request, to inspect this magnetic missal.
He offered a liberal price, much however below the printed one ; with which
offer the vendors or trustees of the treasure did not think themselves justified in
complying. The worthy gentleman, whose portrait accompanies this description,
and which occupies the reverse of the first leaf, next found himself, on a sudden,
the property of Messrs. Gordon and Forster ; and the first punishment inflicted
upon the feelings of this worthy gentleman, was, to send the volume, which was
' in the original stamped binding,' as properly noticed in the Catalogue of Messrs.
Longman and Co-to be stripped of its old coating, and put into a green velvet
and more spruce exterior ! Such a proceeding was little short of rank barbarism :
and it is said that mister Charles Lewis, on receiving instructions to perform the
operation, started backwards three paces and mo '-while the lights ' in his
workshop burnt blue !! ' However, the deed was done : off went the stamped
covers-and on came the green velvet and a more medley compound—a more
infelicitous mixture of January and May-never came across the ken ' of the
collector. To conclude this mysterious ' history-the said volume, with the said
demi-apple, and demi-pea, green exterior, now adorns the cabinet of
"
:
see p... , ante. Its interior beauties are yet undiminished ; and I
long had the wish , but never the means, of putting the finishing stroke to this
inadequate description, by treating the reader with an engraving, from the burin
of Freeman, which should represent the spirits of martyrs and confessors, naked ,
and standing upright upon the backs of prostrate angels, in the act of approaching
the divine presence with hands folded in prayer and adoration. It is a very
singular subject, and executed in the very best style of the artist. But-my
hopes, long indulged, have now sunk into despair-and thus it is that
Clouds obscure the brightest sky,
And night succeeds to day.'
The Poems of Nicolas Grimault, 1693, 8vo. p. 18.
* See the OPPOSITE PLATE.
THE
ASTOR
THE
STOR
NY
NY
IBRAH
BRARY
CPartSe
UNKNOWN PORTRAIT.
From ( "Flemish Respal ofthe XVIthCentury.
London Published forthe Rev- TFDibdin April1817.
PRINTED BYLAHEE
FIRST DAY clxxi
name ; but are you sure that he is the Patron -as you
designate him to be?
PHILEMON. Why I draw such inference is, that you
observe evidently the same man (for the countenance cannot be mistaken) kneeling at the foot of the altar, in the first
principal illumination. Here he is !'-as we used to read in
the chap-books of our infancyLYSANDER. There can be no doubt of the accuracy of
the observation. These hitherto unknown miniature portraits, of an ancient date, are vastly pleasing. Probably you
have a yet further specimen or two ofthe same kind ?
PHILEMON. Has Lysander become unconscionable ? But
while I think of it, I do happen to possess something of a
VOL. I. 1
clxxiv FIRST DAY.
of its vellum, and the soundness of its condition, than for
the brilliancy of its calligraphy or illuminations. Yet, if I
remember rightly, it is in its ancient binding, and possesses
altogether so genuine an air, that I could readily compound
for a little defectiveness of graphic skill.
You must here remember, that all the Illuminated
Volumes of devotion, just mentioned, are executed in a
GOTHIC CHARACTER ; and are, generally speaking, remarkable for one and the same style of (Flemish) art. To submit
further notices of similar treasures would answer very little
purpose nor indeed would the time allow of it , were I disposed to make the experiment. Therefore, just recalling to
your memory the missals of this character, which you lately
saw in the possession of Messrs. Triphook, Wurtz, and
Jarman, * and which are of nearly equal merit with most of
Missals-in the possession ofMessrs. Triphook, Wurtz, and Jarman. ] We will
first dispatch Mr. TRIPHOOK'S Missal. I hardly know when I have seen anything, for its dimensions, and style of art, more curious and attractive . This
bijou measures little more than 5 inches in height by about 4 in width. It appears, from a date, to have been executed in 1527 for one of the Sforzas, Dukes
of Milan and is an OFFICE OF THE VIRGIN after the use of the Metropolitan
church of Rome. The writing is in roman letters : and the whole is in Latin,
with the exception of a prayer, against private enemies, composed in the Italian language, at the end, in 7 pages. It is difficult to describe the exact character
of art which this singular volume displays. In the minuteness, variety, richness,
and even prodigality of ornament, in the border decorations, I am not sure whether it do not unite the delicate capriccios of Francesco Veronese with the powers ofcolouring displayed in the similar ornaments of Mr. Dent's Missal. The illuminations, from the usually selected subjects of scripture, are at times quite
extraordinary exhibiting the peculiarity of touch and power of colouring, displayed in the countenances of Rubens, with the angular- folded style of drapery
particularly used by Albert Durer. There is at times a sort of gaiety of composition as in the figure, with the plumed hat, in the background of the subject of the Salutation-which reminds us of the decorations in the Tewerdancks. The
heads are frequently full of pathos and expression ; as that of the larger Shepherd,
in the annunciation of the Nativity ; and more particularly the head of the
dying Saviour upon the cross. In such a galaxy of luminaries, the eye can with difficulty dwell upon an individual star : but, let the lover of all that is
FIRST DAY. clxxv
the preceding-and, at the same time, earnestly advising you
not to multiply copies of a similar complexion-I proceed to
close this Missal-Discussion by the notice of two or three
curious and precious look carefully upon the Circumcision—its general brilliancy,
andthe management of the gold upon the woman, offering the basket, to the left,
in particular let him also contemplate the blaze of splendour in which the
Annunciation, Nativity, Adoration of the Magi, &c. are executed and enveloped
by their borders — and, equally interesting with either, the Agony ofour Saviour
in the Garden ofGethsemane—what then ? Why, let him do this, and he cannot
fail, instinctively and irresistibly, to throw downforty sovereigns for this treasure ;
and march home with it triumphantly in his pocket.
Next comes the Missal of Mr. WURTZ. That worthy bibliopolist shewed me
the missal under discussion, when he was over in this country for the purpose of
setting springes for [ bibliomaniacal ] woodcocks. ' It is a broad octavo, written
in a large gothic type ; and its chief beauty consists in the purity of its vellum,
and the truth and freshness of its ornaments. The borders are chiefly fruits and
flowers, with an occasional display of precious stones and pearls ; the latter very
delicately managed upon a green back-ground. We see frequently the words
FORS VOUS in these borders : of which I will not pretend to give an explanation. Upon the whole, although there be nothing decidedly pre-eminent in
this volume, it possesses, nevertheless, such general beauty and perfection of
condition-the colours are so fresh and fair, and the style of art (Flemish) so
uniform and attractive-that, as a specimen of graphic skill, of the period under
consideration, I should be well disposed to give it a very choice and snag birth '
in a cabinet devoted to productions of the like character. It remains to notice a
very blazing book star, of the same description, in the possession of M. JARMAN,
jeweller, in the Strand. An enthusiastic admirer of illuminated missals sent me
' post haste ' to observe this said blazing star :' and I will be free to admit that
its rays at first nearly dazzled me ! Yet a second examination shewed me
the fallacy of the first impression. There is more of gaudiness than of grandeur,
more of obtrusive and sometimes even coarse decoration, than of delicate and
accurate composition, throughout this volume. The pages are, as it were, overcharged with embellishment; and quantity, has been too often mistaken for
quality, of colouring. There are, however, very many collectors who need not
be afraid or ashamed of calling Mr. Jarman's Missal a resplendent and heartrejoicing tome.
•
But before we take leave of these precious bijoux, wherein Flemish Art
appears to rather unusual advantage, let me occupy two further moments ofthe
reader's time, by the mention of an exquisite volume, of this description, in the
possession ofMessrs. PAYNE AND Foss ; recently obtained by them, and valued at
the price of Sixty Guineas-be the same sum meted out in the new coinage of
silver, or of gold ! I admit unequivocally the extreme tenderness, beauty, and
clxxvi FIRST DAY.
singularly lovely and precious productions, executed by
Italian or French Artists, and written in the ROMAN
CHARACTER.
LORENZO. Talk not of time-when we are impatient for
instruction like that which you are now imparting !
LISARDO. When vellum, purple or white, oak-covers,
beautiful writing, and yet more beautiful art, be the
theme-away with ...
LYSANDER. Gently, I beseech you. Have you no mercy
upon the lungs of Philemon ? -and are not your eyes
dazzled even unto blindness' by the sparkling gems which
have been already displayed ?
PHILEMON. I will spare the reply of Lisardo. For
myself, know then, faithful and affectionate subjects, that
my lungs are yet untouched, and my desire of communication yet unabated, The attention and admiration which
you are pleased to bestow, are glorious incentives for a
renewal of the Missal- Theme!
condition of this gothic-written missal : but it has suffered a little from the gentle
pressure of some devotee's (shall we say female's ?) finger and thumb-or thumb
and finger -which ever mode of expression please the reader best. The borders
are composed generally of fruits and flowers ; and sometimes the scriptural subjects are surrounded by, or rather embedded in, shells. These subjects have now
and then great spirit as well as delicacy : and that of the three young men, pursued
by three figures of death (see a similar representation in the Typog. Antiq. vol. ii.
p. 102) is really a master- piece of art. This choice devotional manual is a present
'fit for a Queen; ' and, if so, for a Princess-whether her name be CHARLOTTE
or MARY! Yet again ; if, from the pressure of the times, (for Poverty, like
Death, seems now- a- days ' equally to rap at the gate of the palace and the door
of the cottage ') there should not be a disposition to ' mete out' the sixty-guinea'
measure aforesaid, possible it is that the beauteous little missal tome, in the same
collection, executed in what is called cameo gris-and of very uncommon occurrence in this character- may, for TWELVE GOLDEN SOVEREIGNS, adding twelve
shillings thereto (auncientlye ycleped GUINEAS) be considered a very eye and
heart-soothing substitute ! Indeed , I hold this cameo-gris production to be worthy
a place in the choicest cabinet.
·
FIRST DAY. clxxvii
See ! what a galaxy of beauty and splendour does this
specimen convey ! Well may you be amazed . Know, therefore, that this glorious representation of the Assumption of
the Virgin is taken from a Missal, or Office of the Virgin,
(now in the possession of Sir M. M. SYKES, Bart. * ) which
a Missal-in the possession of Sir M. M. Sykes, Bart. ] With what peculiar
propriety does the account of Missals, written in the Roman character, commence
with the present most exquisite specimen !? And how much does it redound to
the book-spirit, taste, and enterprise of the present amiable and excellent possessor ofthe same treasure, that he determined never to lose sight,' ' never to
keep his eye off,' the very volume which forms the subject of our discourse !?
Such was the sentiment-and such the language, of Sir Mark. I own that, as a
whole, nothing has yet approached it, in my humble estimation, of the period in
which it was executed . But who was the artist ? ' Ay, there's the rub ;' and what
a fine fellow must that FRANCIS have been, who seems to have kept constantly
upon the alert ' a host of painters and illuminators, who have propagated his
fame in colours as glowing as those which were exhibited upon their own canvas
and vellums. But to the task. And yet reader, let me, in the very simplicity
of my heart, just mention to thee how often, some twelve years ago, at the sign
of the Horace's Head (not of the Sun' ) in Fleet Street, I have stopped, gazed,
and admired,' with this beauteous tome beneath my eye ! How often I have
sighed and looked, and sighed again, ' to become the possessor of such a
treasure ! Tedious digression-the book !
4
•
•
-
"
I obey. First however, as to its history : for most curious books have something, both extrinsic and intrinsic, belonging to them worth imparting. It was
originally, beyond all doubt, the property of FRANCIS the FIRST ; and expressly
executed for that monarch. The letter F surmounted by a crown : the regal
arms of France : the device of the Salamander ( sometimes accompanied with the
motto ' Nutrisco et extinguo) each, and altogether, unequivocally demonstrate its
rightful Lord.'...What would I give —or rather not give for a catalogue of
the Books of Francis, and more particularly for a knowledge of the secret history
of their dispersion ? No matter : this volume of THE OFFICE OF THE BLESSED
VIRGIN, after a lapse of two centuries and a half, came into the possession ofthe
Duke de la Valliere, and was sold at his sale , in 1783, for 3000 livres. It was
purchased by Mons. Paris ; and of him by Mr. Edwards ; and at the sale of the
Parisian library it became the property of Mons. Laurent, a bookseller at Paris,
for 109l. 4s. From the hands of M. Laurent it came into those of Mr. White, of
Fleet-Street, who put it up to auction in 1804, and bought it in again for 115l.
10s. Sir Mark purchased it of Mr. White, for a sum a little beyond that
last mentioned and it now adorns the splendid library of Sledmere. Thus much
for its history.
:
Secondly, for its appearance, and the character of its illuminations. Mons. De
clxxviii FIRST DAY.
was formerly the closet-companion of FRANCIS THE FIRST ;
it having been, beyond all doubt, expressly executed for
that monarch. Much as you may admire it, I am not sure
•
·
"
Rome, who, of all book- binders, is surely damn'd to everlasting fame, ' hath
shewn the trenchant propensities both of his taste and steel- instruments, by
trimming, what was formerly a goodly quarto, down to the dimensions of a disproportionate octavo : and, in such trimming,' hath chosen to cut away, without
remorse, very many of the marginal decorations of this lovely Book of Offices :
arabesques, the rose, or the lily, by him nullo discrimine agetur. Like a good
tailor he cuts away, and cares not how many interposing sylphs' are dismembered by his operations . The frontispiece of the book bears the following
title : OFFICIUM BEATE MARIE VIRGINIS-in roman capitals of gold and ultramarine blue, admirably executed. An oval, surrounded by flowers, with a
cherubic head at top and at bottom, is the accompanying ornament. Four pages,
having a brown and gold-corded border, follow- with two initial F's, surmounted
by a crown, below each page. The second of these pages only is filled by a
beautiful piece of heraldic painting, containing the arms of some ancient owner
ofthe volume. On the reverse of the 3d leaf, appears the first grand illumination, representing a whole length figure of St. Nicholas ( 5 inches and three quarters
in height) with the three children in a basket. The St. Veronica sudarium hangs
at the bottom ofthe Saint's garment. The expression, drawing, and colouring of
the whole, together with the tenderness of the back-ground , cannot be surpassed.
The 5th leaf is blank. The calendar terminates on the reverse of the 17th leaf.
The Annunciation, on the recto of the 18th leaf, is exceedingly well managed in
its accessories ; but we instantly acknowledge the inferiority of the subject, in
touch, colour, and composition, to that which has just before so much enchanted
us. It is worth observing, however, that the same pencil, which executed the
Annunciation, appears no where again throughout the volume : while the artist
who designed the Salutation, on the reverse of fol. 27, and the Nativity, on the
reverse of fol. 37, appears to be one and the same with him to whom we are
indebted for thefrontispiece.
"
However, we quickly recognise the cunning ' hand of the St. Nicholas ILLUMINATOR, in every one of the remaining subjects : Shepherds keeping Watch :
Adoration ofthe Magi : Circumcision : Flight into Egypt : Assumption : (see the
ACCOMPANYING PLATE. ) Angel appearing to David : Raising of Lazarus : The
Trinity : Francis, in the character of St. Louis, touching for the Evil. In the
whole, 100 leaves of text, with 20 lines in a full page ; written in rather a full
size character, but hardly approaching to calligraphy. Of each of these illuminations, let not the reader expect a detailed account : the vocabularies of the
English, French, Italian , Spanish, and German languages, collectively , would
hardly furnish terms adequate to describe their rich and rare apparel.' Whatever is radiant in colour, and soft in tint-whatever is lovely in the human form,
or graceful in the disposition of drapery-whatever brightens or obumbrates
LIBRARY
Nh
HE
LIBR
ASTOR
BRARY
N
h
THE
FreemanSculp
FAC SIMILLE OF AN ILLUMINATION
Ina copyofthe CFFICE OF THE VIRGINformerlybelonging to Francis the First ,
andnowin the Pofsefsion of Sir M.M.Sykes Bart.
PRINTED BY AWEE
FIRST DAY. clxxix
that even better specimens might not have been selected.
Yet, methinks, what you here behold, unites the dignity
of Poussin with the tenderness of Murillio !
ALMANSA. Surely we have here the very perfection of
the art. Francesco Veronese himself seems eclipsed.
PHILEMON. Not exactly so, either : although it might
be with difficulty that you could produce many more striking
specimens. What I particularly admire in the Missal here
alluded to, is, that uniform classical taste in the borders of
the pictures—which balance, by the sobriety of their tones,
the vivid masses of colour in which the Scriptural Subjects
themselves are clothed within the said borders. In this
transporting volume, almost every page of which is beaming
with the golden initial, and Salamander-device, of FRANCIS,
we observe almost every-thing which renders art perfect :
and ifthe writing be of secondary merit, the illuminations
can yield to nothing superior.
LYSANDER. What can you say further ? and how can we
be interested in any additional specimen of art, after what
we have just seen ?
6
PHILEMON. Say you so ? Look only at a few pages in
the stupendous volume of Creation. ' Because yonder forest
waves its dark-green masses, or yonder mountain is gleaming with the thousand half tints of a setting sun, shall the
' meadow cease to attract by its velvet surface, or the rivulet
landscapes-whatever makes the clouds to float in fleecy masses, or causes the
ray to dart from heaven-whatever gives character, expression, life and soul, to
composition and colouring, are here-nearly in their pristine state with the
exception ofthe last subject, which has been much rubbed. And if artists, called
upon to adorn modern Prayer Books, seek for appropriate decorations, they must
look with no indifferent ( shall I add an hopeless ?) eye upon the illuminations of
this devotional volume. O rare FRANCIS! and more than thrice fortunate,
( terque quaterque beatus ' ) SIR MARK MASTERMAN SYKES, BART!!
* See the OPPOSITE PLATE.
clxxx FIRST DAY.
to charm by its silvery windings ? Has the lily, or primrose
of the valley, no characteristic beauty ?—and because yonder
cedar of Libanus is vast and umbrageous, are we to withhold our admiration from the beech or the pine ?
BELINDA. What does all this lead to ?
PHILEMON. I will instantly extricate you from the labyrinth into which you seem to think I have enticed you. Has
Belinda no love of a cottage, because a palace is a much
grander abode ?
BELINDA. My wonder and perplexity increase. Give us
the moral of all this fabling.
PHILEMON. If you have eyes,' prepare to open them
now. Look at these charming little bits of nature, both in
grove, meadow, and mountain ! ?
BELINDA. I feel the force of your mode of reasoning;
and admire the process by which you conduct us from the
grand to the simple.
*
PHILEMON. Here are my humbler scenes ! Here are my
rivulets, my lilies, and my beechen groves ! What you are
now looking at, are taken from a tiny and fairy-like volume
of the Office ofthe Virgin in the possession of MR. NORTH; †
and these subjects are part of those which constitute the
Calendar.
* See the OPPOSITE PLATE.
+ Office ofthe Virgin, in the possession ofMr. North. ] The further we proceed,
the more, thickly strewed with flowers seem to be the banks and bye-ways
through which we pass. The birds carol lustily in the branches, and all creation
wears a heart- soothing appearance ! To what can this tend ? Briefly this.
After the warm colouring of the preceding note, has the reader any expectation
of witnessing richer hues ? After the glow of Titian, will he sigh for the splendor
of Rubens ? I know not : but the same reader is hereby informed, that the
present exquisite bijou, of the devotional kind, is by far the MOST EXQUISITE
of the Italian illuminated Offices, that Mr. Edwards ever had an opportunity of
obtaining. ' So says Mr. Evans ; Bibl. Edvardsiana, no. 829. And what was the
result of such saying, ' added to the tale' which the volume itself told ? Mr. 6
N
Februarius habet dies xxviii.Lunavero.XXIX
d Ignatii epifcopi et mat xi e Purificatio b Mariev
XIX f Blafiiepifcopi et mart viii 3 Gilberti confefforis
AAgathe Virginis et mart.
xvi b Dorothea virginis
DER
Aprilis habet dies sood Lunavero xxix.
&Theodora virg mr.
IX AMariæ ægyptiaca bPancratii : mr
XIX C Ambrofii epifcopi z conf vili d
XVI e Sixti papæ et mr.
f Sancta Eufemia
A
G.Lewis
ETE
Maius habetdies.xxx1 .
Luna vero XXX.C
XI bPhilippi etlacobi apoftolo C
xix d Inuentio.fanctæ crucis
viii e Sancti Floriani S
f Gotardi epifcopi et conf.
xvi 8 Ioannis ante porta lati.
VAbApparitio . L.Michaelis .
xiii c
G.Lewisdel.
G Lewis
MV
M
KIunius habetdies.xxx .
Lunavero.xxix.sex
e luftini martyris XIX f Marcellini Petriet Erafmi viii g
bBonifacii.ep et martyris XVI A
V
C
XII d
e Medardi epifcopi
H
TOWWYATO
Fac Similes from a Calendar prefixed to the OFFICE OF THE VIRGIN
excruted about the Year 1620 .
us nat, in it.
d V
Freeman sculp
ASTO
LIBRAR
NY
THE
NY
AST
CR
NY
RARY
RARY
FIRST DAY. clxxxi
ALMANSA. If the opening of this precious volume be
thus attractive, what must be the character of the more
serious and elaborate embellishments ?
'BELINDA. Pray, good Philemon, indulge us with one of
these latter, to which my Sister alludes. Shew us only one
more rivulet, or primrose, or beech-tree !
·
John North became the purchaser of it for 120l. Only 3 inches and a half in
height, and scarcely 2 and a quarter in width, this most exquisite' manual produced ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY POUNDS !! What is to be done, gentle reader?
To describe each illuminution, the subjects being nearly the same as those of
the preceding volume, would be useless . The Calendar speaks for itself in the
accompanying plate. Such a series of apposite illumination, for the several months,
surely never was before beheld ! The writing (says Mr. Evans, very truly) is
admirable, and the border most playfully ornamented, in the best style, with
devices and mottos, for the family for which it was executed.' These borders are
so various, that no two alike are to be found in the volume. They are invariably
upon a lilac tinted ground ; and sometimes we observe ornaments upon them, in
ultramarine, which, for their splendor, absolutely defy description, The management of the gold, in the arabesque frames, or borders, of brown, red, or blue,
(as we observe in the plate of the Assumption , above given by Philemon) is perfectly enchanting. The subjects themselves, though small, and sometimes rather
fully occupied by figures, are conceived and executed with surprising delicacy
and precision. I have doubts however whether the artist be Italian, Flemish, or
French. In point of style, we do not witness that decidedly Italian character
which marks the previously-described volume. The condition ofthis DEVOTIONAL
MANUAL is equally matchless with its general merit. It is, of all things, ' most
fit ' for the book-boudoir of such a fairy queen as Shakspeare's TITANIA! But
mortals of grosser habit' well know how to appreciate its worth ; and Mr. North
hath my hearty congratulations on the possession of such a jewel of calligraphy
and illumination !
The present may probably be a fit place, while upon the subject of tiny tomes
of devotion, executed in the Roman letter, to make brief mention of a very extraordinary volume of this kind, lately in the possession of the Rev. Mr. Arnold,
of Corpus College, Oxford. It measured a little more than an inch and a half in
length, by an inch and one eighth in width ; in a gold filligree binding, with silver
clasps all studded with rose-diamonds. There were 12 lines of calligraphy in
each full page. The initials had merit of their kind, and so had the illuminations
of the months and other subjects-which were the size of the full page. It was
not however free from injury. (Might not this be made a pretty ring- companion
to the PETRARCH, noticed at p. cxxxii, ante ? ) The whole was contained in a silk
bag, with rough gold exterior, and strings and tassels of gold. It was once the
property ofa family at Genoa ; and was sold by Mr. Sotheby for about 351.
clxxxii FIRST DAY.
Γ
PHILEMON. Readily; and the more so, as the subject
you are about to view, is the same as that to which your
attention has been recently directed : I mean, theAssumption
ofthe Virgin. She is here, with every hue, tint, and colour,
that can irradiate her person, and add splendour to her
admission into heaven. And yet, in the original, with what
infinitely superior attractions does she seem to seek the
skies !?"
ONVERTE nos deus falutaris nofter t
auerte iram tuam a no
bis Deus in adiutorium meuz
Freeman sc.
LYSANDER. I retract all that I have said ; and will never
in future be sceptical about the increased interest to be kept
up by exhibitions of this nature.
BELINDA. And I as freely confess my unqualified admiration of beech as well as of cedar!
FIRST DAY. clxxxiii
ALMANSA. Never, in future, will I overlook velvet
meads and meandering streams !
LISARDO. My hermitage shall be built in the humble
valley, ' where the hare-bells and violets grow ' —and not in
immeasurable forests of waving pine !
PHILEMON. Good. But it is now really time to say
farewell to Missals ! Yet, would that I could conjure up, by
the waving of my sceptre, the two magnificent and extraordinary volumes of this description which adorn the libraries
of Magdalen and Christ Church Colleges, at Oxford !
LISARDO. What are these ?
PHILEMON. They were formerly the property of CARdinal Wolsey, * having been executed expressly for his
•
* formerly the property ofCARDINAL WOLSEY. ] That day was surely to be
marked with a white stone ' in which I saw-first, at Magdalen College, under
the direction of the very learned and amiable President thereof, Dr. Routh ; and
secondly, at Christ Church College, accompanied by my excellent bibliographical friend, ' the Revd. H. Cotton-(owner ofthe Kele-printed Christmas Carols,'
aforesaid ; see p. cvii) the two devotional volumes above noticed by Philemon,
and once the property of the proud and magnificent WOLSEY. These two
volumes strongly resemble each other in the respective styles of art in which they
are executed. The Magdalen copy was deposited there by the Cardinal, as he
had been formerly a bursar of the same College. The Christ Church copy contains, in the whole, 45 leaves : having 18 lines of roman letter in a full page. The
vellum is thick, but with a soft surface. The ample margin reminds us of the broad brim of the Cardinal's own hat. On folio 32 we read the date of 1528 :
with the initials T C at top- having a crown surmounted with Wolsey's crest of
a lion's head, in blue. On the reverse of fol. 27, are two groups of angels in a
delicious style of execution ; but the art, I submit, is Flemish or German, as we
witness much of the Albert Durer manner in the foldings of the draperies. The
borders, however, and especially the CAPITAL INITIALS, could have been executed by no other hands than those of an Italian. The latter are almost without
a rival and in the former, fruits, flowers, pearls, and precious stones, are executed upon a rich dark ground, in a manner perfectly enchanting. The larger
subjects, from Scripture, have comparatively less merit. The figures are generally short, and coarsely executed ; and the management of the gold, or gilding,
is usually unsuccessful. This criticism, feeble and inadequate as I know it to be,
must be considered as equally applicable to both copies. Warton (Hist. Eng.
Poet. vol. iii. p. 146) has a slight but commendatory notice of the Christ Church
copy; appearing to be ignorant of that in Magdalen College.
clxxxiv FIRST DAY.
private devotions. I have no specimen of them at hand ;
but believe me when I tell you, that, for splendour, classical propriety of ornament, especially in the initial letters,
and general magnificence of execution, I know of nothing,
of the period to which they relate, that eclipses them. They
are also among the very largest with which I am acquainted ;
if we except that extraordinary volume, executed about
the end of the Seventeenth Century, which is to be seen
in the Public Library ofRouen. One would imagine the
longest life inadequate to the completion of the latterwhich however I understand is rather elaborate than exquisite. And thus take we leave of devotional volumes !
LORENZO. Forgive a question, if it be intrusive. But
tell me, why, during your whole discussion upon theological
volumes of calligraphical celebrity, you have omitted to notice,
what has been always represented to me as commanding
especial admiration, copies ofthe Bible written in Hebrew !!
The JEWISH MSS. are surely deserving of mention.
PHILEMON. Undoubtedly ; but I have paid the less
attention to them, as well from my ignorance ofthe language
seen in the public library at Rouen.] Several of my friends, in their late
continental excursions, have described to me this portly and even elephantine
volume : measuring about three English feet in height ! The title of it, which
attests the name of the Calligraphist and Illuminator, D'EAUBONNE, is thus :
" Graduale ad usum regalis monasterii S. Audoeni, ordinis S. Benedicti, congregationis S. Mauri. Pro solemnioribus totius anni festivitatibus scribebat Parisiis
Dom. Dan D'Eaubonne, ejusdem congregationis monachus M.DC.LXXXII.
[Obiit Parisiis die x1 Feb. 1714.]
' The Roman character, in which it is written, (says my friend Mr. Petrie) as
well as the musical notes, both an inch in height, are admirably executed.
The illuminatious also are finely done ; and sometimes a subject is entirely
painted in relief, in one colour ; as crimson, purple,' &c. It has besides
much splendid gilding. This stupendous monument of graphical labour is said
to have cost the Benedictine artist who accomplished it full 30 years of incessant
application ! Quære -whether any account of Doм D'EAUBONNE be to be
met with?
FIRST DAY. clxxxv
in which they are written, as from a custom which I learn to
be extremely prevalent-namely, the execution of modern
copies, with so much nicety and truth, that the deception is
scarcely to be detected. Yet the MS. of the Pentateuch
lately possessed by MR. SAMS, * must be considered a glorious
exception. Now then for CHRONICLES and ROMANCES !
1
...
MS. ofthe Pentateuch lately possessed by Mr. Sams. ] Mr. Joseph Sams, an
enterprising, respectable, and successful bookseller of Darlington, near Durham,
was pleased, in the benevolence of his heart, to call upon me, more than once, in
order to give a minute and faithful description of the extraordinary manuscript
under consideration. Mr. Sams is an ardent bibliopolist in the pursuit of antiques,
whether as MSS. or printed books- but he sometimes suffers his enthusiasm
(amiable and commendable as it undoubtedly is) to get the better of his discretion ;
and when as he has already begun, and purposes continuing to do-he has
enlarged his knowledge by continental travel, and by an examination of the
good things,' in the shape of Fifteeners,' which his own country may afford,
he will probably draw in a little canvass ' in the warmth of admiration of
ancient specimens of art. However, I cannot refrain from laying before the
reader the very interesting account of this MS. OF THE PENTATEUCH which
Mr. Sams caused to be printed in the Manchester Exchange Herald. I hardly
know when the description of a book has presented matter of more singular detail,
or even approaching the romantic. (Look however for one minute at Schwarz's
Disp. 11. De Ornamentis Vet. Librorum -which particularly relates to HEBREW
MSS. ) Thus speaks the Newspaper alluded to, of the date of Feb. 3, 1816.
"
' Curious and unique ancient JEWISH MANUSCRIPT.The literati are likely to
be highly interested with an original, ancient, and complete Manuscript of the
Pentateuch, now in the possession of Mr. Joseph Sams, of Darlington, Durham.
This original copy is of leather : it is in two volumes, about two feet wide, and
measures 169 feet long! It is supposed of goat-skin leather, and is most excel
lently dressed, so as to have an exquisite softness to the touch . Each sheet of
skin is divided into pages, five inches and a half in width. The letters are very
large, and not only most excellently written, but ornamented with a number of
Tagin or Coronae, which is a thing peculiar to the most ancient manuscripts.
Each sheet of leather is stitched very neatly to the others with a kind of substance, in appearance not unlike cat- gut. The antiquity of this manuscript may
be inferred by its being written on leather, a circumstance which would hardly
have taken place after the invention of vellum was made. It was recently procured from the Continent under the most interesting circumstances. It is
believed to be from 14 to 1500 years old ; and in any case is the oldest copy of
the law extant. There is reason to believe it has been above 800 years in one
Jewish faraily, on the Continent. It is well known to what a degree the Jews
clxxxvi FIRST DAY.
LISARDO. As soon as you please ; or rather Romances
and Chronicles -followed by as much MISCELLANEOUS
matter as you may think proper to select !
venerate their sacred books, and with what care they preserve them ; it will
therefore, be easily believed, that nothing but the most afflicting and imperious
circumstances could induce a family, loving their law, to part with a treasure so
precious. During the calamities which followed the train of Bonaparte's wars, a
Jewish family, of opulence, was reduced to utter ruin and compelled to emigrate.
They came to Holland in their exile, and were there so reduced as to be obliged
to pledge, as their last remaining resource, this manuscript of their law, under a
limitation of a considerable time for its redemption. The time expired, the
pledge was not redeemed, and the property was sold in Holland by the person
who lent his money on it. This most valuable and antique performance is now
likely to become a public benefit.
'It has been preserved with the greatest care, in a rich cover, fringed with a
fine silk, and lined. The rollers on which the manuscript runs, are beautiful
mahogany or iron wood. It has been seen by a number of Hebrew scholars and
Jews : the former always expressing a literary enthusiasm, and the latter treating
it with the most solemn reverence. It has been collated by a very learned man,
and its readings preferred to the most ancient copies we have ; so that this may
justly be thought to be unique as well as the most ancient copy of the five books
of Moses in existence.
" These facts naturally gave birth to a few reflections . Is not such a manuscript
a national object? Ought it not to be purchased for the British Museum, or the
Universities of Oxford or Cambridge ? There are many Noblemen and Literati
would not scruple a most generous price , and for a generous price only its present possessor ought to be induced to part with it. The writer of this article
having seen it, thinks, if he may hazard an opinion, that its least value must be
2000 guineas. Surely, such a national object ought not to be allowed to be in
any private hand whatever ; but either the Universities, or some other public
body, should purchase and place it, where, under regular superintendence, it
may be occasionally open to the learned , and to those who are curious for the
accurate knowledge of all that pertains to the records of that wonderful people,
the ancient Israelites .'- Manchester Exchange Herald.
So speaks the Provincial Newspaper of the date just mentioned. It remains
to add that the Treasure, here described, was not disposed of to the British
Museum, nor to the Bodleian Library at Oxford, nor to the Public Library at
Cambridge, nor to the Archiepiscopal Library at Lambeth : but is now the pro- perty of a Dissenting Clergyman. While I honour the spirit of its present
reverend possessor, I may be allowed to lament that such a precious document
does not eurich the shelves of a public collection . Three sighs, and three- fourths
of a fourth sigh, accompanying this declaration ! -and if we are restricted from
FIRST DAY. clxxxvii
PHILEMON. Insatiable Lisardo ! But I will do my utmost
to amuse and instruct. Yet before we proceed further,
grant me a boon-or rather let me crave pardon—for I
have been guilty of a most flagrant dereliction of the duty
which attaches itself to my royal station !
LORENZO. 'Tis for a good and gracious Monarch to prefer
any petition, and his subjects cannot fail to obey. Speak,
revered sovereign !
PHILEMON. My sceptre almost drops from my hand ! ..A
trembling, like unto that which Virgil describes as having
seized Æneas-when he heard the whistling of the winds,
and the roaring of the waves and of the thunderALMANSA. I begin to catch the tremor without really
knowing the cause of it ! ...
PHILEMON. Yes, IMMORTAL CLOVIO ! -thy hovering
spirit will, I trust, in this narrative of ancient Book-Illuminations, forgive the omission of thy ILLUSTRIOUS NAME ! ...
I observe how you are struck with rapture at the bare
mention only of that wonderful artist ; and, in such proportion, I can conceive will be your disappointment if you do
not hear something of him worthy of his high name ! '
•
observing, with the owner of an ancient Missal described at p. clx, ante-
' pudet'-we may at least be suffered to exclaim, in the natural indulgence of
sorrow, Væ! Væ!' Note, in conclusion : both the date of the MS. , and the
price at which it is estimated, partake somewhat of that amiable ' enthusiasm'
which attaches itself to its late owner. For 1400 years old,' read, probably,
' 800 years :' and for 2000 guineas,' read somewhere about 400l. It should
be noticed, on the authorities of Mabillon and Bandini, that Hebrew MSS. , upon
skins of leather, and written in uncial characters-with every apparent mark of
antiquity are scarcely found beyond the x11th century. See Bandini's Lettera
sopra i Principj e Progressi della Bibl. Lavrenziana, 1773, 12mo. p. 88 , &c.
Jewish calligraphists, even in modern times, have a singular aptitude in imitating
ancient manuscripts and I have seen some dozen of scrolls executed with a
precision and splendor perfectly surprising. It were well if Jews confined their
powers of imitation ' to such objects !
VOL. I. m
clxxxviii FIRST DAY.
LYSANDER. As far as regards chronological order, you
are perfectly correct by postponing his name to the present
moment; for he flourished about the middle of the Sixteenth
Century.
----
PHILEMON. He did so and what Cabinets, of Popes,
Monarchs, Princes, and Cardinals, have not been enriched
by his matchless pencil !? Let Vasari recount his wonders
in foreign collections : but at home, and upon British
Ground, the marvellous treasures, from Clovio's hand, in
the well-known cabinets of Mr. TowNELEY and Mr. GRENVILLE, forbid us to envy the possessions of our Continental
Neighbours.
LORENZO. Of the late Mr. Towneley's Missal * I have
heard extraordinary things related : but of Mr. Grenville's
' marvellous treasure' I have yet to learn the particulars.
PHILEMON. Briefly then must I inform you that the
Giulio Clovio, in the possession of the Right Honourable
Thomas Grenville, was executed by that artist at the *
the late Mr. John Towneley's Missal. ] The truly wonderful volume, here alluded
to, was shewn to me by its late venerable possessor, some eight or ten years ago.
It had been procured for him, from Italy, by his nephew, Mr.CHARLESTOWNELEY,
whose name is synonymous with all that is exquisite and classical in ancient art.
Mr. Peregrine Towneley, son of Mr. John Towneley, is the present owner of this extraordinary treasure. It is contained in a morocco case, with the arms of its
late owner, enamelled, in the centre ; and the volume is a large folio, containing
illuminations from scriptural subjects. If I remember rightly, the Day of
Judgment' bad an overwhelming effect--for grandeur, variety, and even pathos.
But Vasari, rich and fertile as he is in the Clovio ' articles, does not notice this
matchless volume, nor was he acquainted with the one about to be described.
·
the Giulio Clovio in the possession ofthe Right HonourableTHOMAS GRENVILLE. ]
I make no apology to the reader for the very long, and I would hope interesting,
note which he is about to peruse, connected with the exquisite production here
especially referred to. The history of its admission into the cabinet of Mr. Grenville is faithfully detailed by Philemon. The treasure itself (guarded by anappropriate velvet binding, contained within a blue-morocco case, the work of Charles
Lewis) measures 9 inches by 5 and nearly six eighths : exclusively of a border,
round each picture, in brown and gold, of the width of about six eighths of an inch.
FIRST DAY. clxxxix
express command of Philip II. of Spain. It consists of a
series of paintings, from the engravings of MARTIN HEMSKIRK, which describe the political power-from the triumph
Ams. note by Mr. Grenville informs us that Clovio was born in 1498, and died
in 1578. In 1556 MARTIN HEMSKIRK engraved and dedicated to Philip II.
TWELVE PLATES from paintings of the victories of Charles V. Philip had
tapestry made ofthese designs, and directed GIULIO CLOVIO, at that time in Italy,
to paint them on vellum. Since that time they are supposed to have continued
in the Royal Library at the Escurial, and appear to have retained the original
richness of their colours. ' Thus far Mr. Grenville. It shall now be my object
to present the reader with a sort of Descriptive Catalogue of these rich paintings
upon vellum :' for a more lovely and interesting (and at the same time generally
unknown) treasure can scarcely enrich the cabinet of the most illustrious collector.
Each subject has a title or prefix, in the Spanish language, introduced within
an arabesque border of consummate taste. These titles, and the compositions to
which they relate, are thus brought under the reader's particular notice. Inscrip- tion within first device :
L'Aguila muy triumphante y no vencida
De Carlos Quinto Emperador Romano,
Nos muestra que esta gentefue rendida
Y como huyo sus vñas Solimano.
FIRST SUBJECT. In the centre, Charles V. seated between 2 pillars, a sword in his
right hand, a ball in his left. Heis clothed in an ultramarine colour body-armour,
with crimson robe, and yellow sleeves : a helmet and crown are on his head.
Beneath him, or rather between his legs, is the black Austrian Eagle, holding a
ring within his beak ; which ring makes fast a golden chord or chain, encircling
the following characters, as having been subjected to the Emperor's sway. To
the left of the Emperor (that is to the observer's left hand) are FRANCIS I. and
POPE CLEMENT VIII. arrayed in their respective full-dresses : that of the former
being military. Still more to the left, in the fore-ground of the picture, is the
SULTAN SOLIMAN, with a flag in his right hand, and a bow in his left. He
stands without the chain, and looks rather significantly at the Emperor, as if
conscious of not having felt the full weight of his power. To the right of the
Emperor, are the DUKE OF CLEVES, the DUKE OF SAXONY, and the LANDGRAVE
OF HESSE, in quiet and submissive attitudes ; well contrasted, in this particular,
with the opposite characters-who are each distinguished for portly dignity
even in their misfortunes. The Duke of Saxony, however, preserves composure
in his misfortune : both himself and the Duke of Cleves are in armour ; but the
Landgrave of Hesse has a black furred-cloak, with reddish- orange sleeves and
petticoat, and yellow stockings. Mr. WILKIE, an artist of whom praise were
useless, and to whom I shewed the whole series of these lovely pictures, was exceedingly struck with this piece of composition and colouring. The figure of the
CXC FIRST DAY.
of his arms-of CHARLES V. Emperor of Germany, the
Father of Philip : and the piece of art, here under description, hath this peculiar good fortune attending it ; that both
the actions, and the characters introduced, are real, and
not fictitious ; and that the latter exhibit, beyond all doubt,
Portraits of those whom they are intended to represent.
principal personage is the least attractive ; but the countenances of Soliman and
the Duke of Cleves are touched with vast spirit and tenderness : that of the
Duke, in particular , is singularly beautiful . The back-ground is green, reminding
us of those of Holbein.
SECOND SUBJECT. BATTLE OF PAVIA : the prefix thus :
Claramente se muestra aqui pintado
Como en Pauia preso por hazaña
Francisco Rey de Francia, fue llevado
A las mas hondas partes de la España.
Three Austrian knights in complete armour, are surrounding Francis, and one of
them is seizing the sword of the captured monarch ; the upper part of whose
countenance, full of ardor and expression, appears above his beaver. Both
knights and horses are in complete armour and caparison, and the housings of
Francis's horse give the enthusiastic observer a sort of earnest of that rich,
brilliant, and minute workmanship, in this particular department of his art, in
which Clovio may be said to be without a rival. There are bells to the crupper
of the horse of the knight in the fore- ground ; the flank and feet of which horse
(as indeed are the feet and fetlock joints of the whole) are pencilled with a tenderness and truth that can only be appreciated by an inspection through a
magnifying glass ! A knight, pierced with a spear, and thrown from his horse,
lies dead in the fore-ground. In the back-ground the pursuit of the vanquished
is continued, and Pavia appears, by the side of a winding river, in the distance.
THIRD SUBJECT. SACKING OF ROME and DEATH OF BOURBON : prefix :
Aquifue Borbon muerto, y derribado
Por los muros de Roma : pero entraron
Los soldados con animo efforcado,
Y ellos la ciudad toda saquearon.
The foreground is occupied by two large figures : the Duke de Bourbon is
tumbling headlong, backwards, from a ladder fastened to a bastion ; while a man,
with an halbert in his hand, is advancing to break his fall. These figures are
arrayed in a very gorgeous armour. The middle ground is filled by a group of
enterprising soldiers, mounting ladders, admirably touched : while in the distance
we observe the sacking and burning of the city. Throughout this composition
there is probably too much of the Flemish taste of Hemskirk.
FIRST DAY. схсі
LORENZO. This is indeed delightful. But how came such
a treasure in Cleveland Square?
PHILEMON. What will not British taste, spirit, and libeFOURTH SUBJECT. POPE CLEMENT THE VII. treating for his ransom in the
castle of St. Angelo, 1527. The following is the prefix :
Tomada Roma ya como diximos,
Clemente en esta torre fue cerrado,
Pero despues enfinfue, segun vimos,
Con mucha plata y oro libertado.
The figures here are comparatively very small : the space of the composition
being chiefly occupied by the buildings of Rome, and by the castle of St. Angelo.
The Pope, with his hands crossed upon his breast, and a Cardinal at each side of
him, appears to be sueing in a very supplicatory manner for peace. A trumpeter
is below, with his trumpet held up, from his mouth, as if listening to the terms
of the Pope. Two soldiers, about 3 inches high, in gorgeously coloured dresses,
are in the fore-ground . To the left, are some soldiers with cannon. But the
most interesting part of the composition, are probably the statues of St. Peter
and St. Paul —especially of the latter-beautifully and tenderly pencilled.
FIFTH SUBJECT. RAISING THE Siege of VIENNA, 1529. Prefix :
Venia Solimano poderoso,
Y auia puesto ya cerco a Viena
Pero huyó de aqui muy temeroso,
Por la virtud de Carlos el que impera.
The fore-ground is occupied by Charles V. completely armed, on horseback,
followed by Ferdinand, &c. This figure, but more especially the housings of the
Emperor's horse, have scarcely their equal in the series : the variety, the richness,
the truth, facility and vigor of touch and colouring, throughout the whole, are
perfectly astonishing. Below, is a dead Turk, dismounted. Probably the
colouring of his countenance is too pale ; as his death seems to be but recent.
A Turk, transfixed with a javelin, and apparently making the last vital
struggle, as he is tumbling from his prostrate horse, is quite a masterpiece of
physiognomical expression. The back-ground is occupied by the retreating army
of Soliman ; which, at a distance, encloses the Sultan in a ring, while a canopy is
held over his head as he leisurely retreats. The city of Vienna is in the background, to the left.
SIXTH SUBJECT. SPANISH EXPEDITION TO AMERICA, 1530. Prefix :
Los Indios que hasta aqui de carne humana
Pacian como fieros y indomados,
Con uirtud y confuerça soberana
Los veys por Cesar ya domesticados.
We have here a perfect contrast to every thing in the series. Human flesh is
roasting, and human beings are being cut up, by the savage Americans. These
cxcii FIRST DAY.
rality, effect ! And where are those shores, however remote,
which forbid the foot of British enterprise to invade them ?
To come to matter of fact. The lovely curiosity under
luckless beings are the Spaniards, who are continuing to be brought in, as
prisoners, or dead men, for further similar cannibal purposes. The wild Americans occupy the fore-ground, and are coloured with admirable sobriety and
truth. There is probably more artist-like knowledge and effect in this piece than
in any other : yet the mangled and roasting limbs make one dwell but a comparatively short time upon such a picture.
SEVENTH SUBJECT. ENTRANCE OF CHARLES V. INTO TUNIS, 1535. Prefixed
is as follows :
Aqui vées como huyó a quel Africano,
Quando Cesar triumphante y poderoso,
Leganó a Tunes con sufuerte mano,
Adonde entró con nombre victorioso.
Avery brilliant and finely composed picture. The victorious army are in the
fore-ground; and with the exception of the figures of Charles and Ferdinand, in
profile, the whole have their backs turned to the observer. The trappings of the
Emperor's horse are, as usual, magnificent : but the pink and light green caparison
of a horse, to the left, strikes the eye immediately as being most exquisitely
managed. There is such a mingling of fine and fresh colouring in this piece,
added to the bustle of its composition, that it cannot fail to take strong hold of
both the fancy and the judgment.
EIGHTH SUBJECT. SUBMISSION OF THE DUKE OF CLEVES TO CHARLES V.
1543. Prefix thus :
De Cleues es el Duque, que vencido
Delante Cesar vées y arrodillado,
Pero despues d'en su poder venido,
Lo libertó, boluiendo le su estado.
This composition exhibits the finest whole length portrait of Charles : who is
sitting, laureated, upon a throne, with the Duke humbling himself on his knees
before him. The brown and gold cloth, with which the throne is covered, is
executed in a manner perfectly wonderful. The countenance of Charles is probably from the pencil of Titian. To the right (on looking at him) stands
Ferdinand, in a pompous but spirited attitude, looking over his left shoulder,
upon the prostrate Duke, with more haughtiness than is even observable in
Charles-the fault of whose countenance may be, that it looks too much out of
the picture : which makes one think it is copied from a portrait. The colouring
of Ferdinand's swarthy countenance, with his black beard, is admirable. To the
right of Charles, stands the DUKE OF ALVA, clothed in blue, orange, and yellow.
These fierce and confident characters are finely contrasted to the tenderness of
expression in the countenances of the Duke of Cleves and his standard- bearer ;
each upon their knees. Groups of soldiers and tents fill the back-ground.
FIRST DAY. cxciii
description had been religiously kept, from the face of
heaven and of human beings, in the Escurial, ever since the
period of its completion. Wellington delivered Spain ; and
NINTH SUBJECT. COUNT EGMONT JOINS CHARLES WITH THE FLEMISH
FORCES, 1546. Prefix :
Sintieron de las alas el sonido
Que l'Aguila triumphante venia haziendo,
Langraue y el de Saxa, y al ruido,
Los vées atras boluer ambos huyendo.
In the fore-ground, the Emperor appears mounted on horseback, talking to some
soldiers. In the middle-ground is seen the imperial tent, from which the
Emperor issues, and shakes hands with Count Egmont. His army is encircled
by cannon, and the Protestant army is retreating, in the distance, in square
battalia. Perhaps there is less force in this than in any other picture ; owing
to the figures being comparatively small. The devotion of the soldiers to their
monarch is seen more particularly in the expressive countenances of three of
those to whom Charles is addressing himself.
TENTH SUBJECT. BATTLE OF MUHLBERG, 1547. Surrender of Frederick
Elector of Saxony. Prefix : (perhaps the most beautiful and striking prefix of
the whole :) Vencido en la batalla vées presente,
El Duque de Saxonia y subiectado
Despues de auer perdido mucha gente
Sus armas, y susfuerças, y su estado.
At first sight there is something almost ludicrous in this composition ; as the
wounded Elector, with a huge gash in his cheek, is running in heavy armour to
make his submission to Charles, who is surrounded by Ferdinand and the Duke
of Alva, &c. The countenance of the captive is very woe-begone, and his figure
perfectly Flemish. The colouring of the imperial group is as mellow and perfect
as can be imagined.
ELEVENTH SUBJECT. SUBMISSION OF CERTAIN CITIES TO CHARLES V. 1547.
Prefix :
Vencido ya Langraue el atreuido
Preso el Duque de Saxa y su compaña
Han sus llaues a Cesar ofrecido
Las Ciudades de nombre de Alemana.
Charles, in profile , seated on his throne. The submissive cities of Hamburgh,
Lubec, Brunswick, and Lunenberg-represented by their respective deputies,
kneeling, with keys in their hands-are to the left. Parts of the grouping of
these figures are stolen from the famous picture, by Raffaelle, of Christ's charge
to his Apostles ; while, in the middle-ground, the upright figure of the Bishop of
cxciv FIRST DAY.
the Royal Palace just mentioned having been robbed, by
its first invaders, of the treasures which it contained, the
robber, or robbers, both of the GIULIO CLOVIo and of the
Arras, in blue, looks like another character, from the same master, of which I
cannot just now recollect the name. Other figures are in the back- ground : the
whole very interesting.
TWELFTH SUBJECT. SURRENDER OF THE LANDGRAVE OF HESSE, 1547. Prefix :
Aqui tu vées como d'esta victoria
Con el vuelo de l'Aguila tomado
Por Carlos, cuyo nombre al mundo es gloria,
Se ofrece el que era fiero muy domado.
This is the last and probably the most rich and interesting composition of the whole In the centre, seated upon his throne , is the EMPEROR CHARLES with
the usual insignia of royalty. His countenance is perhaps a little too small, but
it is most exquisitely touched and coloured. In the fore- ground, kneeling upon
the first step of the throne, is the LANDGRAVE OF HESSE ; Covered with a rich
robe of black velvet fringed with gold. The sobriety of this colouring balances
and mellows, as it were, the general brilliance ofthe composition. To the right
of the Emperor, stand a POPE'S LEGATE, the BISHOP OF ARRAS, and the
BISHOP OF NAUNBOURG : the first in red, the second in blue and gold, and the
third in brown and gold ; the countenances admirably touched. Opposite, to the
left of the Emperor, stand four figures, whose identity Mr. Grenville has not been
able to ascertain ; though he observes that De Thou says (vol. i. p. 264) there
were also present the Arch Duke Maximilian, the Dukes of Savoy and Alva, the
Elector of Brandenburg, Duke Maurice of Saxony, H. Ch. and Ph. of Brunswick,
and Ambassadors of the Kings of Bohemia and Brunswick.' The first of these four
figures, with a crown, is clad in a brown cloak, gold tunic, and purple stockings.
He has a sceptre in his right hand, and both the expression and colouring of his
countenance have scarcely their equal in the series. The other three figures have
cloaks, and turbanned hats or caps, set with jewels ; and look like Turkish
characters. The one to the right, with a purple and ermined robe, exhibits a
countenance of singularly forcible expression . There is probably little doubt
but that the whole are portraits ; and, if so, what a gratifying group do they
present to the man of learning and the tasteful antiquary !
Such is the description (written with the subjects themselves sub oculis —)
that I have ventured to submit, of a volume, which, all things considered, certainly acknowledges NO SUPERIOR. Acaustic critic might, however, observe that
the colouring, especially of the figures in the middle and back grounds, is too strong
and vivid ; and that the figures, in the historical subjects, partake too much of the
Flemish character : but for the latter, Clovio is by no means responsible. I will
only further remark that a third Giulio Clovio, formerly in the possession of Mr.
Jennings, is now in the collection of Mr. Webbe ; and that there appears to
have been an illuminated Missal, by the same hand, in Lord Oxford's collection,
FIRST DAY. CXCV
CORREGIO, (of which latter you have heard such wonderful
things) surrendered, upon the Plains ofVittoria, the lawless
booty which he had acquired. The intermediate links of
·
which was sold at the sale of the Dutchess of Portland's library (no. 2952) for
169l. It is there described as superior to anything of the kind,' and ' in the
highest state of preservation. ' Yet a further word about Giulio Clovio. In the
year 1733 was printed, in a handsome folio form, on one side of the leaf only,
and without numerals, a curious volume entitled Thesaurus Artis Pictoria Ex
Unius Julii Clovii Clari admodum Pictoris Operibus depromptus.' The author
wa's WILLIAM BONDE ; who in the title-page thus describes himself : ' Gulielmus
Bonde, Armiger, Collegii Anglorum Duaceni alumnus, et nepos præhonorabilis
viri Thomæ Bonde, Equitis Aurati et Baroneti, qui fuit Thesaurarius et Contrarotulator Hospitii Illustrissimæ Dominæ Catherinæ Angliæ nuper Reginæ
Dotariæ supradicti Regis [Johannis V. ] optimi Amitæ admodum colendæ .' His
work is divided into three parts : ‹ Libri, sive Sermones tres : 1. Idea. 2. Index.
3. Deliberativus.' It consists of a description of a PSALTER executed by Clovio
for John the III. king of Portugal, which Bonde is desirous should be purchased
by John V.; and his work is a personal address to the latter monarch, giving a
description of the Psalter, and enjoining him to become the purchaser. * Mr.
Let me crave the reader's indulgence for this SUB-NOTE-exhibiting a spe- cimen of Bonde's florid style of composition in his description of ST. MICHAEL,
&c. in the xivth subject, in this Psalter. ' Proxime effingitur ANGELUS MICHAEL innumeros pœne perduelles et summæ Dei optimi Maximi Læsæ Majestatis reos angelos deturbans calo præcipites. Hæc quidem tabula, supra quam potest, non dicam exprimi verbis, sed etiam mente cogitari, sublimè pingitur. Gustum sapit planè divinum, et immistâ formidini atq. horrori quâdam, nescio quâ, spectantium oculos animosq: afficit, immo obruit voluptate. Nimis grandia hæc non ego tenuitur moliar. Nimis enim, nimis bene intelligo, hæc strenuissimè exantlata divini Julii Clovii opera, in quibus cœlitum facta depingens non modo alios summos pictores sed seipsum superat, transgressa semel humanum modum, non facilè cujusquam, licet clarissimi oratoris, dictis adæquari posse.'
•
• Harum tamen rerum omnium plenas expressiones, in pagellà quinque pollices longa, et quatuor latâ, exhibit potens pictor, pro mirâ stupendæ suæ indolis fœcunditate. Di bone ! Quot, in picturâ, angeli dæmonibus ? Quot tenebræ luminibus? Quot vitia virtutibus opponuntur ?- huic imagini tremenda angelorum prælia repræsentanti, figuram inesse nullam, nisi quæ gestit, movet, vivit,
agit, pugnat, atque ita facit hæc omnia animosè, et gnaviter, &c.
Nam, crede mihi, quemadmodum fervet opus belli, sic fervent, etiam pictoris colores, qui sunt plane ad aspectum formosè terribiles. Pingit Clovius (ut verius dicam de Clovio quam de Appelle Plinius) quæ pingi non possunt, fulgura,
tonitrua, fulgetra : Hic enim videmus fulgureos mucrones cœlitum præpositos jugulis, hic cernimus pila pilis minantia, arma quidem profecto cælestia, non fabulatis cyclopum ignibus, non fabulosè divinâ ficti Vulcani manu, fabricata,
sed, ex tonitru et fulgure æterno, verè facta . Part II. H h.
There is something rather diverting in the earnestness with which he entreats
JOHN to purchase this treasure. Nihil rogo ; nihil hortor, nihil suadeo : ab
cxcvi FIRST DAY.
the narrative need not be supplied. It came into the hands
of Mr. Woodburn : and from this latter it glided, imperceptibly and naturally, as it were, into the rich cabinet where it
is now enshrined.
Grenville properly remarks upon the extreme rarity' of Bonde's book, and of its
containing many curious anecdotes ofClovio. In the Third Part Bonde notices a
painter of his own time under the name of RICHARD GRAHAM, thus : " Cognoscito, O Domine, quoniam non sine causâ queri videtur, cognoscito, Richardum
istum imprimis Grahamium et nostratem, et jam modo viventem, Londini, talem
esse et tantâ celebritate famæ pictorem, ut summi principesque hujus nationis
viri, quibus probè notus est omnibus, consortium ejus amabile quippe vehementer
et quotidie quærentibus, illum cognatione atque hospitio suo dignum existimaverint. Sed, ne videatur longior oratio mea, non ego hic multos commemorabo
nobiles, quibus est in deliciis ; tantum hoc, pace tuâ domine dicam, quod quidem
maximum est, quodque gloriosissime faciet, sine ullâ aliâ præterea laude, ad
æternam hujus Grahamii pictoris famam stabiliendam ; vivit, O Rex illustrissime, jam modo cum domino de Burlington familiarissimè, et ita vivit, ut sit illi
domino non solum jucundus, non solum dulcis gratusque comes, sed et charus
admodum, et amicus ; vivebat etiam cum patre æque ac filio ; a domino de
CARLETON colebatur, multos, jamdudum annos, a domino DE ORKERY, nunc in
immortalium numero ascripto, æstimabatur, amabatur. Totam hic Grahamius illustrissimam domum dominorum de BOYLE devinctam consuetudine tenuit et tenet,
sed illum, ut innumeros alios , quos possem commemorare, præstanti doctrinâ et
virtute viros præteream, summo afficit dominus BURLINGTONUS. Sign, D. 2.
In the First Part we not only learn the price for which Clovio executed this
Psalter, but the manner in which he worked, and his mode of paying the artists
whom he employed under him. The passage, which is short, shall close our
extracts : Nuntiatum est nobis et non sine monumentis fide dignis nuntiatum,
atque a majoribus traditum, in perficiendo vel unum librum, octo, industrium
hunc artificem , vel decem plus minus annos, se invicem consequentes, consump
sisse. Adde, quod et alios homines pictores servos sibi semper habebat ad
manum ; nummos tamen Romanos, ille per se solus percipiebat, singulis annis,
quadringentos. Fama refert etiam, non sine magnâ vel regis vel pictoris gloriâ,
regem singulariter præclarum, huic singulariter præclaro pictori, pro uno libro,
oratoribus sic agi solet, sed vis sermonis tota mei, in vero, eam, de qua instituitur, rem deliberandi, genere consistit. ''-'uihil est quod dicam amplius ;
causa Clovii dicta est : Liber Clovianus, certè, a te nunc probabitur, redimetur,
de exilio reducetur, et patriæ pristinæ dignitati restituetur.' Part III. O 2.
* Richard Graham re-published, in the begining ofthe last century, Dryden's Translation of Du Fresnoy's Art of Painting ; to which he added . A short Account of the most Eminent Painters both ancient and modern.' The second
edition ofthis publication bears the date of 1716 ; and is dedicated to the Earl of Burlington. Of his productions as a painter, I know nothing.
FIRST DAY. cxcvii
LISARDO. Oh brave Mr. Grenville ! But the character of
its art ?-
PHILEMON. Ask if the rose, impearled with the morningdew, be fresh, fair, and sweet ? Ask if the hues of the
carnation be tender-if the lily vie not with the Alpine snow
in purity of colour-if the flaming streaks of the tulip, or the
burning radiance of the sun-flower, diffuse not gaiety and
splendour on each surrounding object — and the answer to
these questions shall be the ...
-
LISARDO. Well, well ! We comprehend what you wish to
impart. The Clovio of Mr. Grenville is a miracle of graphical perfection !
6
PHILEMON. Even so : and wishing it may live for aye
in the family in which it is now deposited, let us proceed to
Romances and Chronicles : though indeed the day is now
pretty far spent, and I must honestly confess that my powers
of delivery begin to fail me.
LORENZO. Yet I regret that such a subject should be
slightly handled. However, our very best thanks shall be
due for the intelligence which you may impart : while our
sense of obligation cannot fail to be expressed for the
exertions already made.
PHILEMON. No more of this. For Romances, then, let
me take you quietly into that vast and magnificent bookrepository, ycleped the Bodleian Library ; and let me there
entreat you carefully to turn over the leaves of its chief
jewel in the department of which we are discoursing
duo millia nummum aureorum pensitasse. Quæ quidem summæ, si nostrâ hâc
ætate persolvendæ forent, præmia omnino immensa putarentur. 1st Pt. Dii. rect.
I suspect that Bonde's book, of which only two copies are known in this country-Lord Spencer's and the present—was printed for private distribution only.
And it is worth noticing that each of these copies formerly belonged to possessors
ofGiulio Clovios. The present was Mr. Jenning's, and Lord Spencer's was Mr. Towneley's copy.
excviii FIRST DAY.
mean the ROMAN D'ALEXANDRE ! * I see the eyes of
Lisardo begin to glisten.
LISARDO. As well they may-from the recollection of a
* the ROMAN D'ALEXANDRE. ] This truly grand and resplendent volume, in
French metre, may be considered the JUPITER ROMAUNT- PLANET of the
Bodleian Library. Let the day be ever so dark-let the wind blow ever so
coldly through the crevices of the mullions, or of the panes of glass, in that vast
book-repository - you have here a luminary, whose rays, darting upwards,
(like the light in Corregio's famous Notte) equally diffuse light and heat. These
rays animated ToмWARTON, and they even warmed JOHN PRICE : and certainly,
in one of the coldest of the early November days, these same rays caused the
blood of the writer of this most strange note to glow as if the thermometer were
at 72 in a northern aspect ! I know not why I should wish to have lived in the
middle ofthe Fourteenth Century-because it would most probably have followed
that I should have been dead at the commencement of the Nineteenth -but assuredly I should like to have witnessed the ORIGINAL DIMENSIONS of this richlygarnished folio : such as it was when Master Giles Strangwayes ' took pen in hand,'
and wrote as followeth, three several times, in the fly- leaves of this Romance.
Thys ys les
Strunowayeslike.
Nor should I have objected to embrace it when it came into the hands of its
second owner : who writeth thus, after the said Giles Strangwayes :
Jafper Ffyloll ys own thys boke
Nor again would there have been much objection to have caught a glance at it when
it owned Thōs Smyth ' (see folio 215 of the MS. ) for its third master ! However,
although this extraordinary book gives ' dreadful note ' of its having lost much of
its original brightness, ' it is nevertheless, in its present state, such as I have
above described it to be- the Jupiter Planet ' of the Romance MSS.
The illuminations may be said to be innumerable : having, generally, a diamond-pannelled back-ground, not uncommon in the xivth century. As Warton
and Ellis have disported themselves in the description of this fine book, and
ASTOR
THE
LIBRARY
NY
THE
ASTOR
NY
LIBRARY
T
ROMANORUM GESTA ofthe aMSinanILLUMINATION ofSIMILE -FAC
FIRST DAY. cxcix
glorious summer's morning devoted to the contemplation of
that richly-garnished, genuine, and magnificent old folio !
PHILEMON. This description is not overcharged : for a
more interesting and unsophisticated copy of an illuminated
Romance MS. does not surely exist. But we must leave
this venerable retreat-bewitching as are its multifarious
contents !
LYSANDER. You are hardly over its threshold ere you
give the signal for departure ?
PHILEMON. Necessity is a cruel incentive ; but you must
submit -however attached to the odds and ends of the
manuscript-lore in the regions of Bodley. I wave my
sceptre ; and we are off, at a tangent, for London ! Can
you resist to look more than once upon the minutely beautiful and curious gem here laid before you ?*
as Strutt has enriched his pages with some of the ornaments, it shall be my
object to study brevity and accuracy only : commingling ' a few pleasing illustrations in the way of fac-similes . On the recto of fol. 50, is a whimsical illumination, thus entitled : ' Comment alixandfuit mys in vn vescel de booire p veoir
les mueiles in le bovire.' Alexander is , in fact, seated in a glass diving bell. On
the recto of folio 58, in the bottom margin, among several pretty similar exhibitions , we observe the following juvenile group, not wholly divested of expression.
See the OPPOSITE PLATE.
cc FIRST DAY.
ALMANSA. It is perfect enchantment ! From whence has
such a treasure been taken ?
On the recto of the ensuing leaf, fol. 59, are several representations of a tender
cast of character. Take the following, gentle-hearted reader-from the same representations and draw what inference seemeth best to thee!
Above, is an elaborate group of men, in complete armour, upon horseback, fighting. At folio 130 (mem. for BERNARDO ! ) is a man carrying hawks on a pole
for sale . But almost every page is embellished with subjects taken from the
manners, customs, sports, and pastimes of ancient life. Amongthese are numerous
drolleries : as the following sufficiently indicates.
FIRST DAY. cci
PHILEMON From a MS. of the Gesta Romanorum * in
the possession of the late Mr. Edwards. You observe in it
a very lock and key to the whole history of the Table Ronde;
But where is the date of this wonderful volume ? exclaims the cautious antiquary.
Read as follows, truth-loving virtuoso ; and, putting your hand upon your breast,
exclaim with Cato that you are ' SATISFIED. ' It appears on the recto of
folio 208.
Chi define li romans du boin roi Alixandre.
Et les veus du pauon. les accomplissemens.
Le Restor dupauon. et le pris. qui fu p[er] escript
Le xviij . ior de decembre. lan. m.ccc.xxxviij .
In gold, below :
Che liurefu perfais de le enluminure
Au xviije . jour. dauryl. Per iehan de
grise. Lan de grace. m.ccc.xliiij.
Next follow 7 leaves of English metre : written in a less angular gothic character, and with paler ink. Then 2 blank leaves : the second of which has the
autograph of Smith, before mentioned . On folio 218, from the beginning, we
read as follows-beneath one of the most elaborate and beautifully executed
illuminations, of shipping and architecture, &c. in the volume.
' Ci commence. li liures du graunt Caam qui parole de lagraunt Ermeme. de
persse. et des tartais et dynde. Et des granz merueille qui p[ er] le monde sont.'
The initials and border-ornaments are in the same style with those in the preceding part of the volume ; but the illumination just described is infinitely
superior, in every respect, both to all the preceding and succeeding ; and yet, of
these succeeding, the second is certainly by the same hand : of the third, I have
doubts of the rest, none. On the reverse of fol . 271 , from the beginning, we
read thus :
Explicit le liure noume du grant kaan de la
graunt cite de Tambatuc. dieux ayde amen.
This invaluable volume cries aloud for a russia surtout ! It has been most
bunglingly bound in dismal calf ; and has suffered cruelly from the trenchant '
propensities of such bungling binder, Mr. Bandinell will, I am certain, speedily
bespeak a casket worthy of the jewel to be enclosed in it.
a MS. of the GESTA ROMANORUM. ] I cannot do better than borrow the
words of Mr. Evaus, as they appear in the description of this MS. in the Catalogue of Mr. Edwards's Library, no. 162. ' Gesta Romanorum, folio : a
very beautiful Manuscript UPON VELLUM of one of the most ancient story- books
extant. It was executed for Charles VI. of France. It is written in a very
legible hand, and is ornamented with nine very large minature paintings, and a
profusion of richly painted capitals, and various figures in gold and colours, at
the beginning of each story.' This interesting volume was purchased by Messrs.
ccii FIRST DAY.
and do pray, as a very elegant specimen of that eternallyrecurring subject- the Author presenting his Book-examine how gracefully the author of the said MS. presents
the produce of his labours to his Royal Patron CHARLES VI.
Longman and Co. for the reasonable sum of 46l.: not without an effort, on my
part, to become the owner of it : as I was the last losing bidder. The illumination contained in the PLATE facing p. cxcix, will give the reader a pretty good
FIRST DAY. cciii
We are now about the opening of the Fifteenth Century;
and having only time to allude to the Gillions, Melusines,
and Meliaduses, &c. &c. which, thick as autumnal leaves'
6
notion of the delicacy and minuteness of finish of some of these ornaments : in
colours, it has an enchanting effect : and it really is, as Philemon has properly
designated it, a sort of lock and key' to the Table-Ronde' History. The curious
observer will instantly recognise the same countenance, both in the monarch
receiving the book, in the SUBJOINED FAC- SIMILE, and in the figure standing
over the entrance-gate in the copper-plate just referred to. That countenance
is, unquestionably, the PORTRAIT OF CHARLES VI.
་
What a diverting, and even splendid volume, might my learned friend ' Mr.
Douce produce, from an examination of the more curious MSS. and early printed
editions ofthe GESTA ROMANORUM?! When I say this, let it be supposed that
his Essay upon the same subject, in his Illustrations of Shakspeare, &c. is
considered by me as displaying a master-knowledge of the Gesta ' in question.
Yet, as Polypheme roars aloud, More, give me more ! '
"
* Gillions, Melusines, and Meliaduses. ] What a cluster of romaunt appellatives !
and what harmonious alliteration have we here !? I am aware what these names
imply, and what scope for black-letter lore a satisfactory disquisition concerning
them would unfold. But my chronicle must be brief : as neither Du Fresnoy,
(alias Gordon de Percel) Warton, nor Ellis, shall be consulted . Nevertheless, what
here followeth may possibly be deserving of seven minutes close attention : First
for GILLION DE TRASIGMES. The Duke of Devonshire possesses a beautifully
illuminated vellum MS. of this Romance, in folio. We gather the title of it thus :
Cy commence la table des Rubriches de cest present liure
appelle Gillion de trasigmes moult preu et vertueuz
cheuallier natifde la conte de hayñau.
The table occupies six leaves. After a blank leaf, we read one leaf of the
prologue. The text of the work follows beneath a fine illumination of the
interior of a church ; a tomb, with three figures in the fore-ground ; and a
man reading, to three others, to the right—probably the exploits of the hero
whose tomb this may be. Two monks, hooded, are to the left. The whole
is within a rich border of fruits, flowers, and insects ; having a bomb or mortar
(frequently occurring) below. There are numerous highly ornamented CAPITAL
INITIALS; as on the reverses of folios xlviii , xlix , lviii, and Cxxxvj, to say nothing
of others : the larger ones have a freshness and brilliancy almost unrivalled.
In regard to these larger subjects, we have an admirable sea-fight on the recto of
folio xiiij-within a grotesque border of fruits and flowers. At folio xl, reverse,
we observe an Attack of a Camp -full of bustle and effect : but on the reverse
of folio liij, there is a Battle which has scarcely its equal-being as fresh as ifjust
executed. The reverse of folio C.xlij exhibits a Tournament, such as would put
even my friend PALMERIN into an extacy of delight ! The defeated champion is
VOL. I. n
1
ceiv FIRST DAY.
bestrew the cabinets of the curious, I must hurry on, in a
trice, as it were, towards the close of the same century :
because, about the year 1460, there began to prevail that
dying the conqueror bears the portrait of his mistress on his shield : the court
are looking on. This interesting piece is rather slightly injured, otherwise it is delicious.
On the recto of folio C lxxxxiij is another Battle-equal to the preceding-or
rather, if possible, fresher and clearer. It represents the tremendous conflict
before Babylon, in which the two brothers of Trasigmes furent prins de leurs
haulz faiz.' In the highly ornamented border are a monkey and a bear, the
former applying the nosle of a pair of bellows to the latter, much in the same
wayas Cervantes tells us a madman of Seville applied his hollow cane to the dogs !
The borders are full of capriccios of this kind. On the reverse of folio cciiij , the hero of the romance is about to take leave of the Sultan, to return to his native
country. This is a very interesting illumination ; the expressions of sorrow and
regret being rather powerfully represented. The preceding are, I believe, the
whole of the larger illuminations. On the reverse of folio. cc.lxiij , and last,
the reader sighs to take leave of such a volume, thus :
Cyfine listoire du trespreu et
vertueulz cheuallier, Gillionde trasigmes natifde haynau.
There are 27 lines in a full page. The text, in faded ink, is a large coarse
gothic -and I apprehend this volume to have been executed somewhere about
the year 1450. It is in the most desirable condition ; in yellow morocco
binding.
Next for MELUSINE. In a trice we are off for the octagonal- library at Hafod !
There, about two years ago, was the following memorandum taken, of a beautiful
and interesting vellum Manuscript of the romance under consideration. It is
executed in a small gothic character, exhibiting two different styles of writing;
the first and most ancient style occupying two thirds of the volume. The
borders are much elaborated, but the colours, generally speaking, are faded.
The book is full of illuminations ; many of them injured. At the bottom ofthe
first page, in the centre of the border, is a shield, having a rampant
lion on the sinister side, with mermaid supporters. At top, in two compartments, to the left, the author is writing his book ; and to the right, presenting it
on his knees to his Patron and Patroness, who are seated. The second illumination represents MELUSINE sitting in a shrubbery, within a garden ; while a
knight, to the left, just alighted from his horse, is paying obeisance to her : a
squire, to the right, on horseback, is leading another horse. Many of these
illuminations are singularly interesting ; and thefourth of the Count of Poitiers
and Raymondun, in a wood, contemplating the moon, is especially so. The
17th illumination, of the Bishop blessing the nuptial bed in which Raymondun
and Melusina are lying,' has great simplicity. The original text, or oldest hand-
FIRST DAY. CCV
peculiar style of art which may be considered as furnishing
the models for those wood-cuts, with which the publications
of foreign printers in particular were so profusely embelwriting, terminates with the 48th illumination. The remaining 36 leaves have
no illumination. I apprehend the style of art to be Flemish, and the writing of
the 15th century, perhaps 1450. The remaining 36 leaves are in a small, but
loose and coarse character, and the vellum is very thick. The binding is old
mulberry- colour velvet, with brass corners, in a modern back in the centre of
the sides, arms, two keys in saltier. And thus much for the Hafod Memorandum
relating to Madame Melusine.
In the third place for MELIADUS. From the octagonal library of Hafod we
jump back again to the metropolis ; and sit ourselves down quietly in the
delectable satin-wood book-cased library of Mr. Lang, of Portland Place. Of
this library, rich and replete with romaunt-lore,' and more especially with old
French poetry-some gentle word or two shall be spoken in the TENTH DAY of
this Decameron. At present, suffice it to observe that it contains a treasure of
its kind ; and no back drawing-room, I will venture to affirm, within the said
Portland Place, displays furniture more worthy of the attention of a well- bred
and well-educated visitor. But for the Meliadus-reposing within the fore-mentioned library. This was once in the Roxburghe collection ; and is described in
the catalogue of that library, no. 6096, as MS. très ancien sur velin avec 333
figures, et combats peintes du même format de chaque page !' It was sold for
371. 16s.-but, before it reached its present possessor, it had received rather a
plentiful sprinkling of Cayenne-pepper : as some dishes are considered to stand
greatly in need of the same ! The MS. in question is a large folio of 351 leaves :
written in a close, and not inelegant gothic character, in double columns. The
illuminations are uniformly at the bottoms of the margins ; and although of
various degrees of merit, they are, upon the whole, highly interesting.
These illuminations are of two characters, or modes of execution. Till towards
the middle of the volume, they are comparatively small, with daubed rather thau
coloured backgrounds. Sometimes the figures are slightly coloured, with open
backgrounds. About folio 150 commences the series of larger illuminations—
sometimes slightly coloured, without backgrounds ; sometimes with thickly
daubed backgrounds ; and very frequently, and of much superior merit, in a
delicate india ink outline. Folios 149, 150, exhibit one of the more elaborately
coloured specimens of these larger illuminations ; which is divided into two
compartments : the upper compartment being generally filled with ladies and
gentlemen who express various emotions at the fortune of the battle which rages
below. Sometimes these emotions have no mean power of expression. A small
and very pleasing specimen of one of the outline decorations occurs on the
recto of folio 163—of two knights fighting ; one falling backwards apparently
dead upon his horse. Among the more beautifully executed of these large outline
embellishments are those from folio 258 to folio 275. Some ofthem richly merit
cevi FIRST DAY.
lished. The very choice cabinet of a neighbour has furnished me with a few specimens from a Romance History of
Thebes, which I here place before you.
FIRST DAY. ccvii
But let me rather exhibit, from the same volume, specimens of a more complete and striking resemblance to that
style of wood-engraving to which I now particularly allude.
The following are selected chiefly with a view to the display
of costume,
publication ; as the age of the MS. is probably towards the latter end of the
Xivth century. The latter illuminations are slightly yet most unskilfully coloured.
Afine semi-gothic church, with a neat group of figures to the left, arrests our
attention on the recto of folio 347. This is upon the whole a very singular and
richly ornamented MS.: and the battle scenes, in outline, have very uncommon merit. My friend Mr. G. H. Freeling, the son-in-law of its present Owner,
hath bestowed great pains upon its collation with another ancient manuscript of
the same Roy MELIADUS, and with an old printed edition. The result has
proved the intrinsic importance of that to which it now behoves us to say
farewell!
ccviii FIRST DAY.
LORENZO. Undoubtedly these are curious if not elegant :
and this History ofThebes may rank among the more
singular romance-volumes of the day. Proceed ; but be not
too brief.
this History ofThebes. ] The manuscript of the Romance in question is the
property of my friend Mr. E. V. Utterson ; it being among the numerous
curiosities, of this kind, which enrich his Hermitage' near Stanmore. It is a small
folio, upon paper ; written in a large and inelegant gothic character, with the titles
in red. The illuminations are exceedingly numerous ; the colouring being thin
and washed upon the subjects. The lines of each figure are as strongly marked
as above. There is occasionally a good deal of force and intelligence in these
FIRST DAY. ccix
PHILEMON. Yes-brief almost to obscurity-for think of
what has been already accomplished !!
LISARDO. We will not be unconscionable. Yet a word
for my favourite Roman De La Rose ! ...
decorations ; and both the heads and countenances have very singular character.
There can be no doubt of the identity of the artist who executed the whole.
In regard to the illuminations, we cannot perhaps select a more outrè specimen
than the following :
·
too revolting for female sensibility, but which may please the capricious taste
of some delver into romaunt lore. It represents Medea in the act of destroying
the two children of which Jason was the father.' The recto of the first leaf
furnishes the following title :
Chy commenche listore de thebes premierement
de cheluy qui le fonda et comment elle fu puis
destruite.
The recto of the last leaf not only supplies us with the following colophon, from
which we gather that the Romance treats of Troy as well as Thebes (in fact, the
whole is something very like Caxton's Recueil) but with the interesting memorandum subjoined to it :
Chy fine le tres exelente et noble
ystore de troyes escriptes par la main
Iaquotin de lesplut enlan degrace
mil quattre cens lxix pries pour luy
CCX FIRST DAY.
PHILEMON. I understand you : for I remember how you
struggled to obtain possession of the charming volume, containing that romance, which now enriches the cabinet of
MR. NORTH. But I must first make you acquainted with a
more magnificent Manuscript, of the same Romance, in the
British Museum. The MS. to which I allude is a large
Ce liure appartient a monseigneur le
souverain Bailly de Flandres. par
achat quil en a fait de Maistre Vatos
Libraire demourant A lille.
-
The entire transcription gives evidence of the Flemish education of the artist,
MASTER JAQUOTIN· for whom let us pray, ' as desired : that is, if we have
no objection to the contrary. The subjoined memorandum shews who was the
first vendor and who the first purchaser of this curious book.
How many
interesting hands have opened it ere it came into the Towneley collection (Bibl.
Towneley, pt. i. no. 892) from which it was obtained by my right good friend- PALMERIN, shall we say?
amore magnificent MS. ofthe same Romance in the British Museum. ] Ponder
well, gentle reader, upon what here first ensueth respecting this very precious
gem- or, to borrow the metaphor of the above interlocutors, respecting this
' dainty dish ' of cream. The editor of the first Catalogue of the Harleian MSS.
1762, (vol. i. p. 25, edit. Nares) thus discourseth thereupon. This MS. [ ofthe
ROMAN DE LA ROSE] is so richly ornamented with a multitude of miniature
paintings, executed in the most masterly manner, (each chapter of the book
having prefixed to it a picture explanatory of the subject) that it is not to be
exceeded by any known manuscript in this or any other library ; and is probably
the copywhich was presented to King Henry IV.-the blazon of his arms being
introduced in the illuminations with which the first page is embellished .' Mr.
Nares, in his enlarged edition of the same Catalogue, vol, i. p. 35, calls the
volume ' a transcendent copy ; ' and he is perfectly right. But at vol. iii . p. 143,
no. 4425, there will be found what may be considered a meagre description of a
volume, of which such distinct and warm notice is taken in the preface. This
latter account is as follows. A truly beautiful copy of the Romant de la Rose ;
finely written on vellum, and full of the most elaborate illuminations. It contains
183 leaves, numbered throughout by the original scribe.' The arms, before
noticed, are alluded to ; but their application to Henry IV. seems to be con- sidered incorrect. Indeed there can be no doubt that the volume is of a much
later date ; and from the Gothic Verard-like looking character of the writing, I
should conceive it to be not earlier than 1480. The deficiencies, real or imaginary,
in the foregoing descriptions, are endeavoured to be supplied by the following.
This magnificent and complete copy of the ROMAN DE LA ROSE is a folio of
ASTOR LIBRARY
NY
HL
THE
ASTOR LIBRAR
NY
Fac-Similes ofIlluminations ,
In a MS ofthe ROMANDE LAROSE inthe British Mufeum.
(Harluan.HANDBA
Freeman sc.
PRINTED BYLAHEE
FIRST DAY. ссхі
folio, replete with embellishments ; and was held in such
estimation as to be called the Cream of the Harleian Collection!
about 15 inches and three quarters in height, by 11 inches and a half in width.
It is replete with illuminations, appertaining to the subject of the Romance, of
almost every description. Some of these illuminations are large ; being about
8 inches by 7; and others are small, as the ACCOMPANYING PLATE testifies.
There are however much smaller pieces. The allegorical representations ofAvarice,
Envy, Jealousy, &c. —which follow the first large illumination , are pretty accurately
executed-with the exception of the heads, which are too large. That of Avarice
is the best ; but, nota bene-hypocrisy is represented by a stately Abbess. Fie !
The large illumination on the reverse of folio 6 , of the text, is exceedingly pleasing : especially that part in which figures are reclining upon a grass plat, in the
garden, near a fountain-where a man touches a guitar, and some ladies are
singing. Sweet are such scenes as these ; and Watteau's pencil, I dare wager a
rose against a thorn , has slily stolen a bit from many a similar representation!
But for the MS. The border, which encircles this piece of Arcadian scenery, is
in brown and gold, finely designed and coloured, but much rubbed : as are indeed
too many of these border embellishments. On the reverse of fol. viij is another
large illumination, representing a gay and gorgeous procession ; in almost the
finest possible state of preservation. The salutation of Bel Acueil and his Love
(see the fac-simile of this subject from Mr. North's MS. of the same Romance,
post) on the recto of folio xviij , is rather fine and striking. On the reverse of,
fol. xxiv there is a vastly pretty illumination of Bel Acueil and his Beloved, going
into a garden of roses :
Coment bel acueil humblement
Offrit a lamant doulcement
A passer pour veoir les Roses
Quil desiroit sur toutes choses.
The physiognomy of the man, however, is as repulsive as that of the lady is
attractive. The heads of some lookers on ' appear amidst the bushes in the
background. On the reverse of fol . xxxiiii, is another of these larger illuminations, representing the Castle ofJealousy,' surrounded by a moat, and by hedgerows, as it were, of white and red roses ; but chiefly of the former. Over the
portcullis the word ‘ dangier ' is inscribed ; and just before it, in the foreground,
between the embrasures of the fortification, a turbaned head of a Giant appears,
with a bunch of keys in his left hand. The whole has a magnificent and enchantment-like appearance ! The group over the portal, where the imprisoned
lady appears, has a striking effect : higher up, the windows are filled by armed
men ; and over these windows, suspended, are masses of stone, which drop down
to fill up the apertures, like the closed port-holes of a ship. The topmost tier of
windows is closed by these masses. The worthy Bel Acueil, at a distance, to
ccxii FIRST DAY.
LISARDO. Can you indulge us with a sip of this cream ?
PHILEMON. Fortunately it is in my power to gratify you
the left, looks in a most woful and helpless state. The whole is surrounded by
a beautiful border of flowers and fruits, but not free from soil.
Let us now make acquaintance with the Mendicant and Friar, as exhibited in
the first subject of the OPPOSITE PLATE. It occurs on the reverse of fol . xlj .
The beggar has a black hat and cloak. His jacket or coat is dark green. His
hose are bright orange colour. The priest has a black cowl : a deep blue surcoat :
and the lining close upon his breast is crimson. His surcoat is edged with bright
yellow. The houses are of a gray-brick tint. Beneath them are these lines :
Cy est le souffreteur deuant
Son vray amy en requerant
Quil lui ayde a son besoing
Et son auoir lui met au poing.
Note : at folio lxviij we observe another beggar, of a most gigantic stature, and
exhibiting very frightful symptoms of wretchedness-before a lady, who retreats,
holding up her right hand, and apparently withholding alms. Such an outré figure
is surely enough to extinguish every charitable spark in the gentlest bosom !
The illumination of Virginius pleading before Appius, on the recto of folio xlviij ,
is as admirable as it is fresh and brilliant. I would be understood as speaking
chiefly of the two upright figures before the judge, to the left. Their attitudes
are almost perfect. A figure with a large hat (perhaps our old friend Bel
Acueil) is constantly recurring. Sometimes this hat is of dimensions too formidable even for the most strictly-educated Obadiah ! On the reverse of folio lxj
our broad-brim friend is well introduced ; discoursing with a man, and harmonising well with the background. The same may be said of his appearance at
fol. lxxxiiij , recto, where his right hand, in particular, is well managed. A pretty
architectural interior appears at fol . Ixxij , recto ; but a little too black.
For what enthusiasts call a gem, examine, lover of delicate execution , the illumination which occurs on the reverse of fol . lxxxiiij ; where we observe a tenderhearted knight, with a white-feathered hat, looped with gold to a bit of crimson
drapery, sitting by the side of a lady, clothed in brown and gold, near a fountain. The grouping of this interesting duo is perfect. It ought to have been
here represented to the reader, by means of Mr. Freeman's burin ; but non
omnia possumus omnes.' At fol . lxxxvij recto, Love puts on his wings and
appears in this shape from thenceforth. On the recto of folio Cxxvij is the
author in the character of a SCRIBE : as given with admirable effect at p. cxxviii,
ante. The pencil of Mr. William Alexander executed the fac- simile ; which
however, it must be confessed, exhibits a somewhat younger and gentler physiognomy than the original. For costume, &c. this is a delicious morceau of
illumination ; and, from such a feeling, was consigned to the burin of Samuel
Freeman. On the reverse of fol , Cxxxj is an elegant and expressive figure of
FIRST DAY. ccxiii
with a pretty good taste of it. Look you ! Are not these
vastly pleasing specimens of their kind. *
Venus, beneath a canopy, rising and delivering a letter to a man kneeling before
her. The head dress and countenance of the Goddess are, as they ought to be,
the prettiest specimen of female loveliness ' in the volume. We are now getting
fast out of this Garden of Roses : but where is the BISHOP, exhibited in the
second subject of the ANNEXED PLATE? exclaims the impatient reader ! Softly
and slow ; they stumble who go fast ' —says the Friar in Romeo and Juliet :
and so says the very humble fabricator of this tough gossipping note. The Bishop
does not make his appearance till we reach folio Clxiij , where we read these
verses-beneath the illumination of which the fac-simile has been just referred to.
Ce fort excommuniement
Met genes sur toute gent
Qui ne se veulent remuer
Pour ses pece continuer
From this we gather that the Bishop is excommunicating Love !' : but, as the
above interlocutors seem to intimate, without any chance of success. That Love,
however, is laughing ' at the Prelate, is a mere piece of saucy innuendo on the
part of Lisardo : it being evident that the countenance of this winged figure is
turnedfrom the Spectator. Let us not therefore accuse ' Love' of such a breach
of seriousness and good manners. The Bishop has a white and gold mitre : he
is clothed in a purple and gold vestment ; with white gloves, having a gold
cross slightly indicated on his right-hand glove. The tunic, near his breast,
with a broad border of gold and purple across it, is blue. The pulpit is
wainscot, and so are the platform and tub-like seats in which the auditors sit.
The head of Love is white ; his wings are shaded with gold : his dress, crimson.
The man to the left has a crimson cap with a blue dress : the one on the right
has a cap of the same colour, with a lilac-tinted dress ; but the piece of
drapery turned over, is black. The background is stone colour. The original is
unluckily rather injured. On the reverse of folio Clxxxij is the last illumination, representing Love in the garden, gathering the roses at his pleasure.'
There are three red roses in particular, of a most magnificent growth, and beautiful execution, in the background. On the recto of the following and last
leaf, we read the colophon, at the bottom of the first column, thus :
C
Cest lafin du rommant de la rose
Ou tout lart damours est enclose
And here let us shut a volume, embellished in a style of illumination, very much
superior, for delicacy and strength, to any other known MS. of the Romance.
The prevailing fault of the artist is, a disproportionate enlargement of the head
in the generality of his figures. He was beyond all doubt a Flemish illuminator.
The writing is almost repulsively coarse. But what a nosegay-like description
may YET be given of this beauteous tome !! - (Thy close-ear,' gentle reader,
ccxiv FIRST DAY.
LORENZO. I admit they are extremely amusing and
curious ; but what can the second be intended to explain ?
PHILEMON. Nothing less than the unavailing attempt of
a Prelate to excommunicate Love!-the latter, you observe,
being represented with wings, sitting below.
6
LISARDO. Thus Love laughs ' at Bishops as well as at
' Lock-Smiths !'-
PHILEMON. You must remember, however, that the
whole of the heavy Romance under consideration is a dull
Allegory-being descriptive of the difficulties and misfortunes which oftentimes mark the progress of the tender
passion-but from which the happy circle, I am now addressing, are exempted—
LISARDO. Not altogether....
PHILEMON. Well-pretty nearly so. A peep at another
MS. of this Romance, and then farewell to the extravagant
theme upon which we are discoursing !
LORENZO. You mentioned a Roman de la Rose in the
possession of MR. NORTH ? *
to what is about to be parenthetically imparted. The first of the foregoing notes
of admiration is indicative of Hope, the second, of Despair ! ) This book gives
cruel indication of binding à la mode Françoise. At folio xxx , the two latter
numerals are cut off! No matter, says the hungry bibliopegist : the nearer the
bone the sweeter the meat!' Ah, Monsieur DE ROME, ' what a bone-picker'
therefore wert THOU !
* Roman De La Rose in the possession of MR. NORTH. ] The length of the preceding description of the magnificent manuscript of this Romance, in the British
Museum, has necessarily trenched upon the limits assignable to that of the
present very beautiful copy of it. Yet Mr. North will not complain of the lukewarmness of what is here imparted to the reader ; and especially let him congratulate himself upon the possession of the Chronicle described at p. cxv, ante,
and of the present Romance- two acquisitions, of a superior and interesting
description, connected with the LIBRARY of the great FRANCIS I. Indeed, for
neatness, calligraphy, and soundness of condition, and convenience of size, I
know not whether the copy of the Romance of the Rose,' here particularly
treated of, be not superior to every known copy. It is a small folio, written in
FIRST DAY. CCXV
PHILEMON. I did so : and forthwith you shall be made
pretty intimately acquainted with it. First, gaze with
a small and even elegant secretary-gothic character, in double columns. The first
illumination contains the arms of France : the second, the FRONTISPIECE of
which the ANNEXED PLATE is a fac- simile ; and in which the countenance of
Francis cannot fail to strike the curious observer. Mr. Evans, under whose bookhammer this gem was disposed of to Mr. North, (for 120l. ) very properly
designates it as ornamented with a profusion of the most rich and brilliant
miniature paintings, worthy of the great sovereign for whom they were executed.'
Cat. ofthe Library ofJ. L. Gouldsmid, Esq. 1815, no. 729.
6
Among these ' rich and brilliant ' decorations, receive, gentle reader, what here
ensueth-as illustrative of the subject slightly noticed at p. ccxi, ante : and which,
for spirit and elegance, may possibly vie with the same kind of decoration in the
copy just referred to. It is engraved by the worthy AUDINET, to whom I am
indebted for its two companions.
MB
السنة
ccxvi FIRST DAY.
pleasure at its CHARMING FRONTISPIECE * - which represents Francis I. surrounded by his courtiers, receiving the
Romance in question from the hands of the Author. But
what have we here-for the heart's delight of Almansa and
Belinda !? The lady has placed her hand upon the doorring, and has just entered the mansion. Her lover is but
too happy in imprinting a kiss upon the iron ring, which
has been pressed by the hands of his beloved !
See the OPPOSITE PLATE.
AA
0-0-0
0000
00
0-0-0-0-0
0-000007
0000.
25751
លោ
000000000
Audinet sculp
FacSimile ofthe Frontispiece ofthe RomanDeLaRose,
In the possession ofJohn North Eog.
PRINTED BY LAHEL
LIBR
ASTOR
BRARY
NY
TH
ASTOR
THE
LIBRARY
NY
FIRST DAY. ccxvii
BELINDA. There is no denying the extreme delicacy and
gallantry of this action ! But methinks the race of lovers
has much degenerated of late.
ALMANSA. Fie ! Did Lysander never achieve such a
deed ? ...
LORENZO. We are descending to personalities.
LYSANDER. Is Belinda both forgetful and ungrateful ?
BELINDA. Nay, if you are serious -I desist. Proceed
mighty Monarch of the Day !
PHILEMON. That Day is about to close-together with
my first diurnal reign.
LYSANDER. Remember Chronicles-you know my attachment to them !
LISARDO. Not another Romance?
PHILEMON. Go to.'
6
The order of the discussion now
requires the notice of CHRONICLES : yet Lysander must
necessarily, I fear, be dissatisfied-for I shall only take you
to the British Museum. There, in the first place, admire,
Of these ' companions,' that produced by Philemon breathes the very soul and
quintessence of chivalrous gallantry. The countenance, the dress, the attitude,
the action are all indicative of that refined state of intellect, which, under the
sovereignties of FRANCIS and HENRY IV. made Frenchmen worthy of the ' fine
soil' in which it has pleased Providence to place them-' redeant Saturnia Regna!'
To conclude : let Mr. North put as high a value as he pleases upon this ' rose-'
discoursing Romance-and I will put a higher afterwards : let him consign
it to a velvet receptacle in his choicest cabinet : and if the velvet be British, I
will replace it with some ofthe most exquisite manufacture of Genoa!
The oldest illuminated copy of this once popular Romance, which I remember
to have seen, is that in the possession of the Rev. I. M. Rice. It is a cropt
folio, in old French binding, written in a gothic character, in double columns,
with 38 lines to a full page. The illuminations are small ; measuring about
2 inches and one eighth in length, by one and a half in width ; within square
borders, slightly sprigged at the corners. The back- grounds are diamond- wise,
or in solid gold ; and I should conjecture the MS. to be of the middle of the
XIVth century. The first illumination, divided into four compartments, with a
border of portraits round the entire page, is sufficiently interesting. This MS.
was recently obtained from France.
ccxviii FIRST DAY.
as you ought, that choice old copy of the Chronicles ofSt.
Denis; * but if you want richness of illumination and grandeur of calligraphy, if I may so speak, approach with a firm
step, hopeful eye, and beating heart, those two magnificent
tomes of an imperfect work, entitled Les Chroniques d'Angleterre-executed expressly for our Edward IV.+ Regret,
Chronicles of St. Denis. ] These Chronicles' consist of 3 folio volumes,
which were originally in the library of PETAU, and came into the British Museum
from the collection of Sir Hans Sloane. They are thus described in Ascough's
Catalogue of the latter ; vol. i. p. 344. La grande chronique de France
appellée & connue sous le titre de chronique de St. Denis, qui commence par
l'origine des François, descendus des Troyans, et est continuée jusque à la fin du
Regue du Roi Charles VI. Manuscrit très beau & ancien, sec. xiv. en 3 grand
volumes, sur vélin, orné d'un grand nombre de miniatures, diverses lettres grises,
& vignettes ; le tout peint en or & diverses couleurs, & lié très proprement en
maroquin. ' ( Ex Bibl. Al. Petavii. ) We have here an unusual specimen of art, in
the cameo-gris method of illumination, ( see a brief notice of a missal of this kind,
p. clxxvi, ante) exhibiting some very delicate and vigorously-touched figures
and groups. The first illumination, in four compartments, is injured. That on
fol. 31 (reverse) of vol. i . is among the cleverest : the remainder being much
inferior. The opening of the 11d volume, with Philip Le Bel, exhibits a still
abler specimen of art : the embracing of the two monarchs is very prettily
imagined and touched. The illuminations at the end of the second volume,
relating to the history of Charles V. are among the most perfect and interesting.
Those in vol. 111. are few in number and meagre in execution. The text is a
small gothic, in double columns.
at
* Chronique D'Angleterre, executed for EDWARD IV. ] Of these magnificent
' Chronicles ' — or, rather, of only two volumes (the first and third) remaining
from the entire set, of seven volumes, the following is the meagre notice
of David Casley, Deputy Librarian ' to his Majesty George II.; at page 292
ofhis Catalogue of the Royal MSS. Croniques D'Angleterre, jusques a le temps
du Ed. 2. avec belles Peinctures. Dedies a Ed. 5. For Ed. 5 ' read
' Edward IV.' and for this meagre notice,' read what hereafter ensueth. The
British Museum boasts of no nobler volumes than these. The basis of this
Chronicle is a set in the Royal Library of France, in 6 volumes bound in
12. However, such as the present are, they merit a particular description,
on the score of graphic embellishment. In the first place, their dimensions
are ofthe colossal kind : being one foot and a half in height by about 14 inches
wide. After a table of 12 leaves, the first illumination in the numerical
order of the volumes ( about 9 inches square) displays Edward IV. upon his
throne, receiving a book from the chronicler, who is upon his knees. Three other
figures are in the picture, but the space would have admitted of a half dozen.
FIRST DAY. сехіх
as you may, such a mutilated monument of the bookloving splendour of our fourth Edward ; but be grateful
that so much is yet contained within these massive volumes
for the gratification of the antiquary and man of taste.
LORENZO. You have probably some specimen of the
splendour of art which these volumes appear to contain ?
PHILEMON. Not exactly of its splendour ; but I happen
to possess a droll specimen of the representation of MorThe arras ofthe room is dark crimson and gold. Strutt has engraved this illumination, but in a very indifferent manner, in his Regal and Ecclesiastical Antiquities,
edit. 1773, pl. XLVI. The figures are about 3 inches and a half in height, and
coloured perhaps somewhat too vividly. The illuminations, from 6 to 8 inches in
size, are generally tenderly touched : the second, being chiefly a group of
females, is very much so -but, as usual, too much space is left unoccupied by
figures. Onthe xxviij chapter of the first book, occurs the ensuing representation
of MORVINUS AND THE SEA-MONSTER . The story is in Lying Geffrey'—as Our MODERN LELAND calls him.
The first chapter of the vith book contains a magnificent illumination of some
richly-dressed ladies, accompanied by musicians : the back-ground, being very
tenderly executed. The xxxvth chapter of the same book exhibits a singular
and brilliant group of men clad in silver-tinted armour, touched in a bold and
decisive manner. The general character ofthe illuminations is brilliancy and effect ;
and the condition of the volume is most desirable. The 11d and only other remaining volume in the Museum, is written and illuminated by an inferior artist : it
is however in fine preservation, and abounds with architectural views and representations of castles, battles, sieges, and all the pomp and circumstance of war. '
There are some striking borders in it ; (yet not superior to those in the preceding
volume) among which, that on the recto of folio lxii, having the banner, arms,
and white-rose ofEdward, makes a conspicuous appearance. There is also great
sharpness and brilliancy on fol. ccxv, and a tolerably splendid banquet on the
reverse of fol. ccxxxv-while on fol. cclvj , reverse, the colours are perfectly
resplendent. Among the sieges, that on folio ccxliii may be distinguished for
design and execution. The representation of the marriage of King John of
Portugal with Philippina, daughter to the Duke of Lancaster, as exhibited at
fol. cclxxv, is very striking. The last illumination, on the recto of folio cclxxxx,
with figures nearly 5 inches in length, is rather dismal ; although at first, from
its magnitude, it hath an air imposant.' The small illuminations are comparatively indifferent. The amputation of the figure v, at fol. cclxxv, is sufficient
evidence-if no other were at hand-of the shaving propensities of an ancient
binder of these glorious volumes !
VOL. I.
·
CCXX FIRST DAY.
vinus, King of Britain, attacked by a huge monster, which
arose from the Irish Sea, and which afterwards swallowed
him up.
LISARDO. Tremendously terrific ! But this sea-monster will
swallow a score of such diminutive champions at a gulp !
PHILEMON. We cannot wait to see the result. But while
upon History, real or feigned, never suffer your researches
at the British Museum to terminate without paying very
marked attention to a French translation of VALERIUS
MAXIMUS,* embellished from beginning to end, in two marFrench translation of VALERIUS MAXIMUS. ] Slight but commendatory
notices of two ms. copies of this translation, replete with the most elaborate
illuminations, are found in the prefaces of Mr. Nares's Cat. of the Harl. MSS.
vol. i. p. 27, 35. These MSS. are numbered 4372 and 4374. Our purpose is
FIRST DAY. ccxxi
vellous folio volumes ; and replete with almost every
curious and costly specimen of the art of illumination
towards the close of the Fifteenth Century. Upon the
whole, I am not sure that a more perfect and extraordinary
specimen of Flemish art, of the period of which we are
`speaking, can be mentioned to exist ... It is time to rise,
and put our specimens away. The sun is rapidly declining ;
and I am languishing for cessation of speech, and enjoyment ofthe garden-breeze.
LORENZO. You are absolute. But does the British
to speak of the latter : which, in vol. iii. p. 139, of the same catalogue, is properly described as a still more splendid copy of the same work : with illuminations of the most exquisite neatness, not only large at the beginning of each book,
but smaller to most of the chapters. This appears to have been executed for
some private person, whose arms are emblazoned in the first illumination, and
in some others. Afiner work, according to the skill in painting then possessed,
cannot easily be imagined.' Thus far Mr. Nares : who correctly supposes it to
belong to the fifteenth century. I should apprehend it to be of the latter end
of the same century ; or not earlier than 1470. The preceding eulogy is
perfectly justified by the various and extraordinary exhibitions of the Art of
ILLUMINATION which these two ponderous folios display.
4
The illuminations are, many of them, full 15 inches in height by nearly 11 in
width-divided into three or more compartments. The style is rather Flemish
than French : the colours are as brilliant as if recently executed : the gold bas
preserved all its original brightness, and the marking or touch is as vigorous as
the masses are resplendent. The grouping is full of life and action-occasionally,
but rarely, betraying the stiffness of the Flemish school : yet a group of workmen, in the bottom compartment of the grand illumination ofthe vi11th book, to
the left, is both conceived and executed with a surprising power of drawing and
colouring. I should have premised , however, that the first grand illumination is
injured : particularly in the middle compartment. The group of women with
distaffs, &c. in the bottom compartment of the large illumination to the 1xth
book, has absolutely a magical freshness of colour. The smaller illuminations
possess equal merit, but are necessarily almost lost in the blaze of effulgence
by which the larger ones are enveloped ! Upon the whole, for variety, richness,
and perfection of condition, these volumes cannot possibly be surpassed. Who
the illuminator or illuminators were, is perhaps unknown ; but it may be necessary to state, upon the authority above quoted, that the Authors of the Version
were SIMON DE HESDIN and NICOLAS DE GONESSE.
ecxxii FIRST DAY.
Museum furnish nothing further deserving of particular
notice ?*
PHILEMON. Who shall presume to collect, or even make
6
* does the British Museum furnish nothing else deserving of particular notice ?]
It must I think be taken for granted, either that Lorenzo never visited the
British Museum, or never read a catalogue of its book-treasures ; and yet, with
a character of his stamp and complexion ,' one or the other of these conclusions
seems equally improbable. Let us conclude, therefore, that the above is a mere
random- shot remark, thrown out to elicit further curious information from the
' Monarch of the Day. ' It seems that the Monarch' is too fatigued for a reply ;
his robes are cumbersome, or his sceptre is weighty, or he is unused to so much
parlance in one day. But if the lungs of PHILEMON be exhausted, what must
be the relaxed state of the head and right hand of his ANNOTATOR ? Nevertheless, ' come what come may ' -the reader shall not turn his back upon the
British Museum without a further specimen or two of its multifarious booktreasures. And now-having dispatched our theological, historical, and poetical
branches of discussion — what say you, reader gay, to a smack of alchemical
intelligence ? Be present, spirits of Dee, Tradescant, and Ashmole ! -whose
' brains,' I verily believe, would have turned,' had they seen the volume now
about to be described . It is noticed at vol. i . p . 26, and vol. iii. p. 31 , of the
recent Catalogue of the Harl. MSS. and is numbered 3469.
"
"
On the recto of the first leaf, in Lord Oxford's hand- writing, we read as
follows : Thisfine Book was given me by my ... [ erased] in 17 . . [erased] It was
bought of MRS. PRIEMER who was niece to the Famous MR. CYPRIANUS whose
book it was.' Below, in a different hand, it is thus observed : by a date marked
upon the last miniature but five , This Book appears to have been painted in the
year 1582.' In 1768 (in Wanley's hand writing) it had 48 leaves , and 22
illuminated paintings. It has them now.' Lord Oxford's autograph is on the recto
of the first leaf ofthe text. The initial letters are flowered, in gold. The text is
like that of the Teurdanckhs ; and I suspect that the book, from that character,
(which was discontinued about 1550) is of somewhat earlier date. More extraordinary things were surely never seen. The colouring is gorgeous but beautiful ;
although, occasionally, the touch is rather clumsy and heavy. But the larger
figures-especially those at the 1xth and xth illuminations, are forcibly executed ;
and at the ixth pleasingly monstrous- where we see a double-headed man,
with radii, in black and gold drapery, with wings ; bearing a circular shield of
heaven and earth in his right hand. The x1th is singularly curious, but not
more so than the 6 following ; where the smaller figures are surprisingly well
grouped and touched. The rising sun, at the xixth and xxth illuminations,
have an extraordinary effect. The borders are composed of fruits and flowers ;
and the smaller groups embrace almost all the trades, arts, pursuits, and occupations of mankind.
FIRST DAY. ccxxiii
mention of, the contents of ocean's ' dark unfathomed caves ?"
The longest life, the most unrelaxed and vigorous state of
nerves -a curiosity without limits, and a power of description
In spite of the character of the book, David and Bathsheba, with Esther and
Ahasuerus are contrived to be introduced ; but some of the basso- relievo imitations, especially those beneath the 1vth illumination, are quite master- pieces of
art, and evidently by a different hand. Upon the whole, it is well observed of
these extraordinary illuminations by the author of the Catalogue of the Harl.
MSS. of 1762, that, the beauty of the colouring, the disposition of the figures,
the elegancy of their attitudes, and the propriety of composition, is scarcely to
be equalled.' It remains only to add that the volume is a thin folio ; but evidently cropt (will misery of this sort never cease to persecute the honest bibliomaniac?) in the right margin, or fore- edge.
·
So much for Alchemy. We will, as the LAST memorandum of the loveliness
of ILLUMINATION, (selected from among the British Museum treasures) here
notice a very different production. It is full of grace, beauty, and delightful
caprice and formerly enriched the Royal Collection. Casley (tasteless creature, I fear ! ) hath only this brief memorandum relating to it. 17. A. xxiii.
Sentences selected by Sir Nic. Bacon, Knt. , and sent to the Lady Lumley :
finely painted.' p. 260. ' Finely painted ' indeed they are : and much am I
beholden to Mr. Henry Ellis for having placed so marvellously pretty an oblong
volume about 9 inches and a half, by six and a quarter-upon the Museum
reading table for my inspection. There are, in the whole, only fifteen leaves ;
upon vellum. The autograph of Lumley ' is on the paper fly-leaf, The general title is thus :
Syr. NICOLAS. BACON, KNYGHTE. TO. HIS. VERY
GOOD. LADYE. The. LADYE. LVMLEY. SENDETH. THIS
Bacon's arms and supporters are beneath. On the recto of the second leaf, at
top :
Sentences Painted In the Lorde Kepars
Gallery at Gorhambvry : and Selected
By Him owt of Divers Avthors, and Sent
To the Good Ladye Lvmley At her Desire
The sentences, or moral adages, follow : with a title to the whole in Latin. They
are executed in roman capitals of gold, upon scrolls of different colours, upon a
background of green, red, or blue. The whole ornamented and relieved , with
gold arabesque patterns, most delicately executed. Beyond all doubt this is a
PERFECT GEM of its kind.
As a running but short commentary to the declamation of Philemon, respecting the book- treasures in the BRITISH MUSEUM and more especially of the
uses and purposes to which fac-similes of some of the GRAPHIC EMBELLISH- MENTS therein, may be applied-receive, in conclusion, benevolent reader, what
is observed respecting the same, by Hocker, the Editor of the Catalogue of the
ccxxiv FIRST DAY.
equally strong and varied-all are inadequate to do justice to
the ample stores contained in the NATIONAL REPOSITORY to
which you allude ! Much however as the public have been
made acquainted with its principal treasures, I augur well,
from the known sagacity and invincible diligence of those
gentlemen to whose care such a Repository is now confided,
that very many years will not elapse before we receive some
specimen, or specimens, in the way of graphic illustration,
of the beautiful, curious, extraordinary, or instructive exhibitions of ancient art which that Repository contains. The
wealth of a nation is never better bestowed than in the
diffusion of useful or elegant knowledge ; and least of all
should that knowledge be suffered to lie concealed, which,
by calling forth, and embodying with new life, as it were,
what our ANCESTORS have done, tends most effectually to
perpetuate a meritorious remembrance of OURSELVESand what is this, let me ask, but FAME and PATRIOTISM
in their purest shapes and substances ?' .... I have
done. Information has dwindled into declamation ; and
it is natural that you should exhibit symptoms of ennui.-
Ifyou please, we will disport ourselves in the garden.
6
-
Harl. MSS. of 1762.-' exclusive of their importance in other respects, a variety
of MSS. is highly valuable on account of the many BEAUTIFUL ILLUMINATIONS, and EXCELLENT PAINTINGS wherewith they are embellished ; those
pictures being not only useful for illustrating the subject- matter of the books in
which they are respectively placed, but furnishing excellent lessons and useful
hints to painters ; perpetuating the representations of the principal Personages,
Buildings, Utensils, Habits, Armour, and Manners of the age in which they were
painted ; and very probably preserving some Pieces of eminent Painters, of
whose works no other Remains are extant.' Let every Member of either House
HEAR! -and lend an helping hand ' to carry into effect any resolutions which
may have, for their object, the diffusion of that valuable knowledge which their
Own NATIONAL MUSEUM contains. They owe it to the gallant memories of
COTTON, HARLEY, and SLOANE !
FIRST DAY. CCXXV
So saying, the Party rose-with even shouts of applause,
and the most vehement assurances of not having experienced
the least ennui. ' Philemon collected carefully together his
numerous specimens, with an air of conscious triumph that
his friends had not been disappointed in the promises held
out to them at the commencement of the day. On the
morrow, the same circle surrounded him with increased
expectations of delight : and it was full fifteen minutes ere
the MONARCH could repress the first emotions of gratification, and collect his scattered thoughts, so as to address his
audience in the following manner.
From Foscarinis Letterature Veneziana . 1752 folio

SECOND DAY.
VOL. I. A
ARGUMENT.
Ancient Missals and Breviaries. The Roman, Ambrosian,
Mozarabic, and Vallombrosa Rituals. Ornaments of
Printed-Books ofDevotion. The Death-Dance. Allegorical,
Pastoral, Grotesque, and Domestic subjects of Decoration.
Ofthe most distinguished Printers ofMissals, &c. Advice
to Young Collectors.
Bartholomew Beham Set 1520.
Second Day.
N diverging from the pleasing
topics which occupied our discourse of yesterday, we cannot
be said to enter upon a discussion
altogether foreign to what has
been previously advanced. We
may, on the contrary, observe
that the whole seems to form only
links of one chain ; but that some of these links are wrought
in metal of a baser character than others. The illuminator
prepared the way for the imitative powers of the printer ; not
that the latter always chose the identical subjects which
graced the pages of the former ; for, to the best of my
recollection, we have seldom, in specimens of pencil-illumination, those Drolleries and Death-Dances which appear to
have delighted the printers of the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries. Farewell then to the arabesque border -to
clustered fruits and flowers to groups of thoughtful
or of frolicksome characters :-farewell to the deep and
delicate glow which described the blush of the maiden, or
—
4 SECOND DAY.
the lustre of the gem with which she adorned her braided
hair ! Farewell to the intricate, but not ungraceful capriccios
of the pen and pencil of Francesco Veronesi- and to the embossed and blazing gold of Girolamo, which, like the shield
of Achilles, lighted up all that was around it ! Farewell to
the splendor and high finishing of Clovio ! Farewell these
objects of gaiety and grace ! but not unwelcome, therefore,
to me, the curious and complicated workmanship of EARLY
PRINTED BOOKS OF DEVOTION !
as an
You smile at these apostrophes, and think it high time
that I should descend from such an aerial station and tread
on terra firma with yourselves. Let me however make one
other preliminary observation ; which is this. I saw the
sceptical expression that indented the brow of Lisardo,
when I observed that we should in vain look for fruits and
flowers ' and ' arabesque borders ' in the Missals and Breviaries which issued from the earlier presses ; but I by no
means wished the remark to be considered as canonical, or
' ex cathedra ' position. Generally speaking, the
ancient printers of Missals introduced arabesque -but not
of the purest kind : it was rather crowded and dove-tailed,
like mosaic work, as I shall presently shew and fruits you :
and flowers,' as you will also presently be convinced, were of
uncommon occurrence. Butthey endeavoured to compensate
by variety, for the want of pure taste, in their selections.
Accordingly, we are oftentimes greeted with a profusion of
decorations -of a monstrous and miscellaneous nature. I
speak, at present, of the borders of a page, where grave or
historical subjects were not introduced ; and here, Lisardo,
you may remember the amusement which was afforded you,
the other day, on witnessing an ape seated upon a buffalo's
back, a serpent coiled within a griffin's mouth, a demon leaping
6
SECOND DAY. 5
out of a salamander's throat of fire ; and men, women, and
children, half human and half brute - with divers other
similar exhibitions, which now it were tedious to specify.
-- in
I am yet far from wishing to be satirical, or to under-rate
the real talents of the artists engaged in the publications
here alluded to. On the contrary, their performances (as
you will quickly learn) were at times equally elegant,
singular, and successful ; and subjects of sacred writ were,
by such means, impressed upon the minds of youth with a
very salutary effect. In reputation of another kind
typographical skill -it may fairly be averred that all the
talents of the BULMERS and BENSLEYS of the day could with
difficulty produce such a series of vellum pages, (exhibiting
ink of the most glossy lustre, press-work of the nicest execution, and ornaments of the most complicated nature,) as
we frequently behold in the productions of the Verards,
the PIGOUCHETS, and KERVERS of former times. Whether
it be that some important secret relating either to the ink, *
relating to the INK. ] I looked into Dr. Rees's edition of the Cyclopædia,
(at this moment advancing rapidly to its perihelion,) with the hope, under the
title of INK, of finding something curious or novel respecting the probable
process of making PRINTING INK, in ancient times : and on being referred to
the article PRINTING, for an account of RED INK, I there found only this
solitary description -taken, as well as the entire article of Printing (proh
pudor ! ), word for word, from our old friend Chambers ; of whom the Doctor
had been indeed a valuable coadjutor➡ For red ink (says Chambers) they
use the same materials as for black ; excepting only, that instead of lamp- black,
they add a proper quantity of vermilion. Some hold that, by mixing and
incorporating the bigness of a nut of fish-glue, or brandy, or the white of an
egg, with the ink, the vermilion acquires a greater lustre.' Did the worthy
Doctor never hear of one Antonius Musa Brasavolus, quoted by Petrus Maria
Caneparius, in his prosing but not incurious quarto tome De Atramentis
Cujuscunque Generis, Opus sane novum, hactenus à nemine promulgatum.
Londini, 1660,' 4to. ? The 4th chapter of the division of that work entitled
Typographorum, Chalcographorumve Atramentum ' -treats of printing ink, of
which a process is described as producing very black and adhesive ink.' There
VOL. I. 2 B
"
6 SECOND DAY.
or to the preparation of the vellum, then practised, and at
present unknown, render modern efforts of less avail, I
cannot take upon me to determine ; but—
LISARDO. You forget the enormous expensePHILEMON. I was quickly coming to the consideration of
that point ; which is indeed a most material one. Labour,
I presume, was then rewarded by reasonable wages ; or
talent, of the kind necessary to produce such publications,
was in former times comparatively common.
But here you
compel me to draw an invidious and heart-rending inference.
When I speak of the general prevalence of talent, necessary
for the peculiar productions here alluded to, it must be
understood that I allude exclusively to the talents offoreign
artists—for, in our own country, three centuries ago, (with a
sigh does the remark escape me ! ) there was a prodigious
is scarcely a coloured ink but what Caneparius describes, and sometimes with a
sort of poetical phrensy. Hear him discourse of a new kind of vitriol (' Ad effingendum novum Vitrioli genus :' which Mr. Astle might probably have consulted
to advantage), Sacra numina testor (says Caneparius) neminem veterum legisse,
ni memoria fallor, qui de his tractaverit ; cum neque Dioscorides ullum egerit
verbum, neque Galenus, non Ætius, non Paulus Ægineta, non Serapio, neque
Avicennas, ac summatim nemo hujus vel alterius sectæ notitiam horum attulit,
quod sciam, quorum equidem inventionis gloria ætati nostræ tantum attribuenda
est, tunc Italis, cum etiam Transmontanis : præterea nuper ex Transmarinis
quidam Syrii advehunt ad nos quoddam Vitrioli factitii genus novum pulcherrimi
coloris saphirini taxillorum forma, ceu chrisocollæ mineralis, quod Venetiis in
plateis Divi Marci venundant pro medendis oculis equorum male affectis efficax.
etsi aliquis hujus magisterium occultare conatur, non patiar ego quin
humano generi reddatur acceptum gratis ab Omnipotente Deo :' &c. p. 221.
.....
Mr. Astle, however, very justly observes : Simple as the composition of
ink may be thought, and really is, it is a fact well known, that we have at
present none equal in beauty and colour to that used by the ancients ....
What occasions so great a disparity ? Does it arise from our ignorance, or our
want of materials ? From neither, but from the negligence of the present race ;
as very little attention would soon demonstrate that we want neither skill nor
ingredients to make ink, as good now, as at any former period. ' Origin and
Progress ofWriting; p. 209. edit. 1803.
SECOND DAY. 7
dearth and deficiency of graphic attainments.
Nor must
you be deceived by a colophon : for Missals, professed to
be executed by our earlier printers, were in fact begun and
concluded ' in the offices of foreigners. Even Pynson too
frequently shines in the borrowed plumage of Tailleur. *
But of this hereafter. Let us however - to meet your
observation -suppose that some spirited Collector, or a
select committee of the Roxburghe Club, † should unite their
tastes and purses, to put forth, from the SHAKSPEARE
PRESS, an octavo volume of prayers from the Liturgy,
decorated in a manner similar to what we observe in the
devotional publications just alluded to -do you think the
attempt would be successful ? In other words, where are
* Pynson too often shines in the borrowed plumage of Tailleur. ] The reader
will find a few of the earlier and more magnificent Missals, published by Pynson
towards the beginning of the Sixteenth Century, described in the second volume
of the Typog. Antiquities, p. 424. On reconsidering Pynson's books, I rather
attribute them to the press of TAILLEUR of Rouen ; although Ames and
Herbert seem to be of opinion that the Norman printer was only employed by
Pynson for the execution of Law Tracts. There is, in the Auctarium of the
Bodleian library, a very fine devotional volume, with the name of Pynson as
the printer, of the date of 1529, in folio ; but both in this copy, and in another
of the same kind, in the library of St. John's College, Oxford, without date,
(each from the Collection of Archbishop Laud), there is very strong evidence
of their having been executed abroad ; and, if so, most probably by Tailleur,
who was Pynson's avowed assistant. The red ink, in these beautiful books,
is much beyond what we see in other publications of our early printers ; and
the vellum is of very superior delicacy. If Pynson could have exhibited equal
beauty in these two particulars, Wynkyn De Worde undoubtedly would have
been equally successful ; and yet whoever examines the Book of Hawking,
Hunting, Coat-Armour, and Fishing , printed by the latter in 1496, upon
vellum (in the possession of the Right Hon. Thomas Grenville), will find that
most covetable volume considerably defective in regard to the red- ink and
vellum. If Regnault printed many of the Church-Services for our later printers,
Tailleur, in all probability, executed a few for our earlier ones.
the Roxburghe Club. ] Some account of this Club, and of the important event
which gave rise to its establishment, will be disclosed in the EIGHTH DAY.
SECOND DAY.
the ink and vellum which can match with what we see in
the Missals of old ? The doubtful success of such an
experiment would render it extremely hazardous ; even
were it not attended with, what may be called, an immensity
ofexpense. Welcome therefore, again, I exclaim, the rich
and fanciful furniture which garnishes the texts of early
printed books of Devotion ! But I will now assume the task
ofthe historian.
In tracing the progress of these publications, it must be understood that I do it rather with reference to that of the art of
engraving, than with a view to be chronologically accurate.
I need not tell you that certain celebrated Cathedrals adopted
their own particular forms of service, to which the minor
Cathedrals appear to have rather voluntarily conformed.
Abroad, if my memory be not treacherous, the French or
the Norman churches led the way to this uniformity of
discipline ; and after these, the churches of Catalonia in
Spain. In our own country, I believe, the Liturgies of
In after ages Bishops agreed by consent to conform their Liturgy to the
model of the metropolitical church of the province to which they belonged ....
The rudiments of this discipline were first laid in the French churches ; for
in the council of Agde [ Concil, Agathens. Can. 30. " Quia convenit ordinem
Ecclesiæ ab omnibus æqualiter observari, studendum est ubique (sicut fit) et
post Antiphonas, Collectiones per ordinem ab Episcopis vel Presbyteris dici," &c. ]
a Canon was made about the year 506, that one and the same order should be
equally observed in all churches of the province in all parts of divine service.
And in the council of Epone [ Concil. Epaunens, Can. 27.] , of Vannes in Brittany
in the province of Tours [ of a still earlier date] , and of Girone [An. 517 , for
the Spanish Churches] , a decree was made that the same order of Mass,
and custom in psalmody, and other ministrations, should be observed in all
churches of the province, as was observed in the metropolitical church.'
Extracted from Bingham's Antiquities of the Christian Church ; vol. i. p. 587-8.
Muratori only disgraces himself when he speaks of Bingham as ' sectæ suæ pro
viribus serviens, sed non semper veritati .' Opera ; vol, 1x . edit . 1771 , 4to.
Bingham was a man of learning and moderation .
SECOND DAY 9
YORK, SALISBURY, and HEREFORD Cathedrals were
considered as the standard texts for the performance of
divine service in other Cathedrals. Of these Liturgies, that
* the Liturgies of York, Salisbury, and Hereford. ] We may consider these
Liturgies rather according to the importance of the Churches to which they were
attached, than to the antiquity of the several impressions of them. York, first
in magnitude, and pre-eminently distinguished for its Cathedral (perhaps the
noblest Gothic structure in the world), was however the latest of these three
Cathedral Churches which put forth an impression of the MISSAL peculiar to
itself. Her BREVIARY however was printed in 1493 ; consequently it was nearly
as ancient as any printed Breviary or Missal for the use of British Churches.
Maittaire specifies the parts of this Breviary, in his Annal. Typog. vol. i. p . 568.
In regard to the Missal, Salisbury had preceded her full two and twenty years ;
and Hereford, at least fourteen years. Accordingly (as far as Bibliographers
have as yet aided us), it was not till the year 1516 that the public saw a printed volume entitled Missale ad vsum celeberrime ecclesie Eboracensis, optimis
caracteribus recenter impressum,' &c. Maittaire (Inder, vol . ii. p. 74) has been
only copied by Panzer (vol . vi. p . 492) in his description of this beautiful and
rare volume of which I remember to have seen a copy in the Gough Collection
in the Bodleian library. In his British Topography, vol . ii . p . 425, Gough
describes it as with musical notes, and several fine wooden cuts ;' and in Mr.
Bandinel's Catalogue of the Gough Library ( 1814, 4to. p. 418) we have a
transcript of a note by Dr. Ducarel (whose copy Gough afterwards purchased)
in which it is thus observed : “ Of this very scarce York Missal, in folio, there
are known to be only three copies ; viz . one at Cambridge, one in the library of
James West, Esq. [ See Bibl. West, no. 1886, which copy was purchased by
Herbert, for 2l. 18s . ] and this copy in the library of Dr. Ducarel, A. D. 1762. "
Herbert, in his Typog. Antiq. vol. iii . p . 1457-8, has added little or nothing to
Gough's previous description ; and his copy, from the mark annexed to it, (†)
appears to have been somewhat imperfect. The reader may consult the British
Topography (Ibid. ) for an account of other Services peculiar to York Cathedral ;
but let him not, if he love the mysteries of ancient church-lore, refrain from
reading, by lamp-light, and in some ' lone watch-tower,' the form of bidding prayer,
and another of cursing, for the church of York-which served as covers to a set of
madrigals, in the possession of the late Sir John Hawkins!
"
The CATHEDRAL CHURCH of SALISBURY supplies both curious and copious
details in the history of its ancient form of Service. No cathedral (says Gough)
has preserved such a variety of service books for its Use as Sarum. This is another
name for the Ordinale, or complete service of the church of Salisbury, instituted by
Bishop Osmund 1077. It was also named the Consuetudinary ; and in Knighton's
and Higden's time (which was in the x1vth century) it obtained almost all over
England, Wales, and Ireland. The whole province of Canterbury adopted it ;
10 SECOND DAY.
of Salisbury was the most popular, and consequently Missals
' after the Use of Salisbury Cathedral ' are, comparatively,
of common occurrence.
and in right of it the Bishop of Salisbury was precentor in the college of Bishops
whenever the Archbishop of Canterbury performed divine service. The Cathedrals of York, Lincoln, Hereford, Bangor, and Aberdeen, had their respective
Uses ; but the monks of Royston petitioned Fitz- James, Bishop of London, in the
beginning of the xvith century, for leave to change that of Bangor for that of
Sarum, in their offices ; alleging that the former was imperfect in itself, and still
more so in the performance, from their torn and worn out books, which they were
unwilling to change except for a better form. ' . . . . The Use of Sarum not only
regulated the form and order of celebrating the mass, but prescribed the rule and
office for all the sacerdotal functions.' Brit. Topography ; vol. ii. p. 319, &c.
and authorities cited.
Thus much for the ancient influence or popularity of the Ritual of the
Cathedral Church of Salisbury. In regard to a bibliographical history of the
several impressions of the various forms of service, the reader must be contented
chiefly with the authority just referred to : but the following may not be unworthy ofhis notice. The DIRECTORIUM SACERDOTUM is undoubtedly the earliest
printed book which has any connection with the ancient church of Salisbury ;
and this was first printed by Caxton, probably before the year 1490—but
certainly by Gerard de Leeu in the year 1488. See the recent edition of our
Typog. Antiq. vol. i. p. 323-5 . I doubt much whether any copy of Caxton's
impression contained a frontispiece-as described by Herbert ; who probably saw
a copy with such decoration from a different impression . Pynson reprinted
Caxton's text in 1498, as may be seen in vol. iv. p. 423, of the Bibl. Spenceriana;
where, as well as in Ames, may be read the facetious note of the crabbed RoweMores concerning this work of Directions for celebrating the Mass.' Gough
notices an edition of the Directorium ' as printed by Theodore Martin, at Alost,
in 1487, 4to.; but I suspect that the copy of this work which he saw attached
to an impression of St. Chrysostom's Three Books concerning Providence,' of
the date of 1487, was of a more recent date ; as Panzer, in describing this latter
work, of the date of 1487 (see his Annal. Typog. vol . i. p . 3, no. 6) , makes no mention ofthe Directorium.'
The MISSAL was the next work which engaged the attention of the press ; and
of this, according to Denis, the earliest impression was of the date of 1492—
printed at Nuremberg, by George Stöchs : Suppl. Maitt. p. 330, no. 2728.
Neither Maittaire, Gough, nor Herbert knew of this edition ; and Denis, to whom
Panzer exclusively refers, inserts it on the authority of a copy in the possession of
a private friend. However this may be, it is quite certain that Joannes Hertzog de
Landoia printed an edition of it in 1494, both in folio and octavo, at Venice. An
impression of the latter form is in the Gough library. See also Maittaire, vol. i.
p. 577. The Summer Part of the SALISBURY BREVIARY was executed in the
SECOND DAY. 11
LORENZO. Do you mean to enter upon the Histories of
Foreign Rituals ?
PHILEMON. You ask me to enter upon a most elaborate
"
following year, at Venice, by the same printer, in duodecimo : Gough's British
Topography, vol. ii . p. 326-7. The HYMNS, or Expositio Hymnorum secundùm
Vsum Sarum,' were first printed by Pynson in 1497 : see the Typog. Antiquities,
vol. ii. p. 412. The HOURS, or Hore presentes ad Vsum Sarum,' were first
executed by Pigouchet for Vostre, in 1498, in 8vo ; and Gough for once seems to
feel something like an electrical spark ' in book-description—when he observes
that this volume has beautiful wood-cuts at the sides, representing New Testament histories, the dance of death, saints, virtues, vices, grotesques,' &c. &c. Brit.
Topog. vol. ii. p. 327. In his note he feels still more warmed upon the subject
of early vellum books of devotion. I trust that his Spirit, if hovering within the
' confines ' of any spot where the SECOND DAY of this Decameron shall be read
carefully through, will not be displeased at the manner of here describing this
brilliant and most interesting part of Bibliography. To return. The preceding
impressions ofthe xvth century are quite sufficient to awaken the curiosity ofthe
sharp- sighted collector to the multiplicity of impressions which would in all pro
bability appear of so popular a form of Church Service as that of Salisbury
Cathedral. I forbear therefore to enlarge the catalogue of such impressions ; yet
let me beg ofthe said collector to turn to no. 1887 of the Bibl. West, where he
will find a copy of the Salisbury Missal, of the date of 1527 (which had belonged
to Henry the VIII. and Dean Young) , printed by Prevost for Byrckman, partly
upon vellum-in folio-for which Bishop Burnet, after many years enquiry,'
gave 171. This copy was purchased at West's sale by the late Mr. Evans, bookseller, for 21. 7s.; but another copy, entirely printed upon fine vellum,' reached
the sum of 41.
Yet a word, gentle reader, before we quit the subject of early impressions of the
Salisbury Ritual. Our well beloved W. de Worde put forth the first edition of
the HORE, in our own country, relating to the same Cathedral Service. It was
in the year 1502, in quarto. A copy of this impression, upon vellum (now in
the Gough library, and described at vol. ii . p. 107, of my edition of the Typog.
Antiquities), contained, upon the margins thereof, certain written rhymes, in an
ancient hand, of a strange and mysterious nature : to wit, The Little Credo ; The
Spell of Edmonds Bury; and the White Pater Noster. Again, therefore, trim the
lamp bolt out the blast : and while the watch-tower' rocks to the hurricane,
read-but look not around- as follows :
:
Peters Brother where lyest all night?
There as Christ y yod.
What hast in thy honde? heauen keys.
What hast in thy tother?
Broade booke leaues.
12 SECOND DAY.
(
and puzzling undertaking : but as you seem to expect
something of the kind, something (and very little only)
of the kind' you shall have. Remember, I am a mere
Open heauen gates,
Shutt hell yeates
Euerie childe creepe christ ouer
White Benedictus be in this howse
Euerye night.
Within & without. This howse round about
St. Peter att the one door
St. Paule att the other
St. Michael in the middle
Fyer in the flatt
Chancell-op shatt
Euerie naugers bore
An Angell before.
White Pater Noster. Amen.
'But soft,' the winds are laid : the clouds disperse and the full - orbed moon
sheds her lustre upon the tranquilised ocean. The Little Credo be my comfort
then !-
"
' I mett with our lady in a greene way
With a stocke and a locke I say
Shee sighed full soare for her deare sonne
Which was nayled through hande
And foote to his brayne panne
Well is the man that this creede canne
His fellowe to teache
To heauen he shall reache.
An observation or two respecting the earliest printed HEREFORD MISSAL, and
the reader shall take leave of this unconscionable note. Like all the first editions
of similar works, this Ritual was first printed abroad ; and its scarcity is extreme.
The labour and skill ' of those ancient and worthy Rouen printers, Messrs.
Olivier and Manditier, supported by the spirit and purse ' of Master John
Ricard, a merchant, ' produced this scarce volume at Rouen in 1502. Hearne
had a copy of it, upon vellum ; the gift of his friend Charles Eyston ; and he
declares that he never saw another vellum copy. Camdeni Annales. vol. i. præf.
p. xxvii. note, ed. 1717. What became of it upon Hearne's death, does not
appear. It is not to be found in the catalogue of his library (p . 27, 39) , which
was sold in 1736. Gough (Brit. Topog, vol. i . p. 412) has only a brief reference
to Hearne, and appears to have never seen it. Ames took his description of it
from a perfect copy belonging to a Dr. Hez[ekiah] Bedford : the Bodleian copy
being imperfect. See the recent edition of our Typog. Antiq. vol . iii. p . 5. There
is no copy of it in the British Museum ; and De Bure, Bauer, Vogt, and Brunet
SECOND DAY. 13
novice in these studies ; and my information must necessarily be crude. As the City and the Metropolitan Church
of Rome have always towered above other foreign Cities
and Churches, so it should seem that the Romish ChurchService, or Liturgy, AFTER THE USE OF THE ROMISH
CHURCH, has always claimed precedence in rank, if not in
antiquity. * This point is now at rest ; but formerly there
will be in vain consulted for a description of it. The Offices, or Services attached
to the Use of Hereford, appear to have been few ; as I do not remember to have
met with any other printed ritual belonging to this cathedral. Ofthe Services of
LINCOLN and BANGOR CATHEDRALS, no printed volume has as yet come to my
knowledge.
* The Romish Church- precedence in rank, if not in antiquity. ] Let us take the
latter point first into consideration. In the preface to the 1xth volume of the Opere
del Præposito Lodovico Antonio Muratori, Arezzo, 1771, 4to. it is observed that
Blanchinius (under the patronage of Pope Benedict XIV. ) in compiling his ecclesiastical annals of Odoricus Raynaldus, sent a few ancient copies of the Gregorian
Sacrament to Muratori, that the Catholic church might derive some benefit
therefrom.' After expressing his doubt and diffidence of doing justice to such
a subject, and thinking no one comparable to Menardus (To μaxapitw) for
such a task, Muratori tells the reader that he only proposes to give him an
account of the Three Roman Sacraments, or Sacramental Rituals ; namely, the
LEONINE, the GELASIAN (copies of which were becoming scarce), and the
GREGORIAN: the latter, from the most ancient of all the MSS. of that kind :
namely, from one of the 8th century of which a specimen is given. . In these
three Services (says Muratori) the whole Roman Liturgy is included ; and to
unite them I thought would not be ungrateful to a number of readers.' In the
Benedictin edition of the Works of St. Gregory the Great [ Sancti Gregorii
Papa I. Cognomento Magni Opera Omnia. Paris, 1705, Folio] it is said, on the
authority of Diaconus (lib. ii . cap . 17) , to which Walafridus Strabo (de Reb. Eccl.
cap. 22.) assents, that St. Gregory was not the original author of the text, but Pope
Gelasius I. St. Gregory reduced it only to a better form. Mabillon, as quoted
by Muratori (vol. x. p. 611 ) , says- Libelli antiquitatem probant Rubricæ (ut
vocant) quæ in Libro Sacramentorum Gregorii M. leguntur pro hebdomade
sancta, totidem versibus heic expressæ. Unde Gregorium ex hoc libello in suum
Sacramentarium prædictas transtulisse Rubricas veri simillimum est. Præterea,
totus pontificiæ missæ ritus, in eodem ordine præscriptus, Gregorii ætatem meo
judicio sapit.' Martene, in his valuable work entitled De Antiquis Ecclesiæ
Ritibus (Rotomagi, 1700, 4to . vol . i. p. 44) speaks of a MS. of the Roman
Liturgy of the date of 300 : ' which, however, is questionable : and Muratori
VOL. I. C
14 SECOND DAY.
were some pretty tough contests in adjusting it : and I
cannot help applauding, in my heart, those struggles which
the followers of the AMBROSIAN, GALLIC, and MOZARABIC
allows that, in the oldest copies of the Gelasian and Gregorian Liturgies, there
are not to be found all the rites or ceremonies which characterise the modern
Roman Ritual.
From vol. iii. p. 649, of the Opera Gregorii M., it seems determined that
St. Gregory rather compiled, than composed, the Sacraments and the Liber
Antiphonarius : yet he is allowed to have been the composer of the Gregorian
chant, or the Antiphona, which consists in alternate singing-or was anciently
termed the αντίφωνον ὑμνωδίαν • Institutum à nostro Gregorio cantandi
methodum per Occidentem propagarunt sanctissimi Patris alumni,' &c . Diaconus
makes mention of a famous Chorister or Singer, in the Gregorian choir, of the
name of MABAN ; but it is due to the illustrious memory of one ROMANUS, that
he restored the chant, on the eve of its corruption. Id. Opus, vol. iii . p. 650.
Read that popular author Gussanvillæus-who is most learned upon the science
of the Antiphona. Our Hawkins and Burney are not less erudite ; but from
Masson's Essay on Cathedral Music, prefixed to his Collection of Anthems,' we
have an account of ancient Cathedral music which may probably here suffice as
a specimen ofthe mysteries of that science. When the genealogy ofChrist was
set to music and sung, while the bass was holding forth the existence of Abraham,
the tenor, in defiance of nature and chronology, was begetting Isaac ; the countertenor begetting Jacob, and the treble begetting Joseph and all his brethren.' This
method however of singing—probably called ' cantus fractus et divisus'—did not
escape censure even in its own time. Fosbrooke's Economy of Monastic Life ;
p. 8. With this, not I trust inharmonious digression, I conclude the enquiry into
the ANTIQUITY OF THE ROMAN RITUAL.
As to its RANK ; it necessarily claimed precedence over that of every other
Church. Hugo Menardus, the modest, melancholy, and instructive Menardus
(whose edition of the Roman Liturgy, in 1642, with notes and observations, is
preferable to every one which preceded it ), gravely tells us that the Romish
Church is the mother of every other church, and which every one should imitate,
and be subject to.' See his preface. He published from a MS. at least as old as
the 9th century, and gave a plate of St. Gregory, from the Codex Remensis,
which the Benedictine editors copied at p . 559 of the IIIrd volume of the works
of that Saint. Mabillon as solemnly asserts ' quemadmodum a Romana Ecclesia
fidei suæ originem repetunt pleræque, ne dicam Omnes, Occidentis ecclesiæ : sic
etiam ab eadem modum ac formam divini cultus derivari par est.' Museum
Italicum, vol. ii . p. i . And Renaudot with equal decision affirms :- In Latina
Ecclesia, præcipuum locum obtinet CANON ROMANUS, qui, quòd à Gelasio Papa
primùm, deinde à Gregorio maguo, in eam quam nunc habet formam redactus est
GREGORIANUS vulgò appellatur. Quamvis Ecclesia Romana reliquarum prima,
SECOND DAY. 15
Rituals made for the independence of their particular
Liturgies ; and the latter, with complete success.
It would be neither pleasant nor profitable to describe these,
ab Apostolorum principe fundata, summam habeat dignitatem et autoritatem, jus
etiam singulare in Ecclesias Occidentis semper habuerit, nunquam tamen primis
sæculis Canonis Eucharistiæ celebrandæ sui, formam aliis Ecclesiis ita præscripsit,
ut multis antiqua sua consuetudo, suique ritus non conservarentur.' Diss. De
Liturg. Orient. Orig. et Antiquit. vol. i. cap. 11. p. vIII. 1740. Let us conclude
with Muratori, who thus guardedly observes : Id autem curæ Romanis Pontificibus semper fuit, ut quantum possent, reliquas Occidentis Ecclesias adducerent
ad amplectandam Romanæ Ecclesiæ Liturgiam, et mores ab ea dissonos in sacris
peragendis exuerent.' Antiquit. Ital. Medii Ævi, vol. iv. col. 834.
Let those of my readers who wish to drink deeper draughts of the ancient
Romish-church lore, begin quietly with Amalarius (who wrote of Ecclesiastical
Offices' in the year 820) , Florus Magister, Rhabanus Maurus, Walafridus Strabo,
Berno, and Micrologus [ ' qui sub humili nomine latere voluit,' says Mabillon of
the latter-Mus. Ital. vol. ii. p. iij ] , in our earlier annals-pause awhile ere they
attack Durandus of the x111th century-who wrote a short treatise entitled
'Rationale Divinorum Officiorum' (consisting of forty thousand three hundred and
twenty lines in close gothic print, as appears from the first impression of it in 1459)
-then go briskly to work with Pamelius, Cassander, Claudius de Sainctes, and
Roccha, in the xvith century-and, in the two following centuries,with Cassalius,
Goar, Albaspineus, Leo Allatius, Morinus, and Menardus : and (more instructive
than either of their predecessors) conclude with Bona, Thomasius, Georgius,
Mabillon, the Benedictine Editors, and Muratori.
-
It is however extremely probable that the curious Collector would like to have
an edition of the Roman Liturgy in the theological department of his library.
Let such Collector, therefore, look sharply and sedulously after the curious '
edition of it given by Matthias Flacius Illyricus, in 1557, 8vo. from the press of
Mylius at Strasbourg. He may first whet his appetite by the pleasingly-rambling
account of it in Bayle, ( Dict. vol. ii. p. 839, note D) and then go directly to De
Bure (Bibliogr. Instruct. vol. i. p. 170, no. 200) and Vogt : Catalog. Libror.
Rarior. p. 589-90 : edit. 1793. Brunet is necessarily concise. Manuel du
Libraire ; vol. i. p. 506, edit. 1814. The title is thus : Missa Latina, quæ olim
ante Romanam circa septingentesimum Domini annum in usu fuit bona fide ex
vetusto authenticoque Codice descripta, &c. à Matthia Flacio Illyrico . ' See also
Colomie's Bibl. Choisie, p. 8. Now for a brief chronicle relating thereto. Flacius
was a learned man and a Lutheran. He published this work (with a curious
preface by Beatus Rhenanus, which must not be missing) under an idea of
shewing the discrepancies between the Roman and the Gallican texts. As his
principles were previously known, Pope Sixtus V. and Philip II. of Spain immediately forbade its perusal. Some undaunted Catholic, however, when the first
16 SECOND DAY.
not wholly bloodless, controversies ; but I should remark
that Pepin and Charlemagne were the chief instruments
of the compliance of the Gallican Church with the forms of
worship used in that of Rome. * Their own country seems
terror of the prohibition had a little subsided, plucked up courage to take a peep
into the leaves of this heretical book ; when, behold ! he found the contents of
it directly hostile to the Lutherans, and proportionably favourable to the tenets of
the Church of Rome. What a cry and clatter then was here ! The tocsin
sounded ; and the aforesaid Pope Sixtus V. and Philip II. King of Spain, began
to encourage the timid, and command the bold, to approach the supposed firebrand of Luther-and to take it into their bosoms as imparting the genuine heat
of Catholicism ! This tale will readily account for the rarity of the book. Martene,
however, opposes the opinion of Mabillon (in his Museum Italicum), who thought
that the text of Flacius's impression partook of that of the Gothic or Mozarabic
ritual . The former, on the contrary, thinks it is after that of the Salisbury Missal.
De Antiquis Ecclesiæ Ritibus ; vol. i. p. 481 .
* compliance of the Gallican Church with the forms of worship used in that of
Rome. ] The amalgamation, as it were, of the ancient Gallican and Frankish
churches with that of Rome, took place in the ninth century : the previous exertions of Pepin and Charlemagne having rendered such union almost inevitable.
The Franks and Gauls, however, had not originally the same Ritual. The old
Frankish Liturgy differed in many places from the Roman, and partook ofthe
Gallic and Spanish. The Gauls, in fact, appear to have used the old Gothic text
(of which specimens are given in the VIth volume of the Bibl. Vet. Patrum)
before the introduction of the Romish by Pepin and Charlemagne. The famous
Petavius possessed an extraordinary volume of old Rituals, executed in capital
letters ; and of these, there was one of the ancient Frankish form-written, in the
opinion of Morinus, before the year 560— which venerable and magnificent MS.
(adds Morinus) travelled from Gaul into Sweden.' In other words, upon the
authority of Muratori, it was purchased by Christina, on the death of Petavius,
and deposited by her in the Royal Library at Stockholm. This interesting old
volume contained the Gothic, Frankish, and Gallican Liturgies. Mabillon
published the SACRAMENTARIUM GALLICANUM, at the end of the first volume
of his Museum Italicum (see p. 273, &c. ) from an old MS. of the eighth century,
in the dilapidated library of the Monastery Bobiensis. Muratori speaks feelingly
of this MS. and monastic library, ' Venerandam omnino antiquitatem præferebat.
Quum tot alii Msti Codices e Gallia & Scotia devecti in eam Bibliothecam fuerint
inlati, ut patet ex ejusdem vetustissimo Catalogo, quem publici juris feci in
Tomo III. Antiquit. Ital. Dissert. XLIII. veri videtur simile, hoc etiam Sacramentarium ex aliqua Galliarum Ecclesia fuisse in Italiam advectum.' Opera,
vol. x. p. 199, &c. 609, edit. 1771, 4to. The varieties, antiquities, and customs
of several Gallican Churches, may be seen in Moleon's amusing but rare book ;
SECOND DAY. 17
to have quietly agreed to the compromise ; but the Ritual
of St. Ambrose (as I have just observed) was protected
either by the zeal of his followers, or by a miracle from
heaven. * If any man was ever entitled to the affectionate
entitled Voyage Liturgique de France, 1718, 1757, 8vo.; to which Gough has
been considerably indebted. Brit. Topog. vol . ii . p. 320.
* protected either by the zeal ofhisfollowers, or by a miraclefrom heaven. ] Grant
me all thy patience, kind-hearted reader, while, for thy edification or amusement,
I strive to develope the history of the AMBROSIAN MISSAL. Some Antiquaries
there are, who, in their love of the olden time,' scruple not to push truth from
her ' stool ;' and to set up, in her place, an unseemly Baal of absurdity and fiction.
However, I must write what has been afore written. ' It should seem, from
Josephus Vicecomes (de Ritibus Missæ, lib. ii .) , from Cardinal Bona (Rerum.
Liturgicar. lib. i. c. x . ), from old Radulphus (An. 1390—in libro de Canonum
observantia), and from Pamelius (who may be said to have given the first critical
edition of the Ambrosian Missal in the year 1571) , that, before the time of St.
Ambrose, there existed a particular service, or form of prayer, in the Milanese
church ; and that there was a particular place of worship for Christians, where the
Sacrament and other sacred rites were performed. What (say these writers) St.
Ambrose may have changed, or added, does not appear certain ; unless that we
are assured, from Paulinus, in his Life of this Saint, and from St. Austin, in the
9th book of his Confessions, that the Antiphona, the Hymns, and the Psalms, were
ordered byhim to be sung or chanted according to the manner of the East. However, there are many things which lead one to believe that the more important
parts of this Ritual-at present used in the Milanese church- existed before the
time of St. Ambrose, or were consolidated or compiled by him. Muratori is of
opinion that a few minor or immaterial parts of this service were changed, or
reduced, in subsequent times : thereby differing from Mabillon, who contends for
the identity of the present Ambrosian Ritual with what it was formerly-excepting
the necessary addition of a few Festivals. The authority of Puricellius (who has
so well written of Milanese antiquities) is quoted against Mabillon ; and Puricellius allows of a few subsequent additions or changes. Mr. Butler, in his Lives
ofthe Saints (vol. xi. p . 145 , edit. 1816), seems to have attentively considered the
weight of the preceding authorities, and to have inclined to the opinion that this
Ritual certainly received a new lustre from our Saint's care, but is proved from
his writings to have been older. ' Perhaps (continues he) St. Barnabas, or more
probably St. Marocles was the first author.' Le Brun's Explic. des Cérém. de la
Messe ; and Sormanni's L'Origine Apostolica della Chiesa Milanese, e del Rito della
Stessa, 1755, are referred to by Mr. Butler.
(
"
On the other hand, there are those who contend for St. Ambrose being the
exclusive author of the entire Ritual. Of this number is Walafridus Strabo,
who wrote in the ninth century. But we shall do well to attend to the safer
18 SECOND DAY.
devotion of his countrymen, surely that man was St. Ambrose. His conduct to the Emperor Theodosius has
endeared his memory to the brave ; and his compositions,
distinctions ofAlbertinus and Dallæus ; the former of whom (De Sacrament. Euchar.
lib. ii. p. 509 ) says that the works De Mysteriis ' and De Sacramentis ' were
composed in the seventh century ; and the latter (De Confirm. c. 8) thinks they
are compositions of the eighth century. The Benedictine Editors ( Sancti Ambrosii
Opera, Paris, 1686, 1690, folio, 2 vols. ) consider Ambrose as the author of the
Mysteries, and conclude the Sacraments to have been written three centuries
afterwards. But St. Austin affirms that Ambrose himself wrote the Book of
Sacraments. Præf. vol . ii. Ambrosii Opera (De Sacramentis. ) Another strange
thing occurs. Bullinger calls these two works stupid ;' and the editors of the
Cociana Censura (Helmst. Ann. 1655) observe that they contain many things
which are false, ridiculous, and even heretical, and in contradiction to the doctrine
of St. Ambrose himself,' vol . ii. col. 341. Even Albertinus ( say the Benedictine
editors) thinks the author of these works used a different version from that which
the Saint adopted ! Who shall decide ? Yet one thing is certain, says Muratori ;
It is beyond all doubt that the author of these two books was not subject to the
Metropolitan Church of Rome ; and it is equally clear that his residence was not
far distant from that city, since we find in these works occasional coincidences with
the ceremonies used in the Romish Missal.'
·
In the second place let us say a few words about the History of the Independence of the Ambrosian Missal. It has been more than once observed that
Pepin and Charlemagne used their utmost endeavours to model all the Western
Liturgies after that of Rome. Landulphus senior (whose History of Milan has
been incorporated in the ivth volume of Muratori's Script. Rer. Ital.) says that
it was ordained, in a Council at Rome, under Hadrian I. , that Charlemagne
should make a survey of all the Latin Liturgies, and destroy such as wholly
differed from the Roman, and reduce all the liturgical texts to that of the Papal
Metropolis. Landulphus then goes on to narrate that Charlemagne carried off all
the books of the Ambrosian Liturgy EXCEPT ONE MISSAL-which was saved by
a miracle-thus proving that Liturgy to be sanctified by the Deity. Biroldus,
Durandus, Gualvaneus, Boninus Mombritius, and other early Milanese writers,
adopt the authority of Landulphus, and testify the miraculous preservation of this
missal in tot turbines.' Muratori, however, in the preface to the reprint of
Landulphus's history, thinks that ancient writer rather prone to gossiping and
fabling, as many things are asserted by him palpably contrary to chronological
accuracy. Yet, adds the courteous Priest, certè qui prodigium illud aut falsum
prorsus suspicetur, aut ei fidem accomodare nolit, is me contradicentem minime
dicebit.' Antiquit. Italica Medii Evi, vol. iv. col . 834-840. Muratori goes on to
observe, that, when the Popes were determined to make all the Gallican Liturgies
conform to their own, it was natural enough that they should seize so inviting an
opportunity of leaving no means untried to compel the Ambrosian Ritual, both in
SECOND DAY. 19
at once remarkable for their elegance and chastity, render
his character sacred in the estimation of the scholar. As to
the preservation of the Gothic Ritual, the tutelary saintship
its dogmas and in its rites, to observe a similar conformity.' But the man who
had devoted his life and his abilities to the service of the church ; who considered
wealth as the object of his contempt ; who had renounced his private patrimony ;
and had sold, without hesitation , the consecrated plate for the redemption of
captives ' (Gibbon, vol. v. p. 39, 8vo. edit. 1807) such a man was most likely to
make an indelible impression upon the memories of his ecclesiastical disciples and
successors ; and accordingly the Milanese clergy resolutely and successfully
opposed the Papal mandate. Indeed we are informed by Branda de Castellione
(on the authorities of Corio and Oldoinus) that, as late as the year 1440, an
attempt to renew this unpopular measure was completely frustrated by the
enthusiastic adherents to the Ambrosian Missal : since which time, the votaries
of St. Ambrose have been left in undisturbed possession of their favorite Ritual.
After such an account of the origin and independence of the Ambrosian
Liturgy, the reader would hardly forgive me if I omitted to notice the earlier and
rarer impressions of it. Both the AMBROSIAN MISSAL and the AMBROSIAN
BREVIARY were published in the same year ; namely, in 1475 ; and Zarotus, in
whose office at Milan the former was executed, is supposed to have the honour of
being the FIRST PRINTER OF MISSALS : an honour, however, which Ulric Han
may almost dispute with him-as the latter executed the Roman Missal, at Rome,
in the same year, only one month later. Panzer, vol. ii. p. 458. Saxius is full
of information upon this Milan production : see his Hist. Lit. Typog. Mediol.
p. LXXIX, col. CLXI : P. DLXII : and his account of it justifies Muratori in
noticing the discrepancies which appear even between the editions of 1499, 1522,
and 1594 !—without going up to those of 1482, and 1475, of which that learned
historian was evidently ignorant. Brunet mentions a copy of this first impression
ofthe Ambrosian Missal, in the Royal Library at Paris, UPON VELLUM. Manuel
du Libraire ; vol. ii. p . 369. The Breviary was printed by Valdarfer, at Milan,
in the same year, in 4to.; and Saxius shews how it differs from the modern texts
ofit. Ofcourse it would be an elegant book when from the press of Valdarfer :
see the Hist. Lit. Typog. Mediol. col. CLXII . p. DLXIII. I cannot however dismiss
the very interesting subject of this Ritual (which Elzevir ought to have printed
as a pocket companion for both Protestant and Roman Catholic) without noticing
the peculiar character of parts of its composition-which justify Philemon in the
above eulogy upon the talents of St. Ambrose. That great man called in the aid
of poetry to his devotional exercises, and made hymns to the Glory of the
Trinity. In his tract against Auxentius, (ad calcem Epist. 32) he fearlessly
exclaims : I am accused of deceiving and alluring the people by the poetry of
my hymns : and I do not altogether deny the charge. For what can be more
powerful and alluring than the confession of the Trinity, as it is daily sung by
"
20 SECOND DAY.
of Isidore, and the miraculous conversion of its once formidable antagonist, Alphonsus the Sixth, protected that form
of church-service from the domineering influence of the
Metropolitan power of Rome : and Cardinal Ximenes,
the mouths of all the people ?' These hymns are even noticed in the early
Chronicle of Prosper (An. 386) as the first that were sung in the Church in
Latin metre.' St. Austin [ Confess. lib. 1x. c. 7.] frequently makes mention of them ; and says they were sung as the psalms then were, alternately, verse for
verse, by the people, to alleviate the tediousness of their sorrow ' and from this
example (adds Bingham) the custom of alternate hymnody or psalmody spread
almost all over the Western Church. The Evening hymn is particularly mentioned by St. Austin (Ibid. cap. 12.)
'Deus Creator omnium Polique rector
Vestiens diem decoro lumine
Noctem soporis gratia.
Artus solutos ut quies reddat laboris usui,
Mentes fessas allevet
Luctusque solvat anxios.'
Antiquities ofthe Christian Church ; vol. i. p. 606-7 .
Most of the hymns which occur in the daily, or ferial office in the Latin
church seem to be St. Ambrose's. This holy Doctor is said to have first introduced into the West the custom of singing hymns in the church. Those which
he made are so composed, that the sense ends at the fourth verse, that they may
be sung by two choruses. ' Butler ; Lives of the Saints, vol. xi . p. 124, (note (b).
Well therefore might the old Bishop of Brescia, Gaudensius, speak thus of the
Holy St. Ambrose—in his oration on the day of his own ordination : Obsecro
communem patrem Ambrosium ut post exiguum rorem sermonis mei, ipse irriget
corda vestra divinarum mysteriis litterarum. Loquetur enim Spiritu sancto quo
plenus est, et flumina de ventre ejus fluent aquæ vivæ, et tamquam Petri Apostoli
successor, ipse erit os universorum circumstantium Sacerdotum. ' Seti Ambrosi
Opera; Paris, 1686, vol. i. præf. sign. i iij, recto, note. Listen to the eulogy of
St. Jerom-upon his work Concerning Widows !' Quod si cui asperum et
reprehensione dignum videtur, tantam nos inter virginitatem et nuptias fecisse
distantiam, quanta inter frumentum et hordeum est, legat sancti Ambrosii de
Viduis librum, et inveniet illum inter cetera quæ de virginitate et nuptiis disputavit, etiam hoc dixisse. ' Eunodius, Bishop of Padua, in the sixth century, thus
eulogises St. Ambrose, in his Carm, Hymn. lib. 1 .
6
In carne carnis nihil agit
Regina mens in corpore.
Confregit omne lubricum
Sic vixit ille non sibi,
Sed totus auctori Deo.'
SECOND DAY. 21
whom Lorenzana emphatically calls christianus et politicus
heros,' by his splendid impressions of the Mozarabic Missal
and Breviary, gave at once popularity and stability to the
Gothico-Spanish Liturgy.*
Nor has our Adhelm made a very unhappy pun upon the name of the Holy
Father-in this distich-from his poem De Laudibus Virginum ;
"
Spiritus et castæ servavit fœdera carnis,
Qui nomen gerit Ambrosia de nectare ductum .'
But it is time to have done with St. AMBROSE : clarum et venerabile nomen !'
* Cardinal Ximenes . . . . . . . . . . gave at once popularity and stability to the
Gothico-Spanish Liturgy.] Having already gone over much of the ground on which
this interesting subject has been agitated, I shall here borrow but a part of my
former labours ; and subjoin what appears to be only absolutely necessary for the
further information of the reader. • In the x1th century Alphonsus VI. having
expelled the Moorish Arabs from Toledo, wished to substitute the Roman ritual,
or the Missal according to PAPAL AUTHORITY, upon the ruins of that of the
Goths, or of the Mozarabic Missal. The heads of the clergy, on the part of the
latter, insisted upon the purity of their own ritual, founded on ancient usage, and
sanctioned by the authority of their favourite St. Isidore. A single personal
combat was resolved upon to prove the superiority of the respective Missals ; on
which the champion of Isidore was victorious. King Alphonsus continuing
incredulous or dissatisfied , had recourse to a very different expedient. He
ordered a fast to be observed and a fire to be lighted ; when, after solemn prayers,
the Mozarabic and Roman Missals were thrown into the flames ; but the former only
escaped combustion. A miracle from heaven now seemed to attest the superiority
of the work under description ; and the followers of the Gothic ritual were left in
undisturbed possession of their ancient form of worship. ' Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. i.
p. 135-144 : where, in the extracts from that rare author Gomez (Gomecius De
Rebus Gestis a Francisco Ximenio Cisnerio, 1569, folio) , and from a variety of
bibliographical writers, the subject may, without presumption, be said to be nearly
exhausted. In a Collection of Offices or Forms of Prayer, in Cases Ordinary
and Extraordinary,' published in 1658, 8vo. (unquestionably by Jeremy Taylor)
it is observed, at the end ofthe preface, that the MOZARABIC OFFICE is used
to this very day in six parishes in Toledo, and in the Cathedral Church itself, in
the Chappel of Frier Francis Ximenez ; and at Salamanca, upon certain days, in
the chappel of Doctor Talabricensis. '
"
In the year 1775, Lorenzana, Archbishop of Toledo, put forth a revised and
corrected text of the Breviary, as it was first published under the care of Ximenes.
In the preface to that rather splendid folio volume, we are told, amongst other
things, that the original authors of the Mozarabic Ritual were Osius, Leander,
Fulgentius, Isidore, and others, including Ildephonsus. This, it must be confessed,
VOL. I. C
22 SECOND DAY.
LYSANDER. Will you indulge us with an observation or
two upon Eastern or Greek Liturgies -as the remarks
just made apply exclusively to the forms of worship used
in the Western Churches ?
PHILEMON. I must repeat what I have before observed ;
that, in these matters, I am a mere novice and especially
upon the subject which Lysander seems willing to start.
No, my good friends ; consult RENAUDOT and the Bibliotheca Patrum, and set your hearts at rest upon Greek
Liturgies.
is pushing matters to a pretty remote antiquity. However, Leander and Isidore
(the latter ofwhom sat in the IVth council of Toledo) were brothers, and both
were caressed by Gregory the Great. Hence the general uniformity ofthe Gothic
and Roman rituals ; for both, in the opinion of St. Austin, partake of the ancient Italic version. Lorenzana thusobserves : Ecclesia Romana, omniuni Mater et
Magistra, summoperè insudavit, ut sacra liturgia per universum orbem eodem Ritu
celebraretur ; & sic una esset omnium fidelium oratio : veruntamen Missalia, &
Breviaria antiqua non abolevit ; imò tamquam in Sacrarie Psalterium secundùm
veterem versionem Italam ab Augustino, & aliis Patribus prælaudatam retinet ; in
Vaticana Capella præcinit, ejusque Codices in Bibliotheca tamquam in scrinio
pectoris recondit.' Præf. p. i . It seems allowed however, by the same editor,
that Gregory the VIIth pushed hard to set aside the Gothic, and to substitute the
pure Roman, text ; but without success ; and the same authority is inclined to
think that this Gothic or Mozarabic text [ that is, Arabic mixed with Gothic] was
tolerably entire till the time of Ximenes ; who rather added to, than altered it.
For Lorenzana himself, he appears to have executed his task with equal
diligence and erudition . He consulted a number of MSS. some of them full 800
years old, and others not less than 500-( ante triste natale Lutheri, Calvini,'
&c. he feelingly remarks ! ) Among these MSS. were eight Gothic, containing
Rituals or Ceremonies ; and Bibles of the time of Mahomet, preserved in the
Gothic library, and given to the Spanish Church in the year 988. The critical
researches of Sabatier and Blanchinius, in particular, have been fully consulted
by Lorenzana, and corrected or confirmed by the readings of two hundred MSS .
in the Vatican and other libraries of Italy and Germany. Reverting to the
original impressions of the Missal and Breviary in 1500, and 1502, by Cardinal
Ximenes, I shall only further remark that the copy of each, in Lord Spencer's
library, are the only known copies in this country ; and that the former was
thought the scarcest book in the whole Harleian Collection.'
"
* Renaudot and the Bibliotheca Patrum- upon Greek Liturgies. ] The work of
Renaudot was however preceded by the Rituale Græcorum of Goar, in 1647, folio.
SECOND DAY. 23
LISARDO. Before you proceed further, pray inform us of
the antiquity and meaning of the word MISSAL ; and what
Both works are necessary to the ecclesiastical antiquary ; but Philemon's advice
requires some qualification in regard to the Bibliotheca Patrum ; for thus speaks
Renaudot of this latter publication-' Omnes illæ (Liturgia) de quibus huc usque
dictum est, Armenicâ exceptâ, in Bibliothecam Patrum translatæ sunt. Verùm in
illa collectione ita versatus est Margarinus Bigneus, ut in Græcis Jacobi, Basilii ,
Chrysostomi et Marci , edita jam exemplaria typis describi curaverit : absque ulla
cum Græcis codicibus comparatione, notis nullis, nulla multorum errorum quæ
in textum vel in versiones irrepserant, emendatione. Nec aliter in eo opere
versatus est, quam fecisset diligens typographus, nisi quod de suo pluribus locis
lectores admonuit, ut caute legerent, ea ipsa verba quæ sanctissimi Ecclesiæ
Doctores ad altaria pronunciaverant, nullo florentissimarum Ecclesiarum scandalo.'
Renaudot : Dissert . De Lit. Oricnt. Orig. et Antiq. 1715, 4to. pref. to 1st vol.
' Orientalium porro Liturgiarum, longe major neglectus fuit : compactæ sunt
enim, ut diximus, cum aliis, in Bibl. Patrum, vix lectæ à Theologis, aut adductæ
in testimonium ad fidem Eucharistiæ adversus Protestantes vindicandam ; nævos
multiplices quibus versiones obscurabantur, nemo animadvertit, et in ultima tandem
amplissima Lugdunensi editione, quales ab initio prodierant, recusæ sunt. ' Ib.
"
The Western Liturgies were embodied, or consigned to writing, before the
Eastern. Bingham seems decisive upon this point ; and Renaudot observes-
'unde si non certò, saltem verisimiliter omnino concluditur, ante Basilii tempora,
Liturgias Græcas literis non fuisse consignatas :' præf. p. 1x. The Eastern
Liturgies, in the opinion of Renaudot, may make the Western Churches
blush for their childish, or extraordinary, differences : Lutherana, Helvetica,
Genevensis, Anglicana, Scotica, ut alias prætereamus, etsi multoties refictæ,
omnino differunt, non modò in orationibus, aut ceremoniis quæ integrâ fide et
disciplina aliter se habere possunt, sed in præcipuis partibus . . . Et sanè
communis Liturgia lex inter eos esse nulla potest, qui de materia, de forma, de
ritibus Apostolicæ Liturgiæ non consentiunt, fassi nescire se quo pane Christus
usus fuerit, quo vino : quibus verbis Apostoli utrumque benedixerint : an verba
Christi necessaria sint : quæ varietas, sacri ritus formam, funditus evertit. ' p. iv.
I shall here subjoin, for the gratification of the curious, theform of Sacrament, or
Administration of the Lord's Supper, as translated by Renaudot from the most
ancient Greek service : that of St. Basil. On a comparison, however, with our
own ceremony, scarcely any difference will de discovered :
Sacerdos. Accepit panem in manus suas sanctas, puras et immaculatas, beatas &
vivificantes, & aspexit in cœlum, ad te, ô Deus, Patrem suuin & omnium Dominum
(Tunc accipiet oblationem super manus suas, auferetque velum desuper disco. )
Populus. Amen.
Sacerdos levabit oculos dicens. Et gratias egit. +
Populus. Amen.
Sacerdos. Et benedixit eum.
24 SECOND DAY.
we are to understand by Missals, Breviaries, Offices, and
Hours ?
PHILEMON. What I know shall be readily imparted.
Populus. Amen.
Sacerdos digito ter oblationem suam signabit in modum crucis. Et sanctificavit eum.
Populus. Amen.
Sacerdos (franget oblationem in tres partes, quas ita ad se invicem adjunget ut
quodammodo divise non sint. Quæ dum faciet, digitos intra discum detergit, ne
quid ex oblatis adhæreat, & dicet. ) Et fregit eum, deditque sanctis discipulis &
Apostolis suis , dicens : Accipite, manducate ex hoc omnes. Hoc est enim corpus
meum, quod pro vobis frangitur, et pro multis datur, in remissionem peccatorum :
hoc facite in mei memoriam.
Populus. Amen.
Sacerdos (tenens calicem manu sua, dicet. ) Similiter etiam calicem post cœnam
aqua & vino miscuit, (calicem ter cruce signabit, et dicet. ) Gratias egit. +
Populus. Amen,
Sacerdos. Benedixit eum. +
Populus. Amen.
Sacerdos. Sanctificavit eum. +
Populus. Amen.
Sacerdos. Gustavit, & dedit discipulis suis et Apostolis sanctis dicens, Accipite
bibite ex eo omnes, Hic est enim sanguis meus novi Testamenti qui effunditur pro
vobis, et pro multis in remissionem peccatorum : hoc facite in mei memoriam.
(Sacerdos calicem in crucis formam movebit, ita tamen ut non agitet. )
Populus dicet. Amen, hoc ita est.
Sacerdos. Quotiescunque manducabitis ex hoc pane, et bibetis ex hoc calice,
mortem meam annunciabitis, & resurrectionem meam confitebimini, meique
memores eritis donec veniam.
Populus. Mortem tuam annuntiamus Domine, & resurrectionem tuam confitemur.
Vol. i.
The prayer of St. Basil for the regular Inundation of the Nile'-calling on
God to fill the waters of the river this year, and to bless them '--and especially
the prayer for the seed-time ' or spring-season, ' are beautiful and touching.
Vol. i. p. 14. I cannot dismiss the able work of Renaudot without apprising the
reader that it was the intention of the author to have published these Eastern
Liturgies in their vernacular tongues ; but the death of Colbert (under whose
auspices such intention was to have been carried into effect) prevented the
completion of this admirable design. About two months before his decease, that
great man had ordered ‹ Syriac, Arabic, and other types to be cut : ' but in his
tomb, over which all the Muses mourned, ' the plan was doomed to perish. The
Library of Colbert was singularly valuable in Oriental MSS. which, with the
whole of his MS. Collection, now enrich the Royal Library at Paris. Essai
Historique sur la Bibliothèque du Roi, Paris, 1782, 12mo. p. 198-205.
SECOND DAY. 25
Of the meaning of the word Missal, or Missa, as used
by the oldest authority, St. Ambrose : -whether it were a
dismissal of those who came to be instructed in religious
ceremonies, or a commemoration of the Sacrifice of our
Saviour ―ecclesiastical antiquaries are not strictly agreed.
I incline however to the latter opinion ; and leave yourselves, by the assistance of Du Fresne and Charpentier, to
settle this important question. * The Breviary should seem
·
* Du Fresne and Charpentier-settle this important point . ] These distinguished
Lexicographers, however, do not settle this important point ' quite so decidedly
as Philemon may imagine. Let us first hear our favourite St. Ambrose ; for the
authorities cited by Du Fresne and Charpentier, previous to the time of that
Father, are thought, by several critics, to be spurious : however Pius and Cornelius
(upon the authority of Coustant's App. Epist, Rom, Pont, vol. i. p. 17), who lived
in the second and third centuries, support the inference of the word Missa '
denoting sacrifice. St. Ambrose, in one of his Letters to his Sister, noticing his
being compelled to appear before the Roman Emperor, thus writes : Sequenti
die, erat autem Dominica, post lectiones atque tractatum, dimissis catechumenis,
symbolum aliquibus competentibus, in baptisteriis tradebam basilicæ. Illic
nuntiatum est mihi comperto quod ad Portianam basilicam de palatio decanos
misissent, et vela suspenderent, populi partem eo pergere. Ego tamen mansi in
munere, missam facere cœpi.' Ambrosii Opera ; Paris edit. 1686, vol. ii . col. 853.
Here the reader will be pleased to note well, that the readings were finished '
and the catechumens dismissed ' -before St. Ambrose began the ceremony called
' missa : ' and the Benedictin editors observe upon the expression missam facere
cœpi non de missione competentium, sed de sacrificio ipso dictum videtur.'
Du Fresne, who leans to an opposite interpretation, has not fairly quoted this
passage: for he makes it connected with a subsequent one-beginning ' dum offero,
raptum cognovi Castalum quemdam,'—whereas this latter is a distinct, and an
incipient passage-according to the Benedictin editors. Charpentier is silent
upon its etymology. In support of St. Ambrose considering the word Missa as
synonymous with Sacrifice, it may be remarked, according to Baronius and others,
that the Hebrew word Missah expressly denotes Sacrifice ; and so Cæsarius, in his
x11th Homily, would appear to understand it : -' Si diligenter attenderitis,
cognoscetis quod non tunc fuerint Missæ quando divinæ lectiones in Ecclesia recitantur : sed quando munera offeruntur, & corpus vel sanguis Domini consecratur.'
Yet the said Cæsarius seems a little at issue with himself respecting the legitimate
construction of this word ; for in his Rules to the Monks, he appears to consider
' Missa ' as connected with certain Readings : Ab una Missa legat frater folia tria,
et orate. Omni Dominica 6 Missas facite. Prima Missa semper resurrectio legatur,
·
26 SECOND DAY.
to have been at first confined to Rubrics ; afterwards it
became a more compendious Missal, containing the whole
office of the Mass, and all services except the forms of
marriage. Neither Du Fresne nor Charpentier notice this
dum resurrectio legitur, nullus sedeat ... Perfectis Missis dicite matutinos.' That
the words Mass ' and Sacrifice ' were considered synonymous by the Roman
Catholic divines of the xvith century, is too well known to be here elaborately
discussed. In Stapleton's Works they have every where the same meaning ; and
Richard Smythe, a learned Catholic of Oxford, published a work expressly
entitled A defence of the Sacrifice of the Masse,' in 1546, 8vo. printed by
Middleton—and of which a copy is in the well-stored library of Mr. Heber.
66
6
A third, and a very general impression has obtained, that the word Missa
denotes Dismission. Cassianus, according to Du Fresne and Charpentier, is very
pointed upon this head. In his Canob. Instit. lib. ii. c. 7, he observes, ' missa est
dismissio Fratrum peracto officio ' -in chapter 8 : Missa fieri dicitur, cum populus
ab Ecclesia dimittitur, peracto officio, his verbis, quæ adhuc obtinent : " Ite,
Missa est," id est, Missio vobis indicatum.' Du Fresne himself seems inclined to
consider this word as denoting ' Missa Catechumenorum : ' ea scilicet parte sacræ
Liturgiæ in qua finità concione, et Epistolæ ac Evangelii lectione, Catechumeni
exire jubebantur, Diacono dicente, Ite, Missa est '-i. e. excedite. ' The
reader may consult Martene De Antiquis Ecclesiæ Ritibus, vol. i. p. 57, upon
the meaning ofthe word catechumen,' from the 7th Canon of the 1st Constantinopolitan Council - Primo die ( says this Canon) ipsos christianos facimus,
secundo catechumenos, tertio exorcizamus ..... Et curamus ut longo tempore
versentur in ecclesiis & audient Scripturas, & tum eos baptizamus.' The famous
Alcuin had a very whimsical notion about the meaning of the word Missa —from
Mittendo—' quod uos mittat ad Deum !' Upon the whole, it seems to me that
Philemon has good ground for the bias of his own mind upon this particular
subject. The nature of the volume now called Missal, may be gathered from
Gough : The Missal was the ritual, containing the rites, directions to the Priests,
prayers used in the administrations of the Sacraments, blessing of holy water,
and the whole service used in processions.' Brit. Topog. vol. ii. p. 320. This,
however, from Lyndewode. Our good old Bishop Jewel discourseth thus upon
the Mass itself: How be it, Gentle Reader, if thou wilt know the often Alterations, and Changes of the Masse, reade, I beseche thee, Platyna, and Polydore
Vergil, touchinge the same : There shalt thou finde, howe, and by whome, and
vpon what occasion, and in what processe of time, al the partes of the Masse
were peeced, and set togeather : and that in the space of seuen hundred whole
yeeres scarcely, and with mutche adoo, it was made up at laste, and brought to
somme perfection. ' Defence ofthe Apologie ofthe Church of Englande, &c. 1567,
fol, p. 194 : and see the First Article, of Private Mass,' in Jewel's Replic vnto
Mr. Hardinges Answeare,' 1566, folio.
<
SECOND DAY. 27
latter word; but Gough and Fosbrooke supply me with
the foregoing intelligence. From the latter, in particular,
we gather that the Breviary consisted of eight services ;
namely, Mattins, Lauds, Prime, Thirds, Sixths, Nones,
Vespers,
BELINDA. Hold, I entreat -
PHILEMON. I have named only seven : there yet remains
the eighth the Completorium or Complin-which was of
two kinds : the first was celebrated at twilight, or about six
in the evening the second, or Lucernarium, probably at
the tolling of the curfew. The Offices and Hours seem
synonymous to each other. They contain forms of prayer
both for public and private exigencies, passages from scripture, portions of the psalms, and other similar compositions ;
and our favourite Jeremy Taylor, in the time of the commonwealth (when religious ceremonies of all kinds were
pretty generally dispensed with), put forth a protestant
volume under the title of A Collection of Offices ; ' the
preface of which, if I remember rightly, is equally distinguished for its learning and liberality. † The Hours generally
Although neither Du Fresne, Du Cange, nor Charpentier notice the word
Breviarium, yet Adelung, in his Compendium of the Gloss. Med. et Inf. Æt. (with
additions, 1772, 8vo. 6 vol . ) , has introduced it at page 796 : quoting, amongst
other authorities , that of JOAN. DE JANUA, author of the Catholicon : which says
of it—' ubi reponuntur vel reportantur brevia, vel ubi aliquid continetur abbreuiamentum : unde quidam liber in quo est totum officium diurnum et nocturnum
dicitur Breviarium, liber Ecclesiasticum officium compendio complectens. '
↑ distinguished for its learning and liberality. ] ' I cannot say but many of
our Prayers are also in the Romane Offices. But so they are also in the Scripture, so also is the Lord's prayer ; and if they were not, yet the allegation is very
inartificial, and the charge peevish and unreasonable, unless there were nothing
good in the Romane books, or that it were unlawful to pray a good prayer
which they had once stained with red letters,' Preface ; sign . a 2. The following
is in a fine style-defending the propriety of our public form of worship. I shall
only crave leave that I may remember Jerusalem and call to minde the pleasures
of the temple, the order of her services, the beauty of her buildings, the sweetness
་
28 SECOND DAY.
begin with an extract from the first verse of the first
chapter of St. John ; and consist of prayers, of sentences,
suffrages, vigils, and psalms. The Ladies may look at
leisure into Gough and Fosbrooke ; * but Lysander and
Lisardo may consult Durandus and Lyndewode. There
of her songs, the decency of her ministrations, the assiduity and oeconomy of her
Priests and Levites, the daily sacrifice, and that eternal fire of devotion that went
not out by day nor by night ; these were the pleasures of our peace, and there is
a remanent felicity in the very memory of those spiritual delights which we then
enjoyed as antepasts of heaven, and consignations to an immortality ofjoyes,' ...—.
And such is THE LITURGY OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.' Preface ; sign. A4.
The title of this volume is given in the note at p. 21 ante.
"
* into Gough and Fosbrooke. ] The work of Gough is well known, and has been
sufficiently quoted : but The Economy ofMonastic Life (as it existed in England)
APoem,' byMr. T. D. Fosbrooke, in quarto (without date), and dedicated to that
truly eminent physician and physiologist DR. EDWARD JENNER, has not met
with the same popularity ; for reasons, which it seems difficult at present to assigu.
That poem was the fruit of extensive, and, in many instances, of successful
research. The information contained in the introduction and notes is at once
copious and curious. The stanza is in the Spencerian measure, and the style is
rather in imitation of that of Thomson's Castle of Indolence. I select, almost at
random, perhaps a tolerably fair specimen, from page 45- describing the close
of day ofthe monastic life :
' Last came the trusty man of watch and ward,
Amassy key from his bent elbow hung;
Ofgoers all he kept a keen regard,
Or questioned them with peremptory tongue ;
At prime and eve his larum bell he rung,t
If to his lodge enquiring strangers went,
His turning window‡ on its hinge he flung,
And, if he so could tell his mind's intent,
Would talk by alphabet of arms and fingers bent.§
At cease of bell, ere yet the rites began,
By massy bolts the latticed doors were bound, [ ]
The speeding chantor through the office ran ;
And now the choir turned to the east around,
Or bowed at name of JESU to the ground ;
+ Spens. Faerie Qu. b. ii. c. ix . st. 25.
$ Fenestra versatilis : Monast. Angl. vol . ii . p . 758.
§ Id. p. 714. All monks were, if possible, to converse by signs.
Concil. vol. ii . p . 249. Vis. not. Selb. it. 5.
SECOND DAY. 29
is no end to the varieties of form in which these manuals
of devotion were executed ; and you may probably recollect a very pigmy production of this kind, of the seventeenth century, not above an inch in length, which is contained in the British Museum, among the MSS. of Sir
Hans Sloane. What a whimsical and diminutive curiosity !
We will now resume, if you please, the subject of graphic
embellishment,
I am not aware of any printed Missal which exhibits an
engraving, in wood, or metal, before the year 1480 : five
years after the production of the first printed Missal for the
use of the Metropolitan or Romish Church. These engravings consisted at first either of a large one of the Crucifixion, *
The prying Dean would sum the gathered band,
And truant monk, if frequent truant found,
With purs'd-up brow and angry waving hand,
To scanty fare, and jail (of fearful thought !) command. ||
For some there were, when blew the tassel'd horn,
And all the bosky vallies shook for dread,
On the hill tops who met the Youth of Morn,
As from the waves he reared his glorious head ;
O'er gossy heaths on fleeting palfreys sped ;
With profane hunters not ashamed to hoot,
Haply if roused from her rush-woven bed,
Upsprung the fearful game with flying foot,
And all the chace began a musical pursuit.'¶ p. 45-6.
a large engraving of the Crucifixion. ] This engraving is always placed before
that part of the Roman Catholic service which begins with Te igitur clementissime "
Confinement in some ergastulum, with exclusion from the common table,
chapter, and dormitory. Lynd. Prov. Par. edit. fol. 71 .
The religious were very fond of hunting. Chaucer's Monk's Prol. Monast.
Anglic. vol. ii. Ecc. Coll. pp. 155, 168. Lyndewode : De Clerico Venatore.'
The preceding references are used by Mr. Fosbrooke ; whose poem, with improve- ments and additions, is to be incorporated in the reprint of his British Monachism ;
a work, of which the fire at Mr. Nichols's , in Red Lion Passage, had destroyed
nearly one half the impression. Let me here quietly refer the reader to the Bibliomania, p. 200 : where he will find the terrible denunciations of the Institutes
of Otho and Octhobone against a Clerk who is a Hunter.'
30 SECOND DAY.
or of a smaller one of the particular arms of the See ; or
both subjects were united in the same volume. The earliest
printed Ritual of Baptism, ofthe Church ofMentz, is of
the date just mentioned, and exhibits a portrait of St.
Martin, with other embellishments : but these embellishments, as were almost the whole of them, are from wood.
The first printed Missal of the Cathedral Church ofWurtzburg, of the date of 1481 , exhibits, however, the interesting
and well-executed decoration of the arms of that See, &c.
printed from copper. * Still these engravings, whether upon
Pater ;' and is usually of the dimensions of the entire page. The Bamberg
Missal of 1481 contains this print, and it is probably of earlier occurrence. See
the Bibl. Spencer, vol. i . p. 133-5 : vol. iii. p. 146.
* the arms of that See, &c. printed from copper. ] I know of no book (says
Heineken), printed in Germany, which contains a copper-plate impression before
the year 1481 ; in which year the Wurtzburg Missal was executed. ' Idée
Générale, &c. p. 233. Gough (Brit. Topog. vol. ii . 324) briefly cites the same
authority ; supposing (erroneously) that this print is the first instance of
engraving upon copper ; but the English antiquary had either forgotten, or was
unacquainted with, the Monte Sancto di Dio of 1477 ; the Ptolemy of 1478 ; and
the Dante of the same date of the Wurtzburg Missal. See Bibl. Spencer. vol. iv
pp. 108 , 130, 538. It seems pretty certain that neither Heineken nor Gough
had examined, or perhaps had not seen, a copy of the Wurtzburg Missal : which
has enriched the Bodleian library since the time of Laud, and which, although
now placed in the rare printed books in the Auctarium,' had formerly been
considered a Manuscript, and deposited as such. I well remember, two summers
ago, the gratification which Sir Henry Englefield expressed at the sight of this
precious volume ! He happened to be travelling through Oxford when I made the
following memorandum relating to it.
<
"
"
The work commences with a proheme,' or perhaps ' privilege ' by the Bishop
ofWurtzburg, Rudolfus ; of which the following may be considered a sufficient
compendium : Rudolfus- Epus herbn . et francie orientalis Dux. Kilianus de
Bibra decretorum doctor præpositus. Wilhelmus de limpurg Baro pincerna
hereditarius decanus. Totuque capitulu ecclesie herbn. omnibus et singulisomnes horarũ canonicaru-coll-eccl. paroch. et capell. Ciuitatis et Diocesis nostrarum herbn libros quos partim vetustate ruptos partim pene irreformatos libros huiusmodi de nouo per certos impressoriæ artis magistros peritos,
&c. imprimi & impressari- missales libros quos partim pari modo antiquitate
collapsos quosdam vero membranarum caligine caducos et nonnullos a nostræ
maioris eccl. herbn. &c. omnimode discrepare comperimus. Ad iam dicte nostre
SECOND DAY. 31
wood or copper, were few and solitary ; confined chiefly to
the subjects just noticed. Bold therefore was that genius,
and still more adventurous that publisher, who struck out
the design, and gave it to the world at large, of fixing metal
types within wooden borders of elaborate ornaments, either
gay or grave, and of locking up the same within the
mechanism of the press, and thus multiplying copies as well
for cabinets as for cathedrals ! Here, therefore, was gained
maioris herbn. ecclesie ordinariarum rubricarum debitam consonantiam per huius
artis impressorie opificem peritum videlicet Jeorium Ryser quem usque ad
prememorati operis debitum complementum in nostra ciuitate herbn. comorari
conduximus. et sub nostra paterna tuitione et protectione recepimus ita et taliter
imprimi et impressari — Propterea decrevimus et ita ordinavimus vt huiusmodi
artis impressorie magister prementionatus opus talismodi de Anuo domini
millesimo quadringentesimo octogesimo primo octaua die mensis nouembris
pleniter et omnimode integrum et perfectum habere debeat. quo opere expleto
debeat et teneatur ex eo cuilibet librum quemlibet habere exposcenti pro quatuor
florenis renenis. tradere et assignare- Et ut igitur de huiusmod librorum
impressura indulgentiisque nostris Episcopalibus vt prefertur per nos datis cunctis
plenior pateat fides iussimus annuimus vt commemoratus Jeorius Ryser artis
impressorie magister huiusmodi missales libros vt predicitur imprimendos nostrorum pontificatus et Capituli insigniis decoraret. Datum in Ciuitate nostra
herbipolensi. Anno domini millessimo quadringētesimo octogesimo primo octaua
die mensis nouembris.'
It is just possible that the book may not have been printed quite so early as is
the date of this privilege. However, it is most probable that both the printing
and the copper-plate impression were executed before March 1482 : for the
ornaments are placed immediately beneath the privilege. This plate consists of
an engraving, in the line manner, both of the Arms of the Bishop and of the
Chapter; and is, in the copy under description , struck off with singular success ;
exhibiting the richness of some of Hollar's most delicate efforts. There was
doubtless another copper-plate (of the Crucifixion) facing the part mentioned in
the last note; which is here evidently cut out. It will be observed that the
printing is byJEORIUS RYSER; and my friend Mr. H. Cotton (of Christ- Church),
who has furnished me with a transcript of the entire privilege, adds, that the
volume contains 378 leaves. There are a few illuminations, which are by no
means discreditable to the book ; and on the reverse of the first leaf there is a
ms. memorandum, of the date of 1486, by John Benosth, Vicar of St. Bartholomew, in Wurtzburg, which informs us that the said Vicar bought this copy at
his own expense, and bequeathed it to the said church, ' to remain there for ever
for the salvation of his soul.'
32 SECOND DAY.
in mechanical skill, and in the gratification of supplying
hundreds or thousands with beautifully wrought specimens
of the printed text of Scripture, what was lost in grandeur
of style, or in the higher departments of embellishment : and
the printer might have circulated a thousand copies of his
HORE, while the illuminator was patiently decorating one.
Utility therefore compensated for diminution of beauty and
symmetry and many are the pounds sterling, Lisardo,
which I am confident you would have given, could you
have witnessed the FIRST PRINTED SHEET which was pulled '
in the manner just described : -could you have seen
designer, printer, and publisher, each lost in the embraces
of the other, and expressing their astonishment by more
extravagant gesticulations of joy than were displayed by
Columbus and his followers when they first descried the
shores of the western world !
I am not prepared to say at what exact period the first
specimen of this decorative printing appeared ; but I should
much doubt whether there be any thing of the kind anterior
to the date of 1484. And although a great number of the
Missals or Horæ, which were thus printed, had been
executed by Flemish artists, and most probably therefore in
Flanders, yet France and Paris are the Country and the
Metropolis in which these beautiful productions first appeared.
In introducing them, or rather in giving you notions of their
leading characteristics, I am doubtful whether to adopt the
plan of considering them according to their respective
printers, or according to the particular turn of art which
prevails in them : but, on second thoughts, the latter
method seems to be the preferable one. As humour is made
to succeed pathos in dramatic exhibitions, so prepare for a
grave and moral strain before you suffer your thoughts to
SECOND DAY. 33
wander upon subjects of merriment. Prepare for the
introduction of the KING of TERRORS !
Open yonder octavo Missal, dear Lysander-that Missal
for which you scrupled not to give the best part of twenty
pounds- and let us view the touching emblems of mortality
contained in it. You observe that neither age nor sex are
touching emblems of mortality contained in it. ] The Missal, above alluded
to by Philemon, is of the date of 1498, and was printed by Verard in octavo.
There are, however, numerous Missals, or volumes of Hora, some of an earlier,
others of a later date, which equally illustrate the subject under consideration.
The following fac-similes, from the Missal here mentioned, display the characters
selected by Philemon in the text
Lefpoutee trazde dacottche
Bo
Laemmefille la nunce.
34 SECOND DAY.
spared from the ravages of Death : neither the innocence of
childhood, the beauty of virginity, nor the vigour ofmanhood.
See, here, the Bride is summoned by the grim and ghastly
Monarch, just as she leaves the portals of the church in
which she has sworn eternal constancy to her husband : the
curious garment-the enchased gem-the eye of rapture,
and the heart of hope, avail nothing ! There, however, this
hymenëal calamity is spared ; but the misfortune is inflicted
The Archbishop is here made to expostulate with great formality and earnestness ;
but Death is inexorable.
Tauchenelque
The Bishop and the Knight meet with an equally merciless reception at the hands
of this stern Summoner.
leuelque Techenahes:
SECOND DAY. 35
6
upon the offspring of it ! or, severer lot to endure, upon the
Consort-by perils in the sea,' or upon land'-by the
dagger of the assassin, or the bullet of the enemy :-such as,
of late, inexorable Tyrant, thou hast ordained to make havoc
in that field of glory which has consecrated alike the
memories of the living and the dead ! * But I see I am only
There is something very quaint and satirical in placing The Fool beneath the legs
of a human skeleton-which usually occurs at the beginning of the Calendars.
The following is from a volume printed by Vostre in 1502,
* consecrated alike the memories oftheliving and the dead. ]
For ne'er was field so sternly fought,
And ne'er was conquest dearer bought.
Here, piled in common slaughter, sleep
Those whom affection long shall weep.
36 SECOND DAY
breaking open those fountains of grief which had been
supposed to have exhausted their waters : and I forbearYet who shall deny the force of the sarcasm-who not admit
the cutting severity of the reproof upon midnight revelries
Here rests the Sire, that ne'er shall strain
His orphans to his heart again ;
The Son, whom, on his native shore,
The Parent's voice shall bless no more ;
The Bridegroom, who has hardly press'd
His blushing Consort to his breast ;
The Husband, whom through many a year,
Long love and mutual faith endear.
Thou can'st not name one tender tie
But here dissolv'd its reliques lie !
With no enquiry vain pursue
The cause, but think on Waterloo ! '
Scott's Field of Waterloo, p. 36.
These are heart-touching lines and worthy of the Bard who produced them.
They likewise afford an illustration, at once melancholy and powerful, of that—
perhaps matchless-DANCE OF DEATH which has immortalised THE PLAINS OF
WATERLOO ! There is a previous passage in Mr. Scott's poem which may also
be considered an apposite illustration , but which I choose to give in its present
place for the sake of the auncient rhyme' which follows it :
DEATH hover'd o'er the maddening rout,
And, in the thrilling battle-shout,
Sent for the bloody banquet out
A summons of his own.
Through rolling smoke the Demon's eye Could well each destined guest espy,
Well could his ear in ecstacy
Distinguish every tone
That fill'd the chorus of the frayFrom cannon roar and trumpet-bray,
From charging squadrons' wild hurra,
From the wild clang that mark'd their way, -
Down to the dying groan,
And the last sob of life's decay
When breath was all but flown .
Feast on, stern foe of mortal life,
Feast on !'-
SECOND DAY. 37
and gaieties-when we are told (as we have been for the
last three centuries) that all these subjects only exhibit the
DANCE of DEATH ?!
Learned men are divided in their hypotheses respecting
the Origin of this tragical Dance * —that is, respecting the
Let us now oppose this public banqueting of Death, to a private repast of the
same voracious Gourmand upon the body of our favourite Edward VI. There
is a good deal of the finishing of the Dutch school in this picture.
' Amen quod death, and with his percing dart,
He strake in twayne the kinges yet praying hart,
But Lord how glad the goast was of the stroke,
For when it sawe the prison gate was broke,
Fast furth it flewe, and vp to heaven went
To rest with God in ioyes that never stent :
The soulles body about the bed did sprall,
While they about it on the King did call,
Adawing him as if he wer in swound :
But all for nought, he had his deadly wound.
And when the blud, that went to helpe the hart,
Had sweltred it, and left eche other part,
Than waxt his face and handes all pale and wan,
And when the bludles partes to coole began,
To heavenward his handes and iyes he cast,
Downe fell his iawes, his hart stringes all to brast,
And still he lay, for lively heat was past.'
The Funeralles of King Edward the Sixt, 1560, 4to. B iiij, rect.
Acopy of this rare volume is in the collection of the Right Hon. T. Grenville.
the origin of this tragical Dance. ] One of the most antient representations
ofthis "Dance," still existing, is that at Basil in Switzerland, in the church-yard
formerly belonging to the convent of Dominicans, which is said to have been
painted at the instance of the fathers and prelates assisting at the grand council
at Basil, in 1431 , in memory of a plague which happened soon afterwards, and
during its continuance. The name of the painter, is unknown,' &c. The Dance
of Death, painted by H. Holbein and engraved by W. Hollar, ' (1794) 8vo. p. 4.
From the same authority we learn-that ' It has been frequently supposed that
the Basil painting was the first of the kind, but this is extremely doubtful, from
the knowledge we have of many others of apparently equal antiquity. Many of
the bridges in Germany and Switzerland were ornamented in this manner, a
specimen of which is still to be seen at Lucerne ; and it is probable that almost
every church of eminence was decorated with a Dance of Death. In the cloisters
VOL. I. D
38 SECOND DAY.
earliest representation of it as a subject of art. Of its earliest
appearance by means of the pencil, I am unable to speak
with even any tolerable degree of certainty ; but of its first
appearance in a printed book—and that book a devotional
one-I can venture upon a suggestion probably not very
seen.
of St. Innocent's Church at Paris, in those belonging to the old Cathedral of St.
Paul at London, and in St. Mary's Church at Berlin, these paintings were to be
At Klingenthal, a convent in the Little Basil, are the remains of a Dance
ofDeath, differently designed from that at the Dominicans, and thought to be
more antient. The figures remaining till very lately in Hungerford's chapel, in
the cathedral at Salisbury, and known by the title of Death and the Young Man,
were undoubtedly part of Death's Dance, as might be further insisted on from the
fragment of another compartment which was close to them. In the church at
Hexham in Northumberland, are the remains of a Death's Dance ; and at
Fescamps, in Normandy, it is carved in stone, between the pillars of a church ;
the figures are about 18 inches high. Even fragments of painted glass, whereon
this subject has been depicted, with old English verses over the figures, may
contribute to shew how very common it has been in our own country. P. C.
Hilscher, in a tract printed at Dresden, in 1705, has taken notice of other Dances
ofDeath at Dresden, Annaberg, Leipzeig, and Berne. Dr. Nugent has described
one in St. Mary's Church, at Lubeck, which he states to have been painted in
1463,' p. 6-8.
If the author of this singular representation (the graphic Æsop of his day) be
unknown, the motive which led to its execution seems to be sufficiently manifest :
namely, that of impressing upon the minds of all sorts and conditions of men,'
the certain approach of death and the frailty of sublunary grandeur. In this
conclusion I differ from the ingenious and learned author of the amusing book
just quoted ; who inclines to think that, in the dark ages of monkish bigotry
and superstition, the deluded people, terrified into a belief that the fear of Death
was acceptable to the great author of their existence, had placed one of their
principal gratifications in contemplating it amidst ideas the most horrid and
disgusting hence the frequent descriptions of mortality in all its shapes amongst
their writers, and the representations of this kind in their books of religious offices,
and the paintings and sculptures of their ecclesiastical buildings,' p. 2-3. I submit,
that, if the object of this Death's Dance were to terrify a deluded people,' the
representations of it would be devoted to subjects exclusively applicable to the
lower classes ; but when we see Popes, Emperors, Kings, and all the dignified
orders in Society, made the subjects of this Dance, the design of the artist, and
of those who copied him, was rather of a general nature-shewing (as above
intimated) that all classes of society were to receive the intrusive visits of Death
-for such artist could not think to frighten Popes, Archbishops, and Bishops, by
these representations.
SECOND DAY. 39
-wide of the truth. If my memory be not treacherous, I
remember to have seen an octavo volume of Hora, printed
by Verard somewhere about the year 1489, in which, with
other miscellaneous subjects, this Dance of Death was
introduced : but the preceding, I should conceive, is the
very earliest date attributable to its appearance in print. Of
the numerous, perhaps I ought to have said, innumerable
editions which succeeded * it were in vain to attempt to -
numerous, perhaps innumerable editions which succeeded. ] I have no hesitation in believing (however that belief may differ from the opinions of very
competent judges) that EDITIONS OF THE DANCE OF DEATH (that is to say,
small volumes, in which were wooden cuts accompanied by text, exclusively
devoted to the subject under description) were unknown till the time of HOLBein.
Whether that great artist painted one, two, or three, series of the same subject,
in fresco or in oil, at Basil, or at Whitehall, is immaterial to the point : all I
contend for, is, that we are indebted to Hans Holbein for these beautiful and
instructive manuals of morality. There is abundance of intrinsic evidence that
the cuts, forming these manuals, originated from the genius of Holbein . The
author of the tasteful edition before quoted, seems doubtful whether he designed
them upon the wood for the engraver-but he is clearly of opinion that he did not
absolutely engrave them ; from their superiority to a set of cuts which bear that
artist's' s name expressly upon them-introduced, however, probably to shew that
Holbein only made the designs upon wood. I incline to the same opinion ; and
also think that the set of small drawings by Holbein, sketched with a pen, and
slightly shaded with Indian ink ;-formerly in the Crozat collection, and lately in
that of Prince Gallitzin, (the Russian ambassador at the Court of Vienna- but
now in the Emperor of Russia's collection) at whose house they were seen by
Mr. Coxe the traveller, may have been the originals, or ancient copies of the
originals, from which the earliest editions were published. That Hans Holbein
invented the Dance of Death, is scarcely deserving of refutation.
I now come to some of the earlier editions of this interesting work. My friend
Mr. W. Y. Ottley possesses (in his very fine collection of ancient prints) a very
great treasure in this way. On consulting the Manuel des Curieux et des Amateurs
de l'Art by Huber and Rost, 1797, 8vo. vol . i. p . 155, &c. it is thus observed :
' pour apprécier tout le mérite de ces petites estampes, il faut avoir sous les
yeux les premières épreuves, imprimées seulement d'un côté. En effet, un de nos
amateurs de Leipzig, M. Otto, possède de cette suite 21. pièces qui ont ces
qualités, et qui sont d'une exécution très-délicate .' Judge therefore , print-learned
reader, of the felicity of my friend in possessing FORTY IMPRESSIONS of this
description ! the 27th only ( the Astrologer ' ) being wanting to render the series
40 SECOND DAY.
give a catalogue. Perhaps not much credit is to be attached
to any criticism which pretends to affix, with nicety and certainty, the School of Art in which these representations had
complete. I consider this set, therefore, as unique. There is a short title, in
German, above the cuts ; and there were probably the usual verses, or descriptions, beneath the latter being wanting in Mr. Ottley's series. It is also quite
evident that the titles, at top, are executed at the press. From hence we conclude
that they were intended for an edition of the work. The mention of this set is
material in adjusting the probable time of the earliest impression of the work.
Mr. Ottley thinks, and I concur with him in opinion, that these impressions (41
in number) were executed at Basil : before any edition appeared at Lyons :-
that is, before the same cuts were taken to Lyons for the purpose of publication
there. If so, they were executed before the year 1538 : the earliest date which
has yet been found to any impression. The reader has here a most faithful copy
of the cut ; entitled Die Edelfraw -from which he may judge of the spirit and
beauty ofthe entire set.
Jansen, indeed, does not hesitate to say that there was an edition published at
Basil in 1530 ; containing a sentence, in German, from the Bible, above each
cut ; and, beneath each cut, some German verses. It must however be observed
that Jansen does not favour us with the title of this edition . De l'Origine de la
Gravure; 1808. vol. i . p. 120-1, note. Having submitted this point, the list of
succeeding early editions is made out with tolerable accuracy.
SECOND DAY. 41
their origin, either as paintings, or as decorations for Missals ;
but I incline to think that they are generally the productions
ofGerman, or Flemish artists. Indeed it is worthy of remark,
6 1538. Lyons, small 4to. Simulachres et historiees faces de la mort, &c. 41
prints. French descriptions. In the collection of Mr. Douce. Beautiful
impressions.
1542. Lugd. 12mo.
1545. Ibid. 12mo.
"
"
"
Imagines de morte.' Latin descriptions. 41 prints.
Imagines mortis. ' The same. In Mr. Douce's Collection.
1547. Ibid. 12mo. Les images de la mort.' French descriptions : contains 12
additional prints : namely, 8 of the Dance of Death, and 4 of boys : in the
whole, 53 prints. In Mr. Douce's Collection.
•
1547. Ibid, 12mo. Imagines mortis.' Contains the same number of prints. In
the same Collection.
1549. Ibid. 12mo. Simolachri, historie, e figure de la morte :' containing an
address from the printer, in which he complains of some attempts having
been made, in other countries, to imitate the cuts inhis book, and he informs
the reader that he had caused many more cuts to be added to this edition
than had appeared in any other. All this however is downright flourish
and falsehood ;' as the cuts are precisely the same in number as in the
two previous editions. The descriptions are in Latin and Italian.
1554. Basil, 12mo. Icones Mortis.' The same number of cuts. Descriptions
in Latin. In the collection of Mr. Douce.
1555. Cologne, Imagines Mortis, ' 12mo. This edition (containing the Decla
matio de Morte' of Erasmus) and the reimpressions of it in 1557, 1566, and
1573, are copies of that of 1545. They contain wood-cuts by an eminent
but unknown artist, whose mark is an italic-capital A, curved at the top :
a mark, which is also to be found in some of the emblems of Sambucus
and Lejeune, in some initial letters in Grafton's Chronicle, and in other
cuts executed during the sixteenth century. It must be added that almost
the same variations from the original cuts are to be found in those of this
edition, in De Mechel's prints, and in Hollar's etchings. The cuts, in
the one before us, are a quarter of an inch wider, but of the same height
as those in the original impression. A copy is in the rich collection of Mr. Douce.
1562. Lyon, 12mo. Les images de la mort, auxquelles sont adjoustees dix sept
figures.' There are however but 5 additional figures to this edition , the
other 12 being only what had already appeared. Ofthese 5 cuts, of which
3 are groups ofboys, Mr. Ottley thinks that only two of them are from the
design of Holbein.
It should be added that, in the XVIth century, the subject of the Dance of
Death was introduced into innumerable works as ornaments to capital initials.
Mr. Douce possesses an alphabet of initial letters, of this subject, which, for "
42 SECOND DAY.
that no traces of them are to be found in Italy, as far as I
have been able to ascertain. The subject was undoubtedly
a very fit one for decorating books of devotion. The cloistered
cell, or the richly-furnished cabinet-scenes, in which volumes
humour and excellence of design are even superior to the celebrated series ; and
with respect to execution, especially when their minuteness is considered (being
less than an inch square), absolutely wonderful . ' Their composition is entirely
different from that of any of the others, and one of them is sufficiently remarkable
for its indelicacy. They appear to have been done at Basil : for Mr. Douce saw,
in the public library there, a sheet, on which three alphabets were printed : the
one just described ; another of boys at play, and a third a dance of peasants. The
same distinguished antiquary does not think it improbable that Holbein might
have furnished the design of the Dance of Death for these initials. They appear
(in Mr. D's opinion) to have been struck off as proofs or patterns for booksellers ;
and we know that they were actually used by Cephalæus at Strasbourg, and by Cratander at Basil.
1581. Todtentanz durch alle stendt der menschen, &c. furgebildet mit Figuren,
St. Gallen,' 4to. This publication is rather in imitation of the preceding.
·
6
Rudolf Meyers Todten- Dantz. Erganzet und herausgegeben durch
Conrad Meyeru ; Maaler in Zurich, Im jahr, 1ô50,' 4to. This impression
consists of 60 copper- plate engravings, of which 56 are numbered. Beneath
each, four German verses are engraved. It is a very rare volume.
1649. Todten-Tanz, wie derselbe in der loeblichen und weit berühmten stadt
Basel, als in spiegel menschlicher Beschaffenheit, ganz künstilich gemalet
und zu sehen ist,' &c. Frankfurt au Maym,' 4to. Wurden, 1696 and 1725.
This set contains 44 cuts, of which 42 have German text at top and at bottom.
1651. In this year first appeared the cuts of HOLLAR upon this subject ; with
borders designed by Abraham à Diepenbeke, and afterwards without the
borders. These cuts are close copies of those in the impression of 1555 ;
but are not fac-similes of any single existing model.
1682.Theatrum Mortis Humanæ,' by J. Weichard. These engravings are
within borders of fruit, flowers, and animals ; executed with uncommon
elegance.
<
1736. Todtentanz, von Salomon von Ruszing, in dreyszig kupfern, in
Nurnberg.' 8vo. These cuts contain German descriptions.
1780. In this year Chretien de Mechel, an artist and printseller at Basil, published 45 engravings of a Death's- Dance, as part of the works of Holbein,
of which he intended to give a series. These are taken from the indianink drawings mentioned at p. 39, ante. Mr. Douce and Mr. Ottley each
possess a copy of this work. If however these drawings were copied from
the forementioned celebrated cuts , they must have been done after the year
1547 ; as eight of them did not appear till that time.
SECOND DAY. 43
of this description were usually deposited, by the side of the
ivory-carved crucifix- were well calculated to give an intenser
feeling to reflections kindled by such representations. We
are told that Homer was the beloved author of Alexander
the Great, and that the conqueror of the world felt his
happiness divided between subjecting countries and perusing
the feats of Achilles : moreover, that the Iliad and Odyssey
1785. Freund Heinz Erscheinungen in Holbeins Manier, von I. R. Schellenberg.
t Winterthur,' 8vo. This publication contains only 25 copper-cuts, executed
"
(
in a most admirable style, representing the modern costume. All these
German editions are rather imitations than copies of the original of
Holbein. Jansen, sur l'Origine de la Gravure ; vol. i. P. 122-3. 1/
(1794.) The Dance of Death ; painted by H. Holbein, and engraved by
W. Hollar. 8vo. (without date, but in 1794. ) To this elegant volume is
prefixed aninteresting Essay On the Dance of Death, ' from which much
of the preceding information has been derived. It exhibits also impressions
from Hollar's own plates ; which appear to have been but little used, and
which were, till the present edition, preserved in a noble family.' In
this publication, they are presented to the public without the least alteration.' This impression also contains The Daunce of Machabree :
wherein is lively expressed and shewed The State of Manne, and how he
is called at uncertayne tymes by Death, &c.' By Lydgate : with a
copper-plate of the procession of the various ranks in society conducted
by death, and with the text of Lydgate printed in the black letter. In
respect to the plates of Hollar (of the Dance of Death), I own they disappoint me. It was a subject which that incomparable Artist never possessed
the peculiar talent of rendering justice to. Small figures, with a great
proportion of light and shade, gradually softened down to either extreme—
possessing, what painters call, breadth and mellowness of effect '-—are
not what we must expect to see successfully represented by the burin of
Hollar. His small figures, as little more than etchings, are quite his own,
and incomparable : but-I am wandering. The impressions in the edition
under description are almost uniformly thick or foggy : and much of that
rich and sparkling manner-of that curious detail-of those sharp and
efficient touches, which characterise the original impressions- (see the facsimile at p. 40 ante) will be in vain looked for in the specimens before us.
Brunet only briefly notices the edition of 1538, and the one under description ; of which latter he says there were several copies printed UPON
VELLUM. Manuel du Libraire, vol. ü. p. 121. One of this kind, called ' a
beautiful unique copy, with the plates exquisitely painted, ' was sold by Mr.
Christie in 1804 (no. 265) for 17l. 17s.
44 SECOND DAY.
were placed every evening beneath his pillow: whether to
give a sort of martial inspiration to his dreams, I shall not
stop to enquire-but it may safely be affirmed that many an
impression of Hours and Offices, which are now opened by
My old friends, Freytag, Gerdes, Vogt, and Bauer have rather deserted me on
the present occasion. Gerdes merely notices the Lyons editions of 1538, and 1547 ; and Bauer contents himself with an exclusive reference to Gerdes. Florilegium Hist. Crit. Libr. Rarior. edit. 1763, p. 171-2 : Bibl. Libror. Rar. vol. i . pt. ii.
p. 133. The curious are probably in possession of the eight plates upon this subject
which were engraved in 1541 by the delicate burin of ALDEGREVER. These
are far from being servile copies of Holbein ; but the ensuing fac-simile, from
the original of HANS SEBALD BEHAM, executed about the same period, may
I think, be placed upon a footing with the most successful illustration of the
subject yet published ... And with this pleasing variety let us bid farewell to the Dance of Death.
OMNEM IN HOMINE VENVSTATEM MORS ABOLETUM
1SB
wond
Sisweine Se
SECOND DAY. 45
rude hands, and gazed upon by vulgar eyes, have been
consigned to the pillows of obdurate Abbesses and obedient
Nuns -have been pressed to the heart of the Devotee, and
have received as well the tears as the kisses of the Novice !
ALMANSA. You have excited in me a wonderful inclination
to extend my series of volumes of this description. I have
hitherto contented myself only with a duodecimo printed by
Kerver, and with a thin folio executed by Regnault ; but I
own, while I assent to the general truth of your positions, I
cannot dissemble my grief, or rather indignation, on frequently finding subjects of the greatest gravity mingled with
those, of which no obedient nun,' or melting novice,'
(to borrow your own phrase) ought to have had a glimpse.
BELINDA. This, you see, is the privilege of the marriagestate. My amiable Sister, when we formerly talked of the
symptoms of the Bibliomania, was not only ignorant of these
things, but, if in possession of such knowledge, she would
not have dared to avow it.
PHILEMON. The remark is undoubtedly just. The inconsistency, mentioned by Almansa, shall have its due share of
notice and reprehension ; but it must be introduced with a
proper regard to the delicacy and good-breeding of the circle
which I have the honour of addressing. Away, therefore,
now, with tears and sobs, and unavailing sighs and regrets !
away with the death-cold corpse, and muffled mourner ! and
let us view subjects of an equally interesting, but of a less
painful character. Pursuing what may be said to be the
natural train of ideas, I must beg your attention to scriptural
subjects of a grave and touching nature, which we also see
introduced within these interesting volumes : either by way
of a border-ornament, or in the centre of the page. The
LIFE OF CHRIST Would necessarily form the leading subject
46 SECOND DAY.
for such representations. Accordingly, there is no end to
selections from this fruitful source : either allegorically, or
as direct personal references. Not however but that the OLD
TESTAMENT Occasionally furnished subjects for the artist's
talents ; and among these, few appear to have produced so
many embellishments as the Life ofDavid. See how the
Monarch of Israel is here represented (in a folio volume of
Hora, printed by Regnault, of the date of 1536*) as
choosing one of the three evils to be inflicted upon his
people !
EGO
OV
Slalalay
Hora, printed by Regnault, of the date of 1536.] The above fac similes are
SECOND DAY. 47
A more graceful expression attends the delineation of the
Sacrifice ofAsa. Indeed it may be remarked that this subject is generally treated in a sober and appropriate manner
by the ancient artists engaged in the decoration of Missals.
But let us revert to the graphic illustrations of the New
Testament ; and adopting something of system in our plan,
let us select a subject which preceded the birth of our
Saviour, and which seems to have usually called forth all the
executed from a remarkably- beautiful copy of this edition, obtained from Messrs.
Longman, Hurst, and Co. and now in the collection of Earl Spencer.
48 SECOND DAY.
richness of the artist's fancy in the representations of it.
You will immediately anticipate the subject to which I
allude-the Salutation. It is rarely that we behold it more
elaborately exhibited than in this Missal, printed for Cousin
in 1519, folio. *
VE
OBAGIA
PLENADO
5000000
2
* Missal printed for Cousin in 1519. ] The above is taken from a Salisbury
SECOND DAY. 49
Next follows the Nativity : and I choose to select the
ensuing specimen
of its representation, because it is,
of all those which
I happen to have
seen, the most singularly rude and
simple. The style
of art is evidently different from
what you have
just witnessed, although there be
no difference in
its age -for, to
revert to my former position, I
choose rather to
class the subjects,
than to submit a
completely chronological series of
engravings. Bear
this simple, but
not uninteresting
specimen in mind, when you happen to be getting into
exstacy before the Notte ofCorreggio ! They form almost
Missal printed by Olivier at the expense of Jacques Cousin, in 1519,' folio
(B. vj. rev. second set of signatures) : from a copy in the possession of J. and A.
Arch. The same manner of representation, with rather an improvement in the drawing, appears in a beautiful octavo volume of Hora secundum Vsum Trecen.
in Earl Spencer's Collection, of the date of 1506 : (sign. d iiij, rev.) executed by
Hopyl at the expense of Vostre.
50 SECOND DAY.
the extremes ofhuman art. * I remarked that some ofthese
representations were allegorical . Take the two following ;
and observe how they are meant to call your attention to
all the circumstances of ignominy and cruelty which marked
the sufferings ofChrist. Prints of this character are very
common in old books of devotion ; but I think few, if any,
are more circumstantial than what is here represented—
Ο
the extremes of human art. ] The above subject is taken from an edition of
the Hore diuine virginis Marie, secundum vsum Romanum : cum aliis multisfolio sequēti notatis, vna cum figuris Apocalypsis et destructionis Hierusalem, et multis
figuris Biblie insertis,' 8vo. At the end : Parisius, nouiter impressum opera
Germani Hardouyn, &c. See sign. C vij, recto. As the Calendar begins with
•
SECOND DAY. 51
taken from a beautiful octavo volume of Hora printed
by Kerver in 1512 ; and was preceded and succeeded by
representations still more crowded with the symbols of our
Saviour's suffering. * Nearly the same implements oftorture
(ifyou will allow the phrase) appear in all these early woodcuts; but Regnault, in the volume before mentioned, has
perhaps thrown more expression into the figure of Christas you may here behold.
the date of 1518, it is probable that the edition was printed in 1519, or 1520.
This book is executed in a roman type, which is somewhat uncommon. The
copy from which the above fac-simile was taken, is printed UPON VELLUM, and
is now in the possession of Messrs. J. and A. Arch ; from the Towneley Collection.
* more crowded with the symbols of our Saviour's suffering.] The ingenuity of
52 SECOND DAY.
Allegorical representations were indeed very favourite
subjects for the exercise of the artist's pencil. But the limits
of our discussion will not permit me to offer any thing
the early printers converted these circumstances ' into a subject for heraldic
embellishment ; and Regnault is, I believe, the first who had the hardihood to
subjoin the following Arms of the Redeemer ' to one of his devotional volumes.
I presume such a subject was familiar to the older painters, and was probably
a favourite ornament of sculpture in ancient churches. I throw this out, however,
as a mere suggestion.
REDEMPTORIS MVNDI ARMA
From this representation, our REYNES took the hint ofimpressing such a subject
upon the outside covers of the books from his press. See the Typog. Antiq. vol. iii.
p. 266.
SECOND DAY. 53
more than what is here intended to give us a notion ofthe
SEVEN SORROWS OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN. * There is some
ingenuity in the conception.
You will immediately perceive that these subjects are
made of importance, or are considered as material decorations, in the pages where they occur. I will now submit a
few further subjects connected with the Life of Christ,
At folio LXXVI of Peypus's curious manual of devotion, entitled Hortulus
Anime' (1519, 8vo. ), this subject is represented with only five swords with their
points towards the Virgin ; although the subject be De Septem Doloribus. '
54 SECOND DAY.
which are not so prominently or so pompously illustrated
in the engravings Take the two following, among innumerable similar specimens, which appear in a large folio
missal ofthe middle of the sixteenth century.
UNRI
There is great simplicity in the first, and great spirit in
the second, of these : nor am I prepared to mention the
extent of obligation, binding upon many subsequent artists
of deservedly high reputation, for the valuable hints which
SECOND DAY. 55
various of these early pieces may have afforded them. At
any rate, the merit of putting the crosses of the thieves
transversely, is due, as much to the artist who designed the
bottom print, as to Rubens, in his magnificent picture of
the same subject. * A smaller volume of devotion, adapted
to expositions of the Gospels for the several Sundays
throughout the year, and printed, as I conceive, nearly at
the same time with the foregoing missal, presents us with
the following well executed representation of the Cleansing
of the Lepers.+
Of a similar character, and taken from Osiander's Harmony ofthe Gospels, of about the same date, are the two
very interesting specimens which here follow. I need hardly
you that the subject of the first is meant to represent our
Saviour's dividing the bad from the good, at the latter day,
tell
See Typog. Antiq. vol. i. p. 195 ; vol. ii . p. 79.
+ I cannot suffer the curious reader to take leave of the above interesting
manual of devotion, without making him acquainted with a beautiful cut, on a separate leaf, (in mycopy of it) which evidently belongs to the same volume. Perhaps
VOL. I. E
56 SECOND DAY.
"
6
as a shepherd divides the goats from the sheep.' The second
is a representation of the wicked servant,' who would not
forgive his fellow servant as he had been forgiven by his
master.
the subjoined initials may imply those of the name of the printer of the book,
rather than ofthe artist who engraved the cuts. I do not remember to have ever
seen our Saviour in gremio Patris ' thus represented in any other publication.
There is both delicacy and richness in the execution of it.
SECOND DAY. 57
If I were to touch upon the various Manuals ofDevotion, exhibiting curious or interesting cuts of favourite
Saints and Martyrs, there would be scarcely any limits to
the discussion. Let me however notice an octavo volume,
printed by Peypus at Nuremberg, in 1519, at the cost and
charges of that gallant ancient typographer, Koberger, and
called 'Hortulus Anime,' or ' the Little Garden ofthe Soulwhich merits attention and commendation.
At fol. cxiii, reverse, of this interesting volume, the well
known story in the
life of St. Francis of
his receiving the stigmata, or five wounds
of our Lord, is thus
whimsically delineated ; and although
the figures ofthe Saint
and his companion be
both well drawn, yet
the whole forms what
may be considered
rather a burlesque of
58 SECOND DAY.
the sublime style displayed, in representations of the same
subject, by some of the great masters of Italy.
Observe with what energy the favourite subject of St.
Christopher is here represented : although the infant Saviour
is rarely made to exhibit such marks of impatience.
That everlasting subject, the painting of the Virgin by
St. Luke, is thus executed in the same curious manual. It
must be allowed that both the conception and execution ofit
are sufficiently homely ; but I make no doubt that the
figure here intended for St. Luke was drawn from the life.
SECOND DAY. 59
Upon the whole, there is a natural air about it not altogether
unpleasing. Lysander
and Lisardo may consult the bibliographical
pages of Lambecius,
Bandini, and Montfaucon, while Almansa
and Belinda will be
content to examine the
first volume of Doctor
Clarke'sTravels; where
the same subject is
more than once represented.
At fol. CVII. is the following graceful, but rather feminine
figure of St. Stephen the Martyr. You observe that the
implements of his destruction are carried in his lap.
60 SECOND DAY.
As our old friend Caxton printed the Life of St. Catherine
ofSenis, let us not object to turn our eyes, for one moment,
towards that studious Dame; who is here decorated in rather
a courtly style. *
* decorated in rather a courtly style. ] The verses subjoined to the representation
may amuse the monastic antiquary. They are printed prose-wise in the original.
De Sancta Catherina virgine et martyre.
Gaude virgo Catherina :
quam refecit lux diuina :
ter quaternis noctibus.
Gaude quod tua doctrina :
Philosophos a ruina :
traxit et erroribus.
Gaude quia meruisti :
confortari voce Christi :
per preces diuinitus.
Gaude quia conuertisti :
sponsam regis et vidisti :
rotas fractas celitus.
Gaude serto coronata :
et in Sina venerata :
olei stillamine.
Esto nobis aduocata :
apud deum virgo grata
in nostro certamine.
Ame. Ora, &c.
Fol. cxxIIII.
Myfriend Mr. Ottley possesses a good sound copy of this interesting little
volume ; which is described by Bartsch in his Peintre Graveur, vol. vii. p. 323 ;
and in which HANS SPRINGINKLEE is justly said to be the engraver of those cuts
bearing the above initials, H. S. K.
SECOND DAY. 61
The foregoing are all taken from engravings introduced
in the body ofthe text. Let me now shew you a few which
are worked within the borders. The ensuing are of the
date of 1498, and represent in a sufficiently neat manner
the Parable of the Prodigal Son.
worked within the borders. ] The above representations are taken from the sideborders ofavolume of Heures alusaige de Rome-acheuez le xvi jour de Septem-
62 SECOND DAY.
Towards the close of the xvth century they began to
represent scriptural subjects which filled the entire side of a
page ; and this page, sometimes, of no ordinary dimensions.
Ofthese subjects, few were so popular as that of St. John in
the Cauldron ofBoiling Oil : which also frequently furnished
the title-page of a devotional volume. * I shall however only
call your attention to an elaborate representation of this
subject, which was inserted in a Missal printed by Kerver
in the year 1498 ; and of which Lord Spencer possesses a
beautiful copy printed UPON VELLUM.
bre. Lan Mil CCCC. iiii. xx. et xviii. pour Simon vostre. libraire demourant a Paris
a la rue neuue nostre dame a lymage sainct Iehan euangeliste. ' See sign. fviij,
and g i . From a copy, PRINTED UPON VELLUM, in the possession of Mr. Bell,
bookseller, of Oundle. Let me here subjoin an embellishment forming a bottom
border in a volume of Hora printed by Regnault in 1533, 4to. and repeated more
than once in the book. (Our champion St. George is also made a bottom- border
in the same volume, but it has nothing worthy of being again brought forth to
public notice. )
*furnished the title-page of a devotional volume. ] It does so in Regnault's
Hora, of the date of 1536, noticed at p. 46, ante : but the same cut had
appeared in the impression mentioned in the preceding note ; where it seems to
have suffered less from use. St. John is there in the cauldron, with a man using the
bellows, and another stirring the fire-occupying the fore-ground. Behind the
cauldron, a man is pouring the boiling oil upon the Saint. Two others, to the left,
are looking upwards-towards a large group of characters leaning over a wall,
and viewing the Martyr. These form the back- ground. A very clean impression
of this curious cut (which it has not been my good fortune yet to see) would
display a vast deal of character and expression in this group. At the bottom, in
the left corner, is the monogram B.V.: denoting the (at present unknown) name
SECOND DAY. 63
I believe there are few specimens of this subject which are
more strikingly executed.
of the engraver. The size of the cut is five inches and a half, by three and seven
eighths. Beneath, are the following English verses ; which, however, evidently
belong to a different subject :
Hovv saynt iohan dyde vvryte in vvyldernesse
The apocalyps and of tokens vvondrous.
Vvhiche in the ayre he herde and savve expresse
Vvith myracles terrybles and monstruous. Fo. j. sign. Aj.
64 SECOND DAY.
We are now to touch upon subjects of a somewhat dif
ferent, yet not greatly-unconnected, character. I mean, those
which represent important points of doctrine, or celebrated
miracles . Of the former, the following are illustrations ; and
each, as you observe, is a representation of the Trinity.
The ensuing cut occurs both in the little volume of Peypus,
and in the folio impression of Regnault, each before mentioned; with an interval of about seven years.
There is a sort of Gothic severity or simplicity about this
print which by no means displeases me. It gains in mystery
what it loses in splendor- compared with the favorite exhibition which you are now to contemplate. This, indeed,
seems to be the ne plus ultra of intricate and curious embellishment ; and was a most popular representation ofthe
glorious subject which it professed to display.
SECOND DAY. 65
te
gloriolis
apoltolom
te
Mophetana
Laud
ala
toperofbenytranny& manycandidats
Aedenalaudamus te creamypatienos
Next to the representation of the Trinity, the Assumption
of the Virgin was the darling subject for graphic embellishment : but in no exhibition ofthat subject have I yet viewed
so many sparkling accompaniments as in the one to which
your eyes must now be turned. It is full of conceit and singularity ; but nevertheless it has a pleasing and imposing air.
66 SECOND DAY.
The dotted, or stellated back-ground (give it the grandest
epithet you can !) has, you perceive, a very rich and striking
effect upon the vellum on which it is impressed. It belongs
to the same volume containing the representation of St. John
in the cauldron of boiling oil.
totapulga es
ect mate
amuca
mea
et
maaila
non
electapt
col
pulcza
vt
tunay
eCattara
wing
Porta ch
Plantano2000
Ctella maas
aut
hinum
mter
unsdamom
guacil
oluna
penoca
putaus
ga welle Cme
Blonut aquaz muentu
maala
Gong 0200200
oztus condulu autas de
Of representations of Miracles, I will direct your attention only to one ; but that one is so full, brilliant, and
successful -it shews so much of taste and of ease, both in
design and execution, that it contains a volume of intelligence within itself. It represents the miraculous appearance
ofour Saviour to St. Gregory, when at the altar ; as you
will find related in the legend of that Saint.
SECOND DAY. 67
The upper part of it is crowded with allegorical accompaniments ; similar to what you have before seen. *
0007Willlear
* similar to what you have before seen. ] Look for a few moments at p. 51,
ante ; and then, curious reader, contemplate, for twice the same number of
68 SECOND
DAY
I make no doubt you have frequently witnessed, in
Manuals of Devotion, the head of Christ represented upon
moments, the subjoined illustration of the subject above introduced. The heads
of Judas Iscariot and Pontius Pilate have not only here a very singular effect,
but are executed with great attention to propriety of character. It is rarely that
both heads appear in such a subject. Upon comparison with the preceding cut of
the same kind, the present has quite the air of the German school. Indeed the
previous one is worthy of an Italian pencil.
Oratiões dicede anteimaginepie
tatis qapparuit fetöGregorio: et de
bētdicicu leptePaternoster.ettoti
SECOND DAY. 69
the napkin, or sudarium. This napkin is sometimes supported
by St. Peter and St. Paul, but more usually by St. Veronica ;
to whose life I must refer you. The following is a very able
representation of this head, supported by the latter. *
PO0000
The preceding is taken from the volume of Peypus mentioned at page 57, ante.
The previous fac-simile (at p. 67) is taken from Missale ad Vs. Insig. Eccl .
Sarisburiensis nunc recens typis elegantioribus exaratum, &c. Parisiis Apud
Guliel. Merlin in ponte Teloneorum, ad hominis siluestris signum, e regione horologii
Palatij. 1555. Folio. The subject itself is endless in old prints and old paintings ; but I cannot help here noticing a very fine painting, by Domenichino, in the
possession of Earl Spencer, at Althorp, which represents the Head oftheVirgin
seen upon the drapery of the high altar-as if approving of the piety of the
Saint. This picture hangs at the top of the dining room of that ancient and
hospitable mansion ; and in winter is lighted by a patent lamp, placed belowoftentimes withdrawing the attention of the dilettante guest from the bounteous
prospect immediately before him!
" * Beneath, we read thus : Oratio ante faciem Christi dicenda, alias ante
70 SECOND DAY.
The present may be a fit opportunity to notice those
vulgarities, or improprieties of decoration, which seem to
have so laudably excited the indignation of Almansa. They
will afford a striking, and even risible, contrast to the
magnificent specimens you have just seen : for absurd and
unaccountable enough it is, to view the trumpery or grossness occasionally foisted into the text of many a lovely
impression of Hora! We have been all accustomed, from
early youth, to exhibitions of the Bath of Bathsheba.*
Whether in the form of a capital-initial, or as a distinct and
6
Veronicam . ' See Peypus's ‹ Hortulus Anime,' fol. xxxvII, reverse. What is here
subjoined is taken from a fragment, in my possession, and is meant to represent
St. Peter and St. Paul as supporters of the napkin.
e
The curious are, I dare say, aware of that whimsical and extraordinary print,
executed by Mellan, a French artist, which exhibits a similar head of Christ,
as large as life, entirely executed in circular lines, and upon which the engraver
commenced his task by attacking the centre of the tip of the nose. This effort
may be classed among the Nugæ operosæ '-the laborious triflings ' of human
nature. A little clean printed WEIRX is worth a huge tapestry of such heads !
* The Bath of Bathsheba. ] It would occupy a summer's week to look over the
prints, in the hundreds of Breviaries, Offices, and Hours, which contain representations ofthis popular subject ; and which differ not less in the size, than in
SECOND DAY. 71
obtrusive ornament, this fair dame is generally sure to
arrest our attention, with her royal lover in the back-ground,
the manner, of its treatment. Sometimes this fair Musidora ' is introduced in
the place of a capital initial ; but she is more generally represented within the
initial itself : as we find in the Collection of the Epistles of Erasmus, from the
press of Froben, of the date 1521. I may venture to say that there is something
ofdelicacy and prettiness in this cut.
She is not unfrequently elevated up one floor, where the bath is conveyed ; and
in that situation she is made to catch the attention of the Monarch. Mr. Douce
has various specimens in his rich cabinet of early-printed volumes of devotion,
which illustrate the subject in this point of view. Sometimes, however, (though
comparatively of rare occurence) the Bath is situated, with a proper regard to
female delicacy, in a sequestered spot ; and the water, instead of being contained
in what looks very like a wash-hand bason, is confined within a square excavation
of the ground, surrounded by marble pavement ;-thus :
VOL. I. F
72 SECOND DAY.
who is usually represented leaning over the ballustrades of
a balcony, or out ofwindow. That the fair Bathsheba should
be surrounded, while bathing, by her female attendants, is
See the Hortulus Anime, 1519, 8vo. fol. LVII, reverse. Simon Vostre, who was
fond of voluptuous ornaments, and loved a certain joyous air ' to be diffused over
his books, has surrounded the fair Bathsheba with female attendants holding
fruits, perfumed water, and a mirror. There is a sort of oriental luxury about
the following representation -which, however, is not free from the wash-hand
bason ' criticism.
This cut forms the lower part of a larger one (on sign. k v, reverse) of a very
beautiful octavo volume, thus entitled-in the colophon : Hore beate marie
virginis secundum vsum Trecen. totaliter ad lögum, cu multis additioibus :
Parisiis per wolffgangu hopiliu ipresse Impēsis honesti viri Simonis vostre, in vico
nouo nostre dne, ad intersigniu sancti Johanis cuangeliste comorantis, &c. 1506.'
Pro directore te rogo funde preces.' It is printed in a large handsome lowercase gothic type, with bright red introduced. Vostre's device forms the frontis-
SECOND DAY. 73
C
both natural and proper; but whimsical indeed was that artist
who designed her unbonnetted' and unclothed,' in the
act of receiving an epistle from King David by the hands of
piece. (This edition has been already noticed : see p. 49, note. ) Howsuperior is
the ensuing representation of the fair Bathsheba? taken from a small volume
ofscriptural subjects, in quarto, without date, but which we also see in Coverdale's Bible of 1535.
I have presumed (at page 69, ante) to make a small digression from engraving to
painting, respecting the subject of the Miracle of Saint Gregory-so frequently
exhibited in the ancient missals, &c. Let me here again obtain the reader's
forgiveness in making a similar digression, connected with the present subject ;
of not less general occurrence. My friend Mr. Ottley possesses a fine painting by
REMBRANDT, of this celebrated female bather, as large as life. She is sitting, crosslegged, in the act of having her feet wiped by an old female attendant, (the head
and hands of whom only appear at the bottom of the canvass, to the left) and
her eyes and her mind are intent upon the letter which she has just received
from the Monarch. The expression, conveyed in this act of meditation, is quite
extraordinary: enough to exercise the ingenuity of an ordinary compiler of PictureCatalogues, through at least three pages and a half : but I will only repeat that
this expression is quite extraordinary.' The back-ground of this powerful
picture is occupied by the rich brocade or garments of Bathsheba : enveloped
almost in darkness : while the naked figure of the bather receives a full portion
of light, and produces a fine breadth of effect. Does the retentive reader call to
mind the strange manner in which the divine Raffaelle' has treated this subject ?
as may be seen in the set of prints, from his fresco paintings, for the Bible.
6
74 SECOND DAY.
amale messenger. The fate of Actaeon should have rewarded
such ill-timed intrusion !
in
Some there are who think these loose and (to say the least)
unappropriate decorations evince the innocence of the age
which they appeared ; but I rather incline to the opinion
that, when such ornaments are introduced, they are inserted
from a kind of saucy or roguish feeling of the printer.
Undoubtedly they are at once misplaced and indefensible.
It is now necessary to remark to you, that in almost all
SECOND DAY. 75
the specimens which you have seen, and which I believe are
contained within the pages of the generality of early printed
Missals, nearly the same style of art prevails : that is, the
same manner of grouping and of design, of handling and of
finishing, and of distribution or proportion of light and
shade. You see very little outline : very little left for the
tasteful imagination to supply : very little selection of what
may be called classical. Perhaps a clumsy or over-charged
outline required a redundance, as it were, of light and shade
to conceal its defects. But such a taste was by no means
without exception ; as you will presently learn. Here then,
my friends, allow me to express my unqualified admiration
of those publications of the sacred text, adapted to the purposes of the Mass, which owe, I believe, their earliest introduction to the immortal press of the GIUNTI. The nurse
of ten thousand useful and elegant arts, the central mart of
European commerce, the city both of Jenson and of Titian,
it was reserved for Venice to give a different turn, and to
adopt a purer style, in the decorations of Missals and Breviaries . Approach, and open this magnificent folio volume ;
for which we are indebted to the spirit and enterprise of the
Giunti. It is the MISSAL OF THE VALLEY OF SHADES !
ALMANSA. What an imposing introduction -- and what a
romantic title !
PHILEMON. Not more so than is the history of the
Founder of the Ritual : * for know that, in the middle of
the history of the Founder of the Ritual. ] This singular history has been
frequently written in prose, and a part of it once in poetry. Villegas, in his Flos
Sanctorum, has not failed to notice it ; and appears to have supplied Mr. Southey
with the principal outline of a very interesting little poem entitled ' St. Gualberto :'
see the Minor Poems of Robert Southey,' vol. iii . p . 224-242. The date of this
poem is 1799. Since that period, Mr. Southey has (I dare conjecture) made
himself more particularly acquainted with the life, character, and behaviour ' of
76 SECOND DAY.
the eleventh century, lived one GIOVANNI GUALberto, a
Florentine ; ofa respectable, if not noble, family. It chanced
that, walking in his favourite solitude, near Florence, he saw
St. GUALBERTO, from the account of him in the Acta Sanctorum ; Julii,
tom. iii. p. 311-458 : 1723. Folio.
"
That account is supplied from various manuscript authorities of ancient
dates. Andreas, Abbas Strumensis,' disciple of Gualberto, who built several
monasteries, and died in a small tower which he had erected in a thick wood of
oaks and beeches, ' wrote the life of his master not long before his own decease ;
towards the end of the x1th century. A second biography of Gualberto, from
the pen of Atto, abbot of the Vallombrosa monastery, and afterwards Bishop of
Pistoia, was composed in the middle of the x11th century. Benigno Casenate,
according to Casari, wrote a life of our Saint in the middle of the xIvth century,
and a catalogue of all the abbots of the Vallombrosa monastery up to the year
1373. Andreas Jannensis, or de Sancto Ambrosio, a Benedictin monk (whom
Mabillon has strangely mistaken for Andreas, the first biographer) , wrote a more
extended life of Gualberto, with corrections, at the beginning of the xvth
century. These authorities, with the aid of Zacconius and Damiani, form the
bulk of the matter contained within the pages of the Acta Sanctorum just referred
to. I presume to give a summary of the leading particulars of this matter :'
but those who prefer walking quietly and quickly over the lawn, with Philemon,
need not partake of the wearisome journey of a partly-latinised, and somewhat
lengthy detail. The Spirit of THE SAINT be my succour during this journey !
And first, of the family of Gualberto : living in the middle of the x1th century.
That family, we are told, was a noble one. His mother's name was Willa, or
Camilla : but a doubt is expressed whether the name of his father was WALBERTO
or GUALBERTO. Be it either. The one is readily linked to the other by a
' quasi ' or ' scilicet . ' Secondly, of the murdered man : whether he were the
brother, the father, or one of the neighbours, of Gualberto ? Vir quidam, ut
dicitur, potentiorem se hominem interfecit, à cujus etiam filio, more seculi, non
legibus Evangelii, multas bellorum molestias pertulit : Paterni scilicet ultor
interitus, & strages anhelabat hominum, & frequentium reportabat manubias
rapinarum. Inter has igitur homicida deprehensus angustias, imperiale decrevit
adire fastigium, si quod forte tot calamitatibus posset reperire solatium. Quo
comperto paterni sanguinis ultor insequitur, sive ut repente gladiis opprimat,
impiger comitatur. In Teutonicis vero artibus tunc Imperator agebat.' Upon
this statement, I shall only observe that Andreas, the most ancient biographer of
the Saint, says it was a neighbour ' Ludovicus Zacconius (who wrote an
abridgment of the Lives of the Saints, in Italian, 1612, 4to. ) thought it was the
father.' But I concur strongly with the first venerable authority ; and disbelieve
the murdered man to have been the father. Fourthly, whether the assassin and
Gualberto were each aided by a set of friends ? Let us again listen to the solemn
SECOND DAY. 77
a contest between two men ; which, on his nearer approach,
proved to be his brother yielding to the superiority of an
antagonist who had inflicted upon him a mortal wound.
Gualberto vowed revenge. In a few days (having properly
armed himself, and having resolved to explore the most
narrative of the Latin historian : premising, however, that ancient Andreas
(p. 342) says, that both Gualberto and the assassin were alone : and that the
latter threw himself from his horse, upon the ground, in the posture below
described. Cum itaque procedens modeste, quasi securus incederet, subsequens
autem celerius properaret, tandem contigit, ut sibimet invicem propinquantes, in
mutuos uterque duceretur aspectus. Sed cum is, qui homicidii reus erat, vix
quatuor vel quinque comitum fulciretur auxilio ; interfecti vero filius triginta
ferme cingeretur obsequiis armatorum, quaternionem suum cohortatur, ut fugiat.
Ille se conspiciens de persequentium manibus avolare non posse, animæ patroci
nium petiit, ad humilitatis umbraculum confugium fecit. Projectis igitur armis,
brachiis etiam in modum crucis extensis, solo prosternitur, et vel miserantium
veniam, vel ictus ferientium præstolatur. At ille jam victor ad reverentiam crucis
manum reprimendo compescuit, ultro etiam, ne ab aliquo feriretur, inhibuit.
Postremo pacem integram faciens, ad honorem sanctæ vivificæ Crucis non modo
vitam, sed et paternæ necis donavit offensam.' Let us now recreate ourselves
with Mr. Southey's description of this dramatic scene.
Troubled at heart, almost he felt a hope
That yet some chance his victim might delay :
So as he mused, adown the neighbouring slope
He saw a lonely traveller on his way ;
And now he knows the man so much abhorr'd, ...
His holier thoughts are gone, he bares the murderous sword.
The house of Valdespesa gives the blow !
" Go, and our vengeance to our kinsman tell !"
Despair and terror seized the unarm'd foe,
And prostrate at the young man's knees he fell,
And stopt his hand and cried, " Oh, do not take
Awretched sinner's life ! mercy for Jesus sake !"
At that most blessed name, as at a spell,
Conscience, the God within him, smote his heart.
His hand, for murder rais'd , uuharming fell ;
He felt cold sweat-drops on his forehead start ;
Amoment mute in holy horror stood,
Then cried, " Joy, joy, my God ! I have not shed his blood !"
78 SECOND DAY.
likely places where the murderer might lurk) he met the
assassin of his brother. Some say that they had each a
number of followers, and that the combat threatened to be
He raised Anselmo up, and bade him live,
And bless, for both preserv'd, that holy name ;
And pray'd the astonish'd foeman to forgive
The bloody purpose led by which he came ;
Then to the neighbouring church he sped away,
His over-burden'd soul before his God to lay.
"
We will now attend to the narrative ; chiefly supplied by Damiani. The
astonished Gualberto hastens to the first place of worship which presents itself.
Sed mox, ut ecclesiam oraturus ingreditur, res mira nimiumque stupenda !
Salvatoris Imago, quæ in cruce videbatur expressa, TRIBUS EUM VICIBUS INCLINATO CAPITE VISA EST SALUTARE ! Here the crucifix, which was of wood, is
said to have THRICE NODDED THE HEAD towards Gualberto ! -It is right
however to observe, that Damiani , who gives the story in the Acta Sanctorum, is
treated, bythe authors of that work, as being rather a gossippiug old gentleman ;
and the redoubted Bellarmin is referred to, by them, as proving that he wrote
other things which resemble rather fables than historic truth. ' What is worthy
of especial remark, the authors or rather editors of the Acta Sanctorum ( rudis
indigestaque moles ' ! ) observe that Damiani seems to have written this history of
Gualberto from common report'- ' quæ multum crescit et mutatur eundo ; ut
quotidiana nos docet experientia. ' One would imagine that the critical historian,
who reasoned thus, would at least have made some scruple of digesting the
miracle of the motion of the head of the crucifix ; but in the following passage
the reader will not fail to discover a very whimsical, or very obsequious, logic.
' Cum in tot aliis narrationibus id sibi contigisse fateatur Petrus Damiani, idem in
hâc Crucifixi historia ipsi evenisse non injuria suspicor. Ut ut est, ego Crucifixi
sese inclinantis miraculum S. Joanni Gualberto accidisse historica fide credo,
atque istud in dubium revocare summæ pervicaciæ, ne dicam dementiæ, esse
existimo. ' There is something very accommodating in what follows : Quid enim
historice tandem certum erit ? si omnibus historicis , atque etiam vetustissimis,
synchronis aut subæqualibus factum aliquod narrantibus, de eo dubitare liceat.
Intolerabilis sane est hæc mentis pertinacia, quam quidem nostri temporis
Aristarchi, ac præsertim heterodoxi, prudentiam aut constantiam vocare non
erubescunt. ' p. 314. A catholic writer (Legendarius Gallus) of better discernment, and of tolerable plain sense, who has written a minute life of Gualberto,
thinks that the Saint, from intense feeling and unremitting contemplation of the
crucifix, fancied that he saw it move : in other words, that the motion was the
effect of the imagination only. The Bollandists (or editors ofthe ' Acta Sanctorum')
who find liberal fault with Zacconius for his constant inclination to the marvellous
and hyperbolical, are yet, with a suppleness of reasoning, peculiarly their own,
SECOND DAY. 79
deadly. Be this as it may: a sudden terror possessed the
murderer : he fled, and was overtaken by Gualberto, whose
falchion was about to be brandished over his head, when the
pleased to say of this last-mentioned authority—' Hæc tamen additamenta miraculi veritatem non negant, sed potius confirmant, quamvis per hyperbolem
maxime reprehendendam ! ''
"
In the next place let us hear of the result of this miracle, and of the conversion
of the Saint to monachism. It is Damiani who tells the story. Gualberto now
began to conceive within himself a hatred of the world and of worldly honours,
and to divest himself entirely of its wealth, and anxiously to meditate upon the
future glory of the just-the punishment of the unjust-aud how vain it was to
trust in the frailty of human existence, but rather to devote onesself to the concerns of eternity. Thus meditating, and pursuing his journey, Gualberto approached the city [of Florence] ; when addressing his squire, or companion, he
said, go to the Inn where we are accustomed to stop, and quickly get ready
what may be needful for ourselves and our horses.' His companion did as he was
desired. But Gualberto, ' the servant ofthe Lord,' directing his course or journey
from the spot he had intended to visit-and filled by the divine spirit-came
directly to the monastery of St. Miniati. The abbot receives him courteously,
enquires his wants and wishes -hears of the Miracle of the Cross-and advises
him to relinquish the world and all its pomps and vanities. Seeing his youth
however, and wishing to prove his constancy, he describes the severities of the
monastic life. Gualberto is unshaken in his resolution to comply with the Abbot's
wishes. Meanwhile, the servant, at the inn at Florence, finding his master not
return, goes to the father of Gualberto, and relates every thing that had happened. The father rushes out of doors-enquires of every body--and goes every
where at length he hears of his son in the monastery, and demands him of the
abbot. The abbot tells Gualberto of the arrival of his father, and of his earnestness to have an interview with him. The Saint, on the other hand, entreats the
abbot to go and pacify his father ; who, by this time, had become furious➡
threatening to demolish the monastery. The abbot prevails upon the father to
enter, and visit his son. Meanwhile, Gualberto had put on the monastic
garment, had shaved his head, and, with his eyes intent upon an opened volume,
was slowly approaching the altar. At this moment the father breaks in upon his
retirement-finds his son perfectly tranquilised and composed-while, on the
contrary, himself, and the suite who attend him, begin to beat their breasts, to
tear their hair and their garments, and prostrating themselves upon the ground,
to call upon the name of Christ with loud and frequent ejaculations.' The father
at length becomes composed ; and giving the son his blessing, he departs.
Gualberto now continues his melancholy journey, with one Ubertus (' callidus
et ingeniosus monachus ') and arrives at the famous monastery of Camaldolo,
founded but a few years before ; where the prior tells him to persevere in his
80 SECOND DAY.
former threw himself in a supplicatory attitude : extended
his arms, bent forward his head and body, and implored pity
and forgiveness. An equally sudden impulse possessed
Gualberto. He returned his glittering falchion into its
sheath, unstained by the blood of the murderer-and passed
on: whether to Florence, or to a neighbouring town, I know
not : but on entering the first church in the place, his eyes
were fixed upon a wooden crucifix, which, on intensely
contemplating, was seen to move downwards its head, and to
extend its arms, and to remind him of the attitude of the
man whose life he had so heroically spared ! What would
you more? Are not events like these sufficient to make both
good resolutions, and to establish an order according to the rules of St. Benedict.
Gualberto reaches the neighbouring recesses of Vallombrosa ; situated, like the
spot he had just left, in a romantic country, in the Appenine hills, and about half
a day's journey (or six leagues) from Florence. Milton alludes to
-Vallombrosa, where the Etrurian Shades,
High over-arch'd, imbower.
Par. Lost, b. 1. v. 303, Todd's Edition, vol. ii . p. 320.
The solitude chosen by Gualberto was indeed not less appropriate than that of
Camaldoli. Perusinus says the place was called IMBROSA, on account of the
frequent showers or rains which fell in the valley ; but that author is better
pleased with the word UMBROSA- ' on account of the trees and shades which
prevailed there.' p. 345. The place is watered by the river or torrent Vicano,
which visits it between two chains of mountains. Here then (and as the last section
of this tremendous note ) did Giovanni Gualberto resolve to fix his staff in the
earth, to build the walls of his monastery, and to establish the discipline of his own
particular order. His rules partook of the severity of his dress. His clothes were
of the coarsest woollen stuff, and the rebel-flesh was to be subdued by a belt
studded with small spikes. And because (I ween) the moon rarely gained the
ascendancy of the surrounding hills, so as to lighten up the monastery with her
silvery beams, an everlasting lamp was ordained to burn in the dormitory.
Gualberto found this order of things ' so conducive to health and spirits, that he
reached his 88th year ; and if any faith may be attached to his portrait, and
hand-writing, as given in the volume from which the foregoing information has
been derived, he appears to have been a very comely Saint, and to have written
a tolerably legible hand. A. Maria Rivola, a priest of the Vallombrosa Order,
hath written much and learnedly upon the relics and austerities of this Saint.
Ofthe wonders performed by him, peruse the Bollandistic pages.
SECOND DAY. 81
proselytes and founders ? Gualberto forsook his home ;
entered a monastery, to which, however, he was pursued by
his father, but from which no entreaty could prevail upon
him to depart. Here the worthy Abbot directed him in his
future religious course of life ; and inspired by no common
enthusiasm, he approached a spot, which, from its seclusion,
its mountainous neighbourhood, andmore from the immensity
of the surrounding woods, has long been called the VALLEY
OF SHADES There Gualberto built his monastery; there he.
composed his Ritual ; and hence the VALLOMBROSA MISSAL
takes its name. Enough ! Let Lysander and Lisardo explore the pages of that inexhaustible repertory of fiction and
truth, of absurdity and information, the ACTA SANCTORUM ; *
*
* that inexhaustible repertory offiction and truth, of absurdity and information,
the ACTA SANCTORUM.] This stupendous work, which can hardly be said to be complete, as far as it goes, under 55 volumes-is yet UNFINISHED. Even 55
volumes, and yet an imperfect work ! It consists of the lives of the Saints which
are contained in the Calendar of the Roman Catholic Ritual ; beginning, of
course, with the month of January, and proceeding to the end of the year ;
but at present not extending beyond the 14th day of October : and as these
fourteen days afford materials sufficient to fill six ponderous folios, the reader may
judge of the probable extent of the work, when it shall have reached the last day
of December ! I had meditated a complete bibliographical description of these
Saintly Acts,' (as De Bure is rather unsatisfactory, and Brunet is necessarily
concise) and had intended to give a list ofthe Saints ; but when I found the first
15 days of January (which occupy the first volume) to comprise biographies,
fuller or shorter, of not fewer than five hundred and eighty-two Saints—the design
appalled me !—and the spirit both of RoswEYD and of BOLLANDUS seemed to
rise up before me, and forbid, with an angry look, the execution of such a task !
I made my escape with equal promptitude and gladness.
"
The Yet the reader ought to know something about these bulky tomes.
'nucleus' of the work was first formed in the enthusiastic brain of one HERBERT
ROSWEYD, as we should call him in the vernacular tongue of Great Britain. The
projector of it must have been many years in thinking upon, and procuring, his
materials, as well as in digesting his plan ; as he died at the age of 60, without
having achieved one stitch ' of the text. His death should prove a warning to
Bibliomaniacs. A cargo of books, expressly consigned to him, for the purpose
of furthering or completing his great plan, was shipped on board a leaky vessel.
(
82 SECOND DAY.
·
projected by Rosweyd, and undertaken and continued by
Father Bollandus and other learned Benedictins. Let them
explore those wondrous pages of far-fetched and most curious
Rosweyd had not the patience to suffer these books to be well aired and dried,
before he began to rummage for his beloved treasures. Anoxious humidity, or
infectious vapour, was engendered, and the Father of the Acta Sanctorum' fell
a victim to his bibliomaniacal intrepidity. His design was taken up by John
Bollandus, and in the year 1643, appeared at Antwerp, the first volume ofthis
stupendous work ; which,
-
like streams, enlarging as they flow,
•
continued progressively to arrest the public attention till the year 1794 ; when
I suppose the volcanic effects of the French revolution broke up the channels of
its direction. Since then it has received no additional aid, and no bookseller
appears to have had the inclination , or the courage, to bring it to a close. Those,
however, who imagine that these volumes contain little more than fables and
falsehood, ' are much mistaken. They present us with the fruits of much valuable
research. Hundreds, perhaps thousands of MSS. which were fast rotting away,
or were becoming victims to rats, even more numerous and ravenous than those
which attacked Bishop Hatto in his tower upon the Rhine, (see a comical woodcut of this incident in Sebastian Munster's Cosmography, 1553, folio, page 549,
and the tale told in very descriptive verse by Mr. Southey, in his Minor Poems,
vol. iii. p. 66)—these treasures, but for the perseverance and learning of the
Benedictin Editors, would have irretrievably perished ; and, in consequence,
much light have been withheld from some of the more curious and interesting
features of the history of our own country. But-for the readers and lovers of
ROMANCE. of incidents grave, terrible, strange, unheard of, or even sublime
and beautiful,' (see an article upon the Spanish Inquisition ' in the Quarterly
Review for December, 1811 , ) there is no work to be compared with that entitled
ACTA SANCTORUM.' The very preface of the first volume prepares us for
something ' piquant.' At p . xix , Bollandus defends the Legenda Aurea, or
Historia Lombardica ; and mentions Molanus's commendation of the fuller edition
of it at Cologne in 1483, and of his own copy of it printed at Louvain in 1485 :
p. xx. Ofthe Breviaries used by him, he speaks of the Roman one of 1479, of
the Salisbury Breviary of 1499, and the summer part of that work of the date of
1557. He uses also a Breviary for Ireland, of the date of 1620 : see page liij,
&c. But, if the preface of this work bespeak no ordinary entertainment to be
derived from the text of it, what shall we say to the disquisition, at the very
threshhold of the work itself, entitled Commemoratio Sacrosancti Praputii
Christi Antverpiæ, et alibi ? ' Our old friend Jacobus de Voragine ( Legend. Aurea.
in festo Circumcisionis ' ) has informed us that this extraordinary relic was
conveyed by an angel to Charlemagne, who deposited it in the Church of St.
Maria, Aix-la- Chapelle ; but that he afterwards placed it in the church of Christ
at Carosium. It is now said to be in the church of All Saints at Rome: yet
SECOND DAY. 83
intelligence, for other similar tales of monastic life : return
we to the beautiful book which has caused this romantic
digression. You observe that it is printed quite at the commencement of the sixteenth century. The amplitude of the
page, the size and variety of the types, the lustre of the inks,
the tone and substance of the vellum, but above all, the
pure arabesque taste of the decorations-to say nothing of
the rarity and curiosity of the impression-all combine to
render this volume an acquisition extremely precious to the
Collector. Ifever the magical art of printing was calculated
to produce enthusiastic sensations, such sensations cannot fail
to be felt on a careful examination of this book. *
Bollandus, in imitation of the non satis constat ' of Franciscus Suares, very
prudently concludes- melius est tamen Deo totum committere, quàm aliquid
temerè definire.'
"
It remains only to observe, that to have a complete copy of such a treasure, we
must note well that January have 2 vols.: February, 3 : March, 3 : April, 3 :
May, 8, (including the volume entitled Propilæum ad Acta Sanctorum Maii'—
which contains supplements to the 1st, 4th, and 5th volumes of the same month,
or these supplements may be found with the respective volumes to which they
belong, and then May will contain only 7 volumes) June, 7 : July, 7 : August, 6:
September, 8: October, 6 : in the whole, 53 volumes. To these, add Martyrologium Usuardi, Antv. 1714, ' folio : and Acta Sancta Bollandina, upologeticis
libris, vindicata, Antv. 1755,' folio. This work was reprinted at Venice in 1734,
and continued in 42 volumes, as far as the 15th of September ; but this reimpression is comparatively of diminutive value. Consult the Manuel du Libraire,
vol. i. p. 193, edit. 1814 ; where the controversial pieces attached to the work
are noticed. In the Antwerp edition , there are portraits of many of the coadjutors in the work of men, who, from their physiognomies, appear to have
delighted in the dark and devious track' in which the nature of their labours
compelled them to walk : of men, upon whose shrunken flesh ' the light of the
lamp seems stubbornly to have contended with the increasing rays of Aurora.
Rest their ashes in peace ! —and let the bibliographical devotee pause with delight
upon the complete set of their labours which ennobles the shelves of the ALTHORP
LIBRARY.
"
A careful examination of this book. ] This impression is the more worthy of
bibliographical notice, as it appears to be THE FIRST of the VALLOMBROSA
RITUAL, and to have escaped both Bandini and Panzer. Brunet briefly mentions
the very copy under description ; which is printed upon vellum, with the cuts "
84 SECOND DAY.
Equal beauty and equal skill were evinced by the Giunti
in their smaller productions of this kind. The lovely little
coloured.' Manuel du Libraire ; vol. ii. p. 368. I presume this impression to be
the first, from internal evidence : as the editor of it, Petrus Albignanus, in his
prefatory epistle to Blasius Franciscus Melanensis, Vicar General of the Vallombrosa Order,' expressly says hic preciarus liber qui antea incompositus et
corruptus.' It appears rather singular that Laurentius Romuleus had not the
editorship of this work, as he was professor of rhetoric in the Vallombrosa
monastery, and exercised the office of editor for Lucas Antonius Junta in many
publications. In the preface to the Rhetorics of Cicero, 1508, he describes
himself as having lived for five years, ' quietis Vallis umbrosa recessibus. ' Annal.
Junt. pt. i. p. 129. The volume under description has a fine title-page of a
wood-cut of Gualberto, treading upon a demon ; having beneath Missale measticù fɔm ɔsuetudine ordinis Vallisumbrose ,' in large lower-case letters, with the
device ofthe printer, the fleur de lis. This title, and the device, are in red ; but
the wood-cut is executed in black ink. The preface, before mentioned, follows
on the reverse ; in which thirteen ample and rich monasteries are said to be
devoted to this order. ' It bears the date of December, M.ccccc.iij . A Calendar
of6 leaves, not numbered, follows. Then a leaf, entitled Littere dominicales. '
Another leaf, of similar matter, follows : a third leaf, of Tables, ensues. Next,
four leaves, with musical notes : on the reverse of the 4th of which is a wood- cut
of the arms of the Order, encircled by one of those magnificent borders which
give so rich an appearance to the volume. The whole of this embellishment, of
the entire size of the leaf, is here uncoloured ; a piece of good fortune which I
regret does not again occur (in the larger embellishments) throughout the copy.
The recto of the ensuing leaf, (considered to be numbered as folio 1 , on sign. aj)
presents us with a second title, similar to the preceding, and the commencement
of the text, surrounded by a border of equal magnificence. The bottom compartment, which illustrates the rencontre of St. Gualberto and the assassin (see
page 77, ante, ) shall speak for itself in the following fac- simile of it :
CRVCIS
AMOREPARCIT
SIBI
GRATES
EGIT
CAPIT
CRVX INIMICO
PROOVO
IOANNE
VALBERT
SECOND DAY. 85
volume of Offices which I now hold in my hand-which was
considered as too delicate, or liable to be lost, among its
bulkier brethren in the caravan, and which has therefore
The leaves are now regularly numbered, with signatures, to the end of the
volume : when, on the recto of Fol. x. we observe a third similar large embellishment ; having a bottom-compartment descriptive of the second leading event
in the life of the Founder of this Ritual ; namely, his conversion to monachism,
thus:
AB ARA
SVMPSIT
VESITYSA
PATRE
HABITVM
The third leading event in the life of the Saint- his establishment of the
Vallombrosa Order-is thus delineated, on the reverse of fol. ccxII.
INSTITVIT MONASTERIVMET
ORDINEM VALLIS VMBROSAE
Owingtothe heavy colouring of these cuts, the artist who executed the fac- similes
has not had an opportunity of shewing the complete fidelity of his imitation,
86 SECOND DAY.
accompanied me in a side carriage-pocket-this lovely little
volume, as you will immediately see and confess, is worthy
of all the admiration you can bestow upon it.
of minor magnitude, * but of equal lustre with
which our eyes have just been so dazzlingly fixed.
It is a star
the one on
The running titles, capital initials , and other similar ornaments, partake of
that chastity of design which distinguishes the preceding specimens. The smaller
ornaments are luckily uncoloured ; and most of these are in pure arabesque taste.
The text, in double columns, is a large lower- case gothic type ; such as we see in
the Mozarabic and other Missals of that period. The vellum is in general white
and pure ; and the red and black inks have an unusually splendid effect. The
colophon (in red) is in the second column on the reverse of the cccd and last
leaf. It informs us that the work was executed at the cost of the forementioned
' Vicar General,' and printed by Lucas Antonius de Giunta, a Florentine, with
the greatest diligence, at Venice, in the year of our Lord Mccccc.iij. ' pridie
nonas Decembris. ' The copy, from which the foregoing description has been
taken, was obtained by me from Messrs. Robinsons of Leeds, for my neighbour
and friend Mr. Kendal ; at a price proportioned to its extreme rarity and worth.
It is in old red morocco binding, and has been rather mercilessly treated, in the
top margin, by some half-instructed book- binder.
•
"
a star of minor magnitude. ] My friend Mr. Douce is fortunate enough to
have his book- hemisphere illumined by the rays of this ' minor star ;' and it is
from his copy that the ensuing account is taken. The title at length (without
contractions) is given by Bandini ; and that lukewarm bibliographer has just
energy enough to say of it: Singulæ paginæ figuris in ligno eleganter incisis ex
utraque parte exornantur.' Annal. Juntar. pt. i. p. 8. It is an octavo volume of
Offices after the Use of the Romish Church,' of the date of 1505. Beneath this
title is the fleur de lis, with the printer's initials ; both in red. The type throughout the volume exhibits three founts of letter, each gothic ; and the larger is of
that full face, or round and legible form, which renders it equally favourable to
the effect of the printer's skill, and to the reader's comfort. The red and black
inks seem to vie with each other for the mastery. The vellum may be said to be
perfect candidissima pergamena -as Bandini remarks of a copy in a private
collection . The ornaments, in square borders, round each page, are of the same
school of art as those in the Missal just described. Of these ornaments the
bottom ones are larger, and of preferable execution ; the female figures being
somewhat similar to those in the Poliphilo of 1499. There are large cuts, which
fill an entire page ; but these are by an inferior artist. The signatures have a
peculiarity in being placed at top of the right hand border. This impression
contains, in the whole, 190 leaves : Impressum Venetijs : impensis nobilis viri
Lacantonij degiunta Floretini. Ann. &c. M.CCCCCV. vI. Kal. Julij.' Mr. Douce has
most justly regarded this book ' as an unrivalled piece of elegant typography.'
SECOND DAY. 87
While upon the subject of deviations from the older, and
what is sometimes called the gothic, style of art, discoverable
in the Missals published about three centuries ago, let me
request your particular attention to the singularity of some of
the decorations from the press of GODAR. His border-embellishments are novel and magnificent. That man had a brave
spirit * who could thus venture upon such a profusion of
6
"
The library of the same distinguished Collector has supplied me with the information that the preceding Missal, in the character of its type, in the setting
up of the page, in the borders, ornamental initials, and splendour of the inks,
appears to have been closely imitated by Bernardinus Stagninus de monte
ferrato '—in a beautiful volume entitled Officio e ordinato tutti gli officij chadauno
officio : & tutte le sue hore ' &c. printed in 1511 , 8vo, with the device of the
printer. The larger cuts however are here much better executed-resembling
those in the Poliphilo as to design, and are shaded with considerable artist-like
effect. The cut of the miraculous conception has the mark ia ; supposed to be
the initials ofJohn Andrea . Mr. Douce possesses a book of figures from the Old
Testament, in which both the cuts and text are impressed from blocks of
wood ; and from the colophon of which it should seem that this Andrea was the
artist who executed the work : Opera di Giouaniandrea Vauassore ditto
Vadagnino Stampata nouamete nella inclita citta di Vinegia:'-without date, in
octavo. But my friend Mr. Ottley's book will give satisfactory information about
these mysterious initials ; and I find I am travelling dehors the record.'
"
That man had a brave spirit . ] When I begin by remarking that GODARD
spelt his name both with, and without, the final d, it is to be understood that
neither the insertion nor the omission of this final letter has any thing to do
with the brave spirit ' of GUILLUAME GODAR. So prepare, gentle reader, for
other proofs of this printer's bravery.' I must again entrench myself among the
Hora and Officia of the collection just mentioned : where there is a curious
volume entitled Heures a lusaige de Rome toutes au lög sās reqrir : nouuellemēt
iprimees a Paris pour Guillaume godard demourant sur le pont au change.' Above
this title is the imposing device of the printer : being his initials, GG. upon a
shield, suspended to a tree, and supported by two stags, with long horns. The
volume is without date. It has ornamented borders, of a rustic character, with
figures large and coarse, within angular or oval frames. At the end is some old
French poetry, concluding with this cunning ' advice :
Laus deo.
Oy, voy, porles poy
Si tu parles, garde toy
De qui tu parles & quoy.
The two last leaves present us with something like the brave spirit ' of Godard.
VOL. I. G
88 SECOND DAY.
ornament ; and he is among the very earliest to whom we
are indebted for what may be called a Sister Death-Dance :
I mean, the DANCE OF MACHABRE : a dance, hardly less
popular than the one of which we have before made such
particular mention. Succeeding artists delighted to exhibit
this dance; but among such future exhibitions or impressions
of it, none display equal taste with what we observe in the
edition put forth by NICOLAS LE ROUGE. * Fail not to
They contain treble columns of text, with figures of Saints above, and invocations or prayers beneath. Mr. Douce's copy of this curious book, upon paper,
is in fine genuine condition ; protected by that good old ' stamped binding, in
calf, which marks what collectors call an unsophisticated copy.'
"
6
I shall now adduce more decisive demonstrations of the brave spirit' of
Guillaume Godar. In the same precious cabinet, in which the volume just
described reposes, is a magnificent and elaborate Missal, in large 8vo. containing
treble rows of ornament, and having, among others, whole- length astrological
figures- usually given in half-lengths ; and, in the bottom compartments, some
very interesting embellishments. At the beginning of this desirable book is the
announce of the DANCE OF MACHABRE ; which is preceded by ‹ les figures de la
vie de l'homme et les douze sibiles.' At the end we read : Imprimees pour
Guillaume godar Libraire demourant a Paris sur le pont au change deuant lorloge
du palays alenseigne de l'homme sauvage.' Without date. The vellum, upon the
whole, is second rate.
* The edition put forth by Nicolas Le Rouge. ] Before we speak of this rare and
beautiful edition, it may be as well to observe that the DANCE OF MACABer, or
MACHABRE, was an ancient pageant, or religious entertainment, in which all ranks
and conditions of life were personated and mixed together in a general dance, and
in the course of which every one in his turn vanished from the scene, to shew that
none were exempted from the stroke of death. This dance was performed in the
churches, and can be traced back as far as the year 1424. (Gloss. Carpentier,
vol. ii. p. 1103). It was called the Dance of Macaber, from a German poet of
that name, who first composed some verses under the same title. Fabricius
thinks the poem more ancient than the paintings ; and observes that one
Trecacius first translated the German into Latin verse, about the year 1460.
Goldastus republished this Latin version at the end of Rodericus Zamorensis'
Speculum Humanæ Salvationis, at Hanover, in 1613, 4to ; and Fabricius is
earnest in the recommendation of a pleasant work, upon the original subject,
published by his friend Hischerus, at Dresden, in 1705, 8vo : the title of which
(beginning with these frightful words—' Beschreibung des so genanntem TodtenTanzes ') is subjoined to the last and best edition of the Bibl. Med, et Inf. Ætat.
SECOND DAY. 89
seize with avidity upon this rare and precious volume,
whenever it meets your eye.
I am not aware of any thing particularly characteristic of
the devotional volumes published by VERARD, EUstace,
VOSTRE, PIGOUCHET, HARDOUYN, and other celebrated
vol. v. p. i. edit. 1754. There are numerous ancient and modern editions of
Latin, French, and English versions of this popular dance ; and our SHEPHERD'S
KALENDAR (see Typog. Antiq. vol. ii . p. 526) has been among the earliest
books, in print, which introduces it. Lydgate's partial version of it was magnificently published by Tottell in 1554, folio ; with a wood- cut representation ofthe
dance, at the end of Bochas's Fall of Princes, by the same poet : see Herbert,
vol. ii. p. 808. Dugdale, in his History of St. Paul's, gives us what was supposed
to have been the original painting of this dance, in the cloister of that Cathedral,
during the time of Lydgate ; but which was pulled down, with the adjacent
monuments and tombs, by the Duke of Somerset, in 1549. An outline-etching
of Dugdale's plate, with the version of Lydgate, are given in the elegant volume
noticed at page 37, ante : in 8vo. without date.
It is now time to notice the edition of this work by Nicolas Le Rouge, in a thin
folio volume, without date. The title is thus : La grant danse macabre des homes
et desfemes hystoriee et augmetee de beaulx ditz en latin-Le devut du corps et de
lame. La complainte de lame damnee. Exhortation de bien viure et bien mourir.
La vie du maulvais antechrist. Les quinze signes. Le iugement. Imprime a
Troyes par Nicolas le rouge demourant en la grant rue a lenseigne de Venise. Aupres
la belle croix.' The cuts are horizontally oblong ; and are evidently executed by
two different artists, at least. Those, as far as e ÿj , recto, inclusively, are neatly
and even elegantly finished : and, among them, the Constable, the Archbishop, the
Knight, the Bishop, the Schoolmaster, the Advocate, the Cordelier, the Gaolor, the
Promoter, the Clerk, the three Hawkers, the Queen and the Dutchess. Afterwards,
the common Flemish style prevails ; but the Hawkers are again introduced. The
remaining subjects are like those given in vol. ii. p. 534, in the recent edition of
our Typographical Antiquities, and are usually found in the work there described.
The colophon is a mere repetition of the title above given. Onthe reverse ofthe
last leaf is what I conceive, fromthe monogram in the background, to be a portrait
of the printer, kneeling : of which a fac-simile will be found in the FIFTH DAY
of this work. The figures are about 3 inches and a half in length, in outline : and
appear to be imitations of the same style of art which prevails in the Kalendar
of Shepherds, printed at Paris, in 1499, folio-in the British Museum. Mr.
Douce observes that there was an edition of this work by Nicole de la Barre, in
1523, 4to : with similar but comparatively indifferent cuts ; omitting some of
those in the present impression. This book was obtained by Mr. Douce from
the late Count Macarthy in exchange for another volume.
90 SECOND DAY.
typographical contemporaries ; except that they are are all pretty
nearly equally distinguished for splendor, richness, and
extreme skilfulness of execution : exhibiting almost the same
style ofart, and (wonderful to say !) such proofs of living on
good terms among themselves, that the one often printed for
the other, and borrowed the device of the other. * In short,
* the one often printed for the other, and borrowed the device of the other. ] Afew
performances, among twentythat might be mentioned, may be noticed of these printers. The earliest octavo volume of VERARD which I remember to have seen ofa
religious character, is of the date of 1489, and contains astrological figures somewhat similar to those given at page 100, post ; but in outline, and of larger dimensions. My friend Mr. Freeling has a very choice copy of this date and character.
Mr. Douce has one of 1498. The larger decorations of Verard are not in the purest
taste ofthe early Parisian school ; and his borders are not always so brilliant as are
those of his contemporaries : but I possess a beautiful specimen of his printing, in
this way, of the date of 1500, in 8vo. ' pres le carrefour saint seuerin a lymaige saint
iehan leuägeliste, ou au palays deuant la chapelle ou len chante la messe de messieurs
les presidens.' This copy is printed upon vellum of an equally excellent colour and
substance. The type is one size beyond his smallest type, the latter of which is
seen in Mr. Douce's copy.
The devotional volumes of EUSTACE are, I think, of rarer occurrence than
those of his contemporaries. The device of Eustace is borrowed by Pychore, or
Pychore's is the original of Eustace's—in a volume of Heures a lusage de Rome'
printed at Paris in 1503—' par Iehā pychore : et Remy de laistre : demourāt au
croissat en la grat rue des carmes dess' la place maubert -in the possession of
Mr. Douce. This fine book has elaborate borders, ornamental, and descriptive
of historical subjects. There is a monogram on a shield, by way of frontispiece,
which seems to represent the initials IR and C B-on each side of a cross.
The name of SIMON VOSTRE is entitled to especial respect. His Hours and
Offices are perhaps as common as any which have come down to us, but fine
specimens of his vellum books are justly appreciated by the knowing. His
ornaments are full of variety and interest. This printer and Pigouchet were
constantly borrowing the device of each other. Mr. Douce has a most interesting
devotional volume, printed by Pigouchet, with the device of Vostre, in which the
Calendar commences with the year 1502 ; having the gothic type of rather a
round appearance, like that of the Giunti. The embellishments are large, striking,
and extremely elegant ; and some of the corner compartments are not a little cu- rious and whimsical. The vellum is quite delightful ; and the cuts are, upon the
whole, both splendidly and successfully coloured. In that of the Adoration are two
shepherds ; one, with a fillet round his head, called Gobin le gay ;' the other,
with a string fastened to a dog, called Le beau roger ;' on one side is a woman,
SECOND DAY. 91
there seems to have been a complete reciprocity of interest
and of sentiment between them. Happy period ! perhaps
never to be revived among the brethren of the matrix and
of the name of alison ; ' on the other side is a woman called ' mahault.'
Mr. Douce is of opinion that these cuts are peculiar to the missals of Vostre and
Pigouchet. The same collector possesses a volume of Hora ad Us. Rom. with
Pigouchet's device, printed by Vostre, of the date of 1498 ; UPON VELLUM.
Referring to a former memorandum of this book, when it was sub oculis '—and
made on the very day in which intelligence arrived of the victory of WaterlooI find it described as one of the most beautiful and perfect copies of a book ever
seen.' That great battle bas been more than once called, the most beautiful and
perfect ' thing of its kind that ever took place. Whimsical coincidence ! Lord
Spencer possesses a beautiful volume of Hora ad Us. Paris. printed by Pigouchet
in 1491 , 8vo. (see Bibl . Spencer. vol . iv. p. 510) in which the device of MARNEF
appears on the reverse of the leaf containing the colophon ; and in which colophon
the purchasers are required to go to the Sign of the Pelican ' (Marnef's device)
for such copies as they may wish to procure.
My friend Mr. Neunberg has a volume of Hora, of the date of 1502, by
Vostre ; from which the cuts of the Games and Sports, given in the following
pages, are taken. His copy is upon paper, but it is a fine genuine book. I
possess a splendid specimen of the same printer's talents, in what may be called
a thin quarto of Heures a lusaige de Verdun toutes au long sans req[ ue]rir : avec
les figures et signes de lapocalipse ; la vie de thobie et de iudic, les accides de lhome,
le triumphe de cesar, les miracles nostre dame :' without date, but having the year
1515 as the first year of the Calendar. It is a splendid, but not wholly uninjured specimen of Vostre's talents ; and has a freshness about it as if it had just
issued from the press. There are large wooden- cuts of the dimensions of eight
inches by five ; and the latter part is profusely ornamented by an illustration of
the Dance of Death. Here is also a representation of the parable of the Prodigal
Son, and of the other subjects mentioned in the foregoing note. These Heures a
lusaige de Verdun are by no means of common occurrence.
The device of PIGOUCHET appears in some of the devotional volumes printed
by POITEVIN. It is precisely similar, except that the initials IP (for Jehan
Poitevin) are placed in the centre of the tree instead of those of Philip Pigouchet,
There is a volume of Heures a lusaige de Rome, &c. of the date 1498, 8vo. upon
vellum, in the Auctarium of the Bodleian Library, in which this peculiarity
appears; and, if my memory be not treacherous, I have seen at least three more
similar illustrations ofit.
Let us pay all imaginable homage to the typographical reputation of GILLET
HARDOUYN. Earl Spencer, Sir Henry Englefield, and Mr. Douce, each possess
more than one beautiful specimen, upon vellum, of the press of this elegant
printer ; and I happen to have purchased from Messrs. Payne and Foss, a
92 SECOND DAY.
puncheon ! . . . . . Hark ! do I hear, even yet, the sound of
the choruses of their Tavern-Club-vying with those of
6
the chapel, near the palace where they sing the mass of
Messieurs the Presidents,' as the colophons of Verard perpetually inform us ?! In this general grouping I would not
however be understood to include THIELMAN KERVER ; as
he is deserving of particular notice and commendation, not
so much for the superior beauty of his productions, as for
having first introduced the italic type into France. One
of his Hora,' of the date of 1517, bears unequivocal proof
of this curious fact in the annals of Parisian typography. *
singular volume of Hora, perpendicularly oblong, (the text being 5 inches and a
half in length, by only 2 in width), with a few wood-cuts , coloured : in excellent
preservation, without date, but defective in the first two signatures, A and B.
The device of Hardouin, with those of all the printers just mentioned, will
appear in the FIFTH DAY of this work ; when a few further words may be said
in behalf of them. ' See a missal of Hardouin, printed in roman characters,
described at page 50, ante.
this curious fact in the annals of Parisian typography. ] Let us begin this
KERVEREAN article with a little attention to chronological order. The Bibl.
Spenceriana, vol. i . p. 151 , vol. iv. pp. 512, 515, contains descriptions of some
beautiful specimens of the press of THIELMAN KERVER towards the close ofthe
xvth century ; and the cabinets of Sir H. Englefield and Mr. Douce possess
specimens of a later date, towards the year 1517 ; when, for the first time, in
France, appeared a volume of Hora printed in italic characters by the same
ingenious artist-who, in his colophon, seems to claim the merit of having first
introduced that type into his own country. Beneath the arms of Christ (see
page 52, ante, here on a diminished scale) we read as follows : Hore ad vsum
romanum industria Thielmanni Keruer, sub hoc nouo sculpture stilo nup[er]ime
exarate parisi9 in uico diui iacobi ad signum cratis ferree, Anno salutis millesimo
quingentesimo decimoseptimo. XXVI. Augusti.' The page is about four inches in
length, by only one inch and an half in width. The vellum is pretty fair, but the
ornaments are indifferent and sparingly introduced. Mr. Douce possesses this
typographical curiosity. The same friend has also a beautiful little volume,
entitled ' Enchiridion p[ re] clare ecclesie Sarum ....· precationibus ac venustissimis
imaginibus et ijs quidem non paucis refertum.' It is printed by Kerver's widow,
in 1528, 12mo. at the expense of Asardt Plomier ; and is one of the finest
specimens of thick white vellum that I ever beheld. The red ink of Kerver
(especially that in a volume of Offices, of the date of 1512, 8vo. now before me,
SECOND DAY. 93
Approach we now, with a soft and gentle step, but with
emotions of no ordinary delight, the tasteful productions
of the united genius and skill of GEOFFREY TORY and
SIMON DU BOIS. These productions, of almost equal beauty
with those of the Giunti, differ, as you will observe, most
essentially from those of the earlier Parisian artists ; inasmuch as they are almost entirely in the outline, and have
decorative borders of fruits, flowers, and insects. Like
the greater part of the preceding ornaments, the present
were without doubt borrowed from the practice of the ancient
illuminators ; and I am rather surprised that such a taste
had not previously prevailed. The skill of my auditors
would readily supply the colouring of such an outline ; but
and from which the first fac-simile at page 50-1, ante, was taken) has a peculiarly
brilliant lustre. Like many of bis Parisian brethren (and in confirmation of
what has been observed at p. 7, ante) we may notice that Thielman Kerver was
employed bythe booksellers of London to print books of devotion ; for thus saith
the Bibl. West. no. 828 : The Prymer of Salysbury, with many prayers and
goodly Pyctures, &c. b. 1. emprynted in Paris, wythin the House of Thylman
Karver, at the Expences of Johan Growte, Bookseller in London, 1534, ' fine
copy, 8vo. purchased, I believe, by Gough, for 1l. 8s. A rare volume, indeed :
but could any Englishman's name have been Growte?
Of FRANCIS REGNAULT, enough has been before observed (see p. 46, ante)
to prove that I do not hold him the least in estimation of these far-famed
Parisian publishers of EARLY PRINTED BOOKS OF DEVOTION.' I cannot
however but here notice, in a very particular manner, a volume of Horæ in
laudem beatissimæ virginis Mariæ, ad vsum Romanum ' -bearing the following colophon Parisiis Ex officina Reginaldi Calderij et Claudij ejus filij ,' 1549,
4to. which is inthe possession ofmy friend Mr. Douce. The text is in the Roman
character. The borders are elaborate, and in fine arabesque style. In one ofthe
larger cuts, (the Adoration) which is subscribed Ad sextum, ' there is a remarkable
coincidence of resemblance in the portrait of a figure kneeling (presenting a box of
gems) to that of Henry IV. of France : the beard, features, and expression, being
very similar to what we observe in those of the French Monarch. Mr. Douce's
copy has the additional value of having formerly belonged to Diana of Poictiers,
mistress of Henry II. It is in the binding peculiar to that celebrated character,
and is in a most beautiful state of preservation. Of this binding, due notice will
be taken in the SIXTH DAY ofthis work.
•
94 SECOND DAY.
I have here nothing to do with fancy, and shall submit
only a specimen or two unaccompanied by the border. See
with what energy the inspired Monarch of Israel strikes the
chords of his divine harp ! Perhaps, however, you will object
to the apparent shortness of the figure.
*
Contemplate next a different subject. View the terrible
progress ofDeath upon his black horse : see the raven over
his head screaming for his expected prey; and the advanced
Courier, or Attendant, of a form as shadowy and terrific as
that ofthe grim monarch himself ! Observe how coolly the
Contemplate next a different subject. ] The first of the subjects above given is
taken from signature m v-the second, from signature n vij, of the work mentioned in the first note at page 98, post.
SECOND DAY. 95
animal, upon which the King of Terrors rides, is trampling
upon the once-formidable monarchs and heroes of the day:
reminding us of the forceful imagery of the author ofPierce
Ploughman-as you may remember to have read it in the
magnificent reimpression of that work by Dr. Whitaker :
' Death came drivynge after, and all to dust pashed
Kynges and kaysers, knightes and popes
Learned and lewde ...."
Now prepare yourselves for a gratification of a higher
kind. Look attentively upon these pages which represent,
the one the Salutation, the other the Offering of the Wise
Men.
96 SECOND DAY.
go matutinum Wersas.
Omine labia mea aperies. 疚。
Et os meu annunciabit laudem tuam.v.eusin adiutorium meu
intende. A. Domine ad adiuuädñ me
festina.loriapatri, et filio , e spiritui
f iiii
SECOND DAY. 97
festina.
Eus in adiutoriu meu intende.
Domine ad adiuuandum me
loria patri & filio: et spiritui sancto.
icut erat in principio & nunc et semp:
et in secula seculorum amen. pmnus..
hii
98 SECOND DAY.
After a careful examination of these curious and uncommon embellishments, you will not probably wonder at my
urging you to seize every opportunity, when fair specimens
present themselves, of enriching your cabinets with the productions of those volumes which bear proofs of the united
skill of Tory and Du Bois. * Yet due praise must be given
to every artist, whether engraver or printer, who exhibited
those ornaments which Tory has the credit of having first
brought to public notice. Admire therefore, with all the
zeal and correctness of feeling which the occasion excites,
this beautiful octavo missal which presents us with the joint
names of Du Bois and COLINEUS; † and which contains the
* the united skill of Tory and Du Bois.] This is not the proper place to give
full scope to the panegyric upon these elegant and successful artists. In the
FIFTH DAY their merits will be more distinctly set forth. It is however essential
here to notice the beautiful volume of Heures a lusaige de Paris, printed at Paris
in 1527, large 8vo. by Master Simon Du Bois for Master Geofroy Tori of
Bruges.' Every page is adorned with borders like those of which specimens are
above given. The red and black title, in Latin, is over the device of Du Bois
(the ' pot-cassé ' with the motto non plus ' ) which will be faithfully given in the
'Day'just mentioned. The type is a secretary- gothic, and is tastefully disposed.
Sir H. Englefield and myself each possess a copy upon paper ; but Mr. Douce
revels in the possession of a beautiful impression of it UPON VELLUM.
"
thejoint names of Du Bois and Colinæus, ] This volume is really a master-piece
of the art of printing. It is in a profuse, but very correct style of embellishment ;
and is entitled Hora, in laudem beatiss. semper virginis Maria secund. cons. Cur.
Rom.' &c. and purports, at the end of it, to have been printed by Simon Colinæus
in 1525, 8vo : but the title tells us it is sold at Paris by Geoffrey Tory at the
sign of the broken-pot. ' There is a privilege of Francis I. to Geoffrey Tory (of
which hereafter) in a large gothic type ; but the entire volume is printed in
a small roman character. The borders are full of ornament, in the outline, and
have a sharpness and brilliancy of execution which makes one almost think
they were cut upon metal. Lord Spencer's copy of this interesting volume
(which I was glad to obtain for his Lordship at the orthodox price fixed upon
it by Messrs. Payne and Foss) is upon rather thick, but finely-manufactured
paper, and is perfectly clean and sound. It is also in its pristine binding, with
gilt on the leaves. ' Many of the lower ornaments were rather imitated, than
adopted, in subsequent books by Geoffrey Tory. As to the printer of it, I have
"
SECOND DAY. 99
most beautifully printed arabesque borders that I remember
to have seen. Look only at the specimens of the bottomborder (not however so strictly arabesque as are the side
ones) which give us, among numerous capriccios, the initial
letter of THAT MONARCH who patronised all that was magnificent and illustrious in the Fine Arts !
キ
a shrewd suspicion that the worthy Colinæus was incapable of such typographical
excellence : but this point shall have a reconsideration. Mr. Douce has also a
copy of this extraordinary book, but of less soundness of condition. A perfect
copy UPON VELLUM (such a copy must exist ! ) would afford no trifling gratification to the lover of all that is delicate, and curious, and uncommon, in the
earlier productions of the press.
100 SECOND DAY.
Thus much, my friends, for missal-embellishments representingsubjects from Holy-Writ. Letusnownotice specimens
of a different character. And first, as claiming chronological
precedence, let us take a cursory glance at those Astrological
Figures-which were the favourite decorations of almost
every missal. The following are the earliest of their kind
which I remember to have met with ; and are taken from a
missal printed by Verard about the year 1488, or 1490 ; as
the first of these dates is found at the head of the Calendar.
00000
SECOND DAY. 101
Subsequent printers (especially Godard*) enlarged these
astrological figures, adopting however the same expression
of character.
Let me now direct your attention to decorations of a
more pleasing description. First, then, we will fancy ourselves strolling in some
garden tempting with forbidden fruit,"
and witnessing the agility with which yonder youths are
climbing the tree, and stealing the said
forbidden fruit !" Observe also the cunning and cautious manner in which a fair
damoiselle catches the falling treasures in
her lap ! Few embellishments were more
popular, for a series of years ; t and renowned WILLIAM LILY has taken care
that future generations should be made
acquainted with so tempting an illustration.
What you here see, is taken from a Missal,
printed by Verard, of the date of 1498.
See page 88, ante.
+ Few embellishments were more popular, for aseries of
years;] In fact, the above embellishment, modified and
enlarged, formed the title- page to the celebrated LILY's
GRAMMAR ; and is even yet made familiar to youth.'
A distinguished modern writer has contrived, with some
felicity, to illustrate this apple-stealing frontispiece. Describing the march of the allies to Paris, after the evermemorable battle of Waterloo, he observes that it was
' no great degradation from the discipline of the English
army to remark, that some old school- boy practices were
not forgotten ; and that, where there occurred a halt, and
fruit- trees happened to be in the vicinity, they instantly
were loaded likethe epigrammatic tree in Lily's Grammar,
only with soldiers instead of scholars ; and surrounded by
their wives, who held their aprons to receive the fruit instead of satchels, as in the
emblem chosen by that learned grammarian.' Paul's Letters to his Kinsfolk,
102 SECOND DAY:
From the garden let us direct our steps across the
meadow, into the copse.
Do
Here we are introduced into
the mysteries of The Chase.
Here we become instantly
mingled with hounds and
huntsmen. First, observe
the dogs ere they have slipt
their collars ; waiting for the
echoes ofthe horn ... Hark!
the huntsmanblows a signal for the chase, and
the woods resound to the lengthened note !
praytake especial notice how cautiously they here prick
their way; and, yonder, how they are prepared to receive the
infuriated stag !
1816, 8vo. p. 268-9. It will be seen (I submit) that our soldiers and their wives
are better represented in the above fac- simile than in the frontispiece to Lily's
Grammar. Had the commanding officer of such a foraging party any partiality
for Verard's Missals ; and did he wish to see the picturesque effect of such
grouping?
SECOND DAY. 103
These specimens, you observe, are pretty, and rather
interesting of their kind. Schneyders would undoubtedly
have managed the dogs with more nature and spirit, and
Reubens would have executed the men a little more after
the fashion that men are wont to be ;' but upon the whole
there is something curious in these representations. I regret
that the death of the stag, and the bearing him home in
triumph, are obliged to be selected from a volume which is
evidently of inferior workmanship. However, take them as
you find them.
Let us now retreat from these scenes of uproar and death;
and, equally gratifying to our rural propensities, let us move gently onward towards
that inviting greensward whichslopesbeneath
a hillock, where the ash and the hazel love to
intermingle their branches. There, sheltered
from the solstitial ray, view how quietly
and happily the pastoral swain receives the
guerdon of his mistress-whose name he
has taught the groves to resound !'
VOL. I. H
104 SECOND DAY.
Viewagain, perhaps the same Amaryllis, gathering flowers,
in company with her lambkin ; or, arrayed in sempstressfashion, invoking heaven to send peace and plenty upon her
humble shed ! These at least are inoffensive decorations.
Still delighting ourselves with scenes of rural felicity, let
us pass on to the sound of pipe and tabor, or of wild and
general laughter; or-shall we become envious spectators of
pastimes where man seems blest, for every nymph is kind ?
The following specimens prove that I am not merely acting
the part ofa rhetorician.
6
SECOND DAY. 105
I am by no means certain whether this latter decoration
may not be intended to represent a particular amusement of
which we are at this day ignorant. Is it, think you, some
Pastoral Queen receiving the homage of a favourite courtier?
Or is it a scene in some rural Drama-of which the name
and character must ever remain concealed?
Dismissing, with regret perhaps, these pleasing spectacles
of Arcadian felicity, we must hasten to diffèrent, but by no
means uncommon, subjects of decoration. Now then, Lisardo,
for your favourite Drolleries and Monsters ! Could subjects
like the following, think you, produce seriousness of mind,
or add to the glow of devotion ?* Remember, I anticipate
mirth ; and therefore allow you to laugh as loudly and as
lustily as you please. The ensuing are of the date of 1502.
produce seriousness of mind, or add to the glow of devotion. ] It has been
suggested to me, that these Drolleries or Grotesque Ornaments may have been
borrowed from carvings beneath the wooden seats of the choirs ; and which,
generally speaking, are not remarkable for their gravity or propriety. These
seats are made to turn up, and unless thus reversed, the ornaments here alluded
to may escape the attention of the curious. Among the most extraordinary of
this character, are those which are carved upon the turn-up seats of the choir
of Beverley Minster : a specimen of cathedral-building (we may call it YorkMinster in miniature ' ) which perhaps is no where excelled for the purity of its
style, and the preservation of its parts. When I visited this interesting edifice,
in the summer of 1815, my friend Mr. John Broadley of Kirk Ella shewed me,
with extreme delight, the drawings of these turn-up seats, of the size of the
original carvings, which he had caused an artist of ability in the neighbourhood
to execute ; and which I hope will at some future period find their way into the
cabinets of the curious by faithfully engraved copies.
106 SECOND DAY.
SECOND DAY. 107
Arrange the ensuing under what class you please They
seem to be half gothic and half arabesque.
The last, and not the least interesting of subjects, connected with the engraved ornaments of early printed books
of devotion, and with which I shall conclude my present
labours, is, that of the Sports and Pastimes of Youth.
Prepare, therefore, dear Lorenzo, that magical talisman
which renews the memory of other times ; ' which creates,
and calls up in succession, those amusements of boyhood and
school-days, when conscience rarely felt a pang, and the eye
was never moistened with a heart-corroding tear. Dear to
me, and equally so, I am sure, to the circle I am addressing,
is the remembrance of such days-gone, never to return !
But I am becoming the moralist instead of the Cicerone.
Belinda will be pleased to hand to me yonder anciently-
108 SECOND DAY.
bound volume of Hours, printed by Vostre in 1502. What
have we here--which presents itself as the very first thing
on opening it ? It is the procession of the BOY-BISHOP. *
More sprightly and more jocund scenes succeed. Does
not the ensuing representation of Threadingthe Needle, (an
amusement equally participated by the youth of both sexes)
remind the female part of my audience, in particular, of
those soft and cloudless moonlight nights, when the village
green re-echoed the wild whoop and unceasing laughter
with which the spirit of this pastime was kept up ?
The young ladies now disappear ; and none but the
' rougher sex' (as Thomson, a little ungraciously, calls us)
are made to engage in the sports which are here described.
The procession of the Boy Bishop. ] This seems to have been a favourite
amusement with the ancient lads of our country ; and was practised with great enthusiasm by those of St. Paul's School, founded by Dean Colet. See Knight's Life
of that Prelate ; Dugdale's Hist. of St. Paul's ; but more particularly Mr. Ellis's
edition of Brand's Popular Antiquities. There is an old monument of this boybishop among the plates of Mr. Stothard's Monumental Antiquities.
SECOND DAY. 109
You may safely affirm that Flemish artists executed these
characteristic groups. The subjects speak for themselves.
PPPPP
110 SECOND DAY.
Was it with such a volume as this, think you, that the
unfortunate Queen Mary was occupied in her devotions*
while upon the scaffold, and just before the axe performed
its fatal office ?
I cannot however take leave of the works which appear to
have afforded us so much amusement, without calling the
attention of the male part of my auditory, to those curious
specimens of Ancient English Poetry which are frequently
contained in them. Of the exact date of the earliest of these
specimens, I am quite unable to submit any thing like a
correct suggestion ; but am probably not much wide of the
truth when I conjecture that the year 1490 is the remotest
period of the introduction of English verse within a volume
of devotion, in the Latin language, printed abroad? Our
favourite Regnault, at least, is full of passages in our vernacular tongue ; but whether what he meant for English
theunfortunate Queen Mary was occupied in her devotions. ] During the dean's
[of Peterborow] prayer, she [ Mary] employed herself in private devotion from
THE OFFICE OF THE VIRGIN.' Hume. It will perhaps never be known from
what edition of the Office of the Virgin these royal devotions, at such a crisis,
were exercised ; or whether the copy of it were upon paper or vellum ? What
sum can purchase it ? And who was the fortunate printer whose leaves were
probably moistened by the tears of the miserable Queen ?
* Regnault is full of passages in our vernacular tongue. ] I shall begin with
some direct specimens of English metre, from a volume of Hore, after the use of
Salisbury, which Regnault printed in 1536 ; and from which edition specimens
of engravings have been before selected : see p. 46, 47, &c. In this impression
there is a set ofprints illustrative of the following distichs.
Dauid was enamoured of Bersa
bee. In the bathe whan he her se.
Dauid his lust to optayn.
Made Vrye to be slayn.
Dauid by Nathan beynge re
p[re]ued . Peccaui sayd sore greued.
How Dauid for his offence,
Dyde chuse to haue pestylece. (see p. 46, ante.
SECOND DAY. 111
poetry, be really to be considered as such, is more than I can
presume to determine ; especially as neither Puttenham,
Webbe, nor Campion, have vouchsafed to consider this
How Dauid for his vyce
To our lorde dyde sacrifyce.
Dauid promised to Bersabee. Salomon to be kyng of
Iudee.
Dauid at his last endyn
Ordyned Salomon to be
Kyng.
<
Fol. XCIV-XCIX.
Ofthe ensuing-THE
shape, ' that the reader
I submit that these are rather bonny metres,' and are probably to be found in
the earliest impression of this ritual of the date of 1534.
TENCOMMANDMENTS-they come in such a questionable
may hesitate a little in what department to place them. They are taken from
the edition of 1534, of the same work, by the same printer, and repeated in that
of 1536.
The. x. commaundementes ofthe lawe.
Thou shalte worshyp one god onely
and loue hym with thy herte perfytely.
God in vayne swere not wylfully
ne by no thynge that he made veryly.
The sonday kepe and halowe holyly
herynge goddes seruyce deuontly.
Fader and moder honour thou lowly
and in theyr nede helpe them gladly.
Slee thou no man malycyously
nor ther to consent wyttyngly.
Thou shalte not do no lechery
but vse thy wyfe in wedlocke onely.
Thy neyghbours goodes stele not falsly
nor no thynge witholde vntruly.
False wytnesse bere thou not deceytefully
nor false recorde for none enuy.
Other mannes wyfes kepe not flesshely
ne other women to holde carnally.
Other mennes goodes coueyte not lyghtly
nor holde from theym vnryghtfully. Fol. clxxxv. recto.
Of specimens of English Prose, from these early-printed devotional volumes,
take the following — gentle reader : without proheme or apology. Whan saint
Bernard was in hys prayers the dyuell sayd vnto hym, I knowe that there be,
112 SECOND DAY.
knotty point in their learned lucubrations upon English
Poesie.
6
Reverting for the last time to the ornaments of early
·
"
certayne verses in the sawter who that say them dayly shall not perysshe and he
shall haue knowlege of the daye that he shall dye, but the fende wolde noth
shewed hym to sait bernard than [sayd] saint bernard. I shall say dayly the hole
sawter, the fende considerynge that saint bernard shall do so moche profyte to
laboure so he shewed hym this verses, ' fol . cxxv. (The Latin verses O bone
iesu, illumina oculos meos,' &c. follow. ) The preceding is printed in red in
both editions, but the word ' not' is substituted for noth ' in the latter-and the
word sayd ' is introduced in the latter and omitted in the former. A variety of
English sentences, printed in red, are scattered throughout both impressions :
but Theforme of confessyon,' and The xv. oos. in englysshe,' contain the most
delectable specimens of English devotional composition. It is well for modern
piety that the Latimers and Ridleys of former days did not select these as
models for their own incomparable compositions. The first prayer begiuneth
thus : O Jesu endles swetnes of louynge soules O iesu gostly ioy passynge and
excedynge all gladnes and desyres. O Iesu helthe and teder louer of all repētant synners that louist for to dwelle as thou saydyst thy selfe with the chyldren
ofme. ' &c. —The second prayer is as follows : O Blessyd Iesu maker of all the
worlde, the of a ma maye not be mesured, whiche closys in thy hade all the erth
haue mynde of the bytter sorowe : Fyrst wha the iewes fastned thy blessyd
handes to the crosse with blunte nayles. Also to the more encreasing of thy
payne they added sorowe apon sorowe to thy bytter woundes, whan they perced
thy blessyd, tender and swete fete bycause that thou woldest not accorde to
theyr wyl, and soo cruelly they drewe thy blessyd body, in length and brede to
the mesure of the crosse, that all the joyntes of thy lymmes were both losed and
unlokyd,' &c.
The prayer which follows has this extraordinary commencement : ' O Iesu
heuenly leche haue mynde of thy langour and blewnes of thy woundes,' &c.
But for the gratification of the uninitiated in ancient English spelling, I shall
take the liberty of transcribing entire the 4th, and ensuing prayer, as it would
be printed at the present day. Not a hair's breadth injury is done either to the
words or tothe composition. O Jesu, very freedom of angels, paradise of ghostly
delights, have mind of the dread and hideous fearfulness that thou suffered when
all thine enemies stood about thee, and clipped thee as wood- lions, smiting thee,
and spitting on thee, scratching thee, and manyother great pains putting to theeFor mind of all these despiteful words, cruel beating, and sharp torments, I
beseech thee, blessed Jesu, deliver me from all mine enemies bodily and ghostly :
and give me grace to have defence and protection of health everlasting against
their wills, under the wings of thy blessed passion Amen. Pater Noster. Ave
maria gratia.' In the following prayer, mysterious mention is made of our
SECOND DAY. 113
printed books of devotion, ' I must be allowed to regret that
they have not been hitherto sufficiently examined in Histories ofEarly Engraving; * and to hope that the period
may not be despairingly remote, ere these embellishments be
considered and illustrated in a manner less desultory and
superficial than I have been compelled to treat them. Let me
however remind you, that ornamented Books of Devotion, or
Prayer Books, (containing our own form of Church- Service)
from the reign of Elizabeth to that of George III. , occasionally, but rarely, made their appearance. Indeed, the
Prayer Book of our virgin Queen† is entitled to very
particular notice and commendation. The borders of it are
evidently of foreign workmanship, as to engraving ; and in
that department of the German school of which Albert Durer
may be considered as the parent. Wehave here death-dances
·
Saviour's beholding in the mirror of his clear majesty, in predestination of all
his chosen souls, that should be saved by the merit of his passion'—but this is
touching a deep and thrilling chord and so let us take leave of these early and
extraordinary effusions of the piety of the Roman Catholic Church. They form
the concluding text of both the impressions so often mentioned.
not hitherto sufficiently examined in Histories of Engraving. ] Papillon, as
far as I can discover, has only two slight allusions to them : vol. i , p. 112-151.
Mr. Ottley will one day, I trust, furnish us with a treat to our heart's content'
upon this amusing subject.
† the Prayer- Book of our virgin Queen. ] The well-furnished library of my
friend Mr. Douce supplies me with an impression of this beautiful little quarto
volume, of the date of 1590 ; which appears to be the 4th edition : those of
1569, 1578, and 1581 having preceded it. A fifth edition was published in
1608, and the catalogue of Messrs. Robinsons of Leeds notices one of the date
of 1701-2 That of 1608 was published by Norton and Bill, and has the portrait
of King James I. on the reverse of the title- page. The earlier editions are comparatively rare. Dr. Lort had the second edition (Bibl. Lort. no. 1087 ) which
was sold for 11. 6s. The libraries of West ( no. 1551) and Tutet (no. 192)
supplied only this fourth edition, and West's copy wanted the title- page. The
copy of Tutet is the one now under description. It is called A Booke of
Christian prayers, collected out of the ancient writers, and best learned in our
time, &c. London. Pr. by Yardley and Short, 1590, ' 4to. The reverse of this
title, which is surrounded by a broad wood-cut border of scriptural characters,
114 SECOND DAY.
without end: but the portrait of the Queen, upon her knees,
forming the frontispiece, is an interesting and well-executed
embellishment. I wish we knew more of the private history
contains the portrait of Q. Elizabeth, above noticed by Philemon . Her majesty shall speak for herself in the following very beautiful fac- simile :
I am extremely well persuaded (says Mr. Douce, in the fly-leaf of his copy)
that this cut of Q. Elizabeth, and probably some of the others in this book, are
executed by a foreign artist whose mark is A. The same artist not only cut a
great number of prints for foreign books, but for many published in this country :
such as Grafton's Chronicle, the Gardener's Labyrinth, Munday's Romance of
Zelanto, &c. This cut of the Queen was preserved so late as 1652, and was used
in Benlome's Theophila, printed in that year.' Seven leaves of introductory
matter, within flower-fancied borders, precede the preface or preparation to
praier,' with the first prayer beneath to be said at our first waking. ' The first
SECOND DAY. 115
of this elegant volume. At all events, if you feel disposed
to loosen your purse-strings, purchase one of the earlier
editions of it ; on account of the superior sharpness, or
truth of outline, of the cuts.
·
series of wood-cut embellishments commences upon this page ; representing,
according to Herbert, (vol. i . p. 645,) The history ofthe Birth, Life, and Passion
of our blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, ' after Albert Durer and Agnes
Frey his Wife. ' Upon what authority this is said, remains to be proved. The
style of art is wholly dissimilar from what we observe in the productions of
Albert Durer ; who died 40 years before the first impression of the work. This
first series terminates on folio 18 : where a different style of art prevails-(of a
Flemish character) and the same history re-commences on the reverse of folio 19.
This again ends on folio 38 ; when two more leaves follow, of the same Flemish
cast of character. On folio 41 commences a series of The Cardinal Virtues and
their opposite Vices ; which terminates on the reverse of folio 51. The figures
representing these Virtues are about 3 inches in height. Then succeeds, what
Herbert calls, The Works of Charity,' occupying only 3 leaves. These are also
in rather a Flemish style of execution. The Five Senses (being female figures of
the same height as the Virtues ' just noticed) adorn the following pages, as far as the recto of fol . 57. Next ensues a series of small cuts, illustrative of the
Signs preceding and accompanying the Day ofJudgment : as far as the recto of
fol. 61 : when the Five Senses, Cardinal Virtues, Works of Charity, repeated,
with the Day of Judgment, extend as far as folio 81 inclusively.
6
On folio 82 commences the Dance of Death. This dance, executed upon a
smaller scale, is as well sustained, in all its parts, as the one of which the preceding pages have made such ample mention. Take, reader, the following ; as
confirmatory of this position :
The Doctor.
Doctor Diuine at
last : thy reading
houre is past.
The Preacher.
Preacher no more
about: thy glasse
is run out. Fol. 84.
116 SECOND DAY.
Sturt's was, I believe, the last attempt, deserving of particular notice, * to make the Ritual of the Church of England
popular through the medium ofcopper-plate embellishments ;
THE PRESS is thus described as not being exempt fromthese deathly visitations.
The Printer.
Leaue setting Let printing
thy page : spent
is thine age.
lay: and come
away. Fol. 90.
The series is repeated, and ends on folio 138 ; when the text concludes, and two
leaves of table follow, not numbered. The device and colophon of the printer
are on the reverse of the second leaf of this table. There is a good deal ofpoint,
occasionally, both in the subjects engraved, and in the metrical subscriptions, or
explanations of them : but the limits of this note have been already too unconscionably extended to admit of further specimens. Upon the whole, this volume
is equally interesting for its elegance and singularity. At folios 81 , 82, &c. we
meet with some of the prayers (a little modernised) which have made so extraordinary a figure in the preceding note.
* Sturt's the last attempt deserving of particular notice. ] The title of Sturt's
publication was as follows : The Book ofCommon Prayer and Administration of
the Sacraments and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church according to the
Use of the Church of England together with the Psalter or Psalms of David
Printed as they are to be sung or said in churches. London. Engraven and
Printed by the Permission of Mr. John Baskett Printer to the King's most
Excellent Majesty, 1717, 8vo. Sold by John Sturt Engraver in Golden-Lion
Court in Aldersgate Street.' This work was published both in medium and in
super-royal octavo. On the reverse of the title-page is a portrait of George the
SECOND DAY. 117
and these of an elaborate and singular nature. There can
be no doubt, I think, in the minds of tasteful men, that this
attempt was eminently unsuccessful. Here therefore pause
we in the bibliographical labours of this Day!
But before I thank you for the particular marks of
attention which you appear to have bestowed upon the poor
stock of information I have just imparted, and while I am
really conscious of having done but feeble justice to a subject
capable of great variety and extension, let me entreat
you, if you already begin to feel symptoms of a passion
to become owners of such volumes as those which have just
been described, -let me entreat you, I repeat, not to be too
precipitate in your purchases of them. The great error
of young, or what are called green, Collectors, is, that,
having once inflamed their fancies, and mustered their
means, to adorn their shelves with Missals, Breviaries, and
Hours, PRINTED UPON VELLUM, they incautiously and indiscriminately purchase every thing in this shape which comes
in their way. At present, the study of this department of
Bibliography is in its infancy. Accordingly, such Purchasers
First, in stipling, with the Lord's Prayer, Creed, Ten Commandments, Prayers
for the King and Royal Family, and the xx1st Psalm, ' running horizontally
and directly across the physiognomy of his Majesty! These sacred parts of our
liturgy were perhaps never before so unpicturesquely introduced ! The portraits
of the Prince and Princess of Wales, with a dedication to their Royal Highnesses
signed by Sturt, then follow. Each page of text is surrounded by an ornamented
border of religious ornaments ; and both these and the text (the latter in two
columns) are engraved upon copper. The effect is harsh and dazzling in the
extreme ; and surely none but the most enthusiastic devotee ever yet prayed to
Heaven from the text of Sturt's prayer book ! There are also scriptural subjects,
engraved upon copper, running across the page, or divided into two compartments,
side by side. The capital initials are small and well ornamented . At the end, are
the usual prayers for Gunpowder Treason, Charles the Martyr, the Restoration,
&c. &c. The copy from which this description is taken, is on the largest paper,
in the Althorp library, and is elegantly bound in old red morocco.
118 SECOND DAY.
will do well to content themselves with a fair, clean specimen
of each style, simple and profuse, gothic and approaching
the classical, of each printer before mentioned—and indeed
of several others, of equal merit, whose names have not been
formally announced : for distant, I trust, will be that day,
when the CHEVALLONS, LE NOIRS, and a score other brave
typographical wights, of equal celebrity, shall be banished
from my remembrance, or cease to receive the homage ofmy
praise ! Only be wary and choice in your selections : not
pouncing upon sprawling folios because they stand high, and
have a pompous look upon your shelves -- but seeking intrinsic worth and beauty, and sometimes, if you please,
oddity and singularity, in your specimens. Beware also of
painted, or rather daubed, copies of these early devotional
volumes. Sometimes, one meets with correct and chastelycoloured specimens, gilded even with no very remote resemblance to manuscript productions ; but, generally speaking,
one uncoloured, and therefore unsophisticated copy, is
worth three that have pretensions to beauty and accuracy of
illumination !
The outline which I have given you, my friends, may
have afforded pleasing ideas, or furnished useful materials,
for a more careful and comprehensive survey of the subject.
Be yours the task, and not uncongenial toil, of converting
these seeds of intelligence into a rich and productive harvest.
But see ! ... the sun wants scarcely half an hour of his
setting, and the blackbird's soft note is yet heard in the
grove.
At these words, PHILEMON ceased, and the party rose.
Their expressions of thanks were general and warm ; and it
SECOND DAY. 119
was with evident reluctance that Almansa and Lisardo
helped to put away the opened volumes, in order to join the
garden-promenade.
The next day, PHILEMON being duly invested with the
insignia of office, continued his discourse in the following
manner.
VOL. I. I

THIRD DAY.
ARGUMENT.
Engraved Ornaments of Printed Books. Block-Books.
Ars Memorandi, &c. Speculum Humane Salvationis.
Ars Moriendi. Hartlieb's Chiromancy. Books ofChiromancyandPhysiognomy. Bibles. Ancient Classics. German
Publications, and Translations ofthe Classics. Romances.
Works of a grotesque character. Basil Books. Works upon
Hawking. Emblems. Italian Classics and Novels. Improvement to be derived from elegantly published works of
genius.
Hans Sebald Beham Sof Swaine feet
Third Day.
HE heavens are serene. The
horizon is skirted by softly rolling
masses of white clouds, and the
sun shines propitiously upon this
the last day of my reign over the
little empire which surrounds me.
Give me all your candour and
patience, if, in the variety ofbibliographical topics selected for this day's discussion, I omit
many things which are curious, or do but imperfect justice
to such as require an extended detail. Where so many
flowers present themselves, I may be pardoned if I gather
a few only of the rarer or more beautiful species.
Lisardo, I make no doubt, has dreamt abundantly ofthe
ornaments of Missals and Breviaries which engrossed so
much of our attention yesterday ; and has risen this morning
with a keen appetite to possess what may be worthy, in this
of a place within his Library. The rich Catalogue of
Messrs. Longman, Hurst, and Co.* was, I understand, well
way,
* The rich catalogue of Messrs. Longman, Hurst, and Co.] This epithet is just.
124 THIRD DAY,
1
examined last night, a full hour or two after midnight, when
all the family, including even his own wife, had retired to
bed and sleep. The hollow note of the owl additional gave
energy to his bibliographical resolves....
The Catalogue alluded to was published early in the year 1816, and contains not
fewer than 7832 articles. It embraces books in almost all languages, and of
every description : and the prices are, upon the whole, moderate and judicious.
I would be understood to speak of works of general utility ; for it is difficult to
say what is moderate ' or ' judicious ' in articles of rarity or caprice. The titlepage of this Catalogue contains a wood-cut ornament of a man reading by lamplight, which is said to be a portrait of one of the partners in the firm. Posterity
should know which of these partners it is intended to represent. I claim the
privilege of here making an observation ; probably of no importance to the
public, but certainly in justice to my own feelings.
Some years ago after much heavy toil in wading through the bibliographical
criticisms of Fabricius, Harles, Ernesti, Masch, &c. and the Notitiæ Literariæ of
the Bipont Classics -as well as the prefaces of more modern continental editors—
I published the third edition of an Introduction to the Knowledge of rare and
valuable Editions of the Greek and Latin Classics. ' (1808, 8vo. 2 vols. ) Good or
bad as that workmay be, it has now been long out of print ; and I hope, at some
future day, to publish a fourth and enlarged edition of it -improved by the
censures of public critics , and by the suggestions of private friends. But what
more immediately presses upon my mind at this moment-as connected with the
notice of the foregoing catalogue-is, that, after the toil just described, it seems a
little hard to have the fruit of it snatched away, and put into other men's
panniers. In other words, the bibliographical or critical adjuncts to a great
number of the articles, in the catalogue now referred to, are entirely my own ;
either as a summary of the sentiments of eminent critics, expressly mentioned by
name, or as a literal version of their sentiments-and yet no notice of your
humble servant' is, in such instances, vouchsafed to be taken ! Now it does seem
rather hard to annihilate the middle man, and rest exclusively upon the original
prop- which, but for such middle man, perdie,' might not have come to the
knowledge of the compiler of the Catalogue ! Suum cuique ' wrote old Tom
Hearne in the fly leaf of his books.... Note further, gentle reader. The catalogue
here spoken of is not singular for this recording of obligations. The system of
crushing the middle man is fast spreading into the country ; and provincial
bibliopolists are starting up, and bursting upon us, in all the splendour and power
of self-created genius !
•
I will only further observe that the Catalogue of Old English Poetry, published
by the same spirited Firm, and entitled Bibliotheca Anglo-Poetica, 1815, 8vo.
does great credit to the diligence and accuracy of the Compiler of it. This
contains 956 articles of some of the rarest pieces of old poetry in our vernacular
tongue.
·
THIRD DAY. 125
"
LISARDO. You are getting upon a high horse -and are
certainly mistaken in respect to Almansa. I admit the close
examination ofthe Pater-Noster-Row Catalogue, long after
the family had retired to rest ; but of that slumber my wife.
certainly did not partake. With pen in hand, and desk and
paper before her, she took down the numbers and prices from
the catalogue as I gave them out ; and this morning I had
only to write for the conveyance of the articles selected.
ALMANSA. I beg an end of this discourse. It is getting
into downright scandal : the routine of a lady's bed-chamber
is questioned, and its privacy invadedLISARDO. Yet a word, and I cease. My attention was
not confined to the very excellent and general Catalogue of
which you have just made mention. That coy and most
deserving bibliopolist, the only living filial descendant of
Honest Tom Payne, hath lately, to the joy and comfort of
all discerning Collectors, put forth an unostentatious and
well-garnished Catalogue of the books in his own spacious
Repository and you will smile and wonder to see the
number of little rare old- fashioned pieces, in the Italian and
French languages, which I trust an early attention to that
Catalogue* has obtained for me. But do not therefore
an early attention to that Catalogue.] Lisardo will be fortunate if his early
attention be crowned with success. The catalogue above mentioned, after an
almost hopeless sterility of nearly fifteen years, was published in 1815-16. in two
parts : the classical, critical, and philological works, in the Greek and Latin
languages, forming the first : and French, English, and Italian literature forming
the second part. Both parts are worthy of the manufactory from which they
came. There is much sterling worth and downright bullion in their materials.
Yet I despair of Lisardo's success : and will say wherefore. Within twenty-four
hours after the publication of the second part, the day was rainy-dismally rainy-
'twas one ofthose January days, which, in this country, unhinges the most elastic
spirits, and cows the stoutest hearts-save and except, however, the spirits ' and
heart' of ATTICUS : for betimes in that same morning, and seated in a black-
126 THIRD DAY.
suppose I have neglected the old Folio Gentlemen-the
three M's!
LYSANDER. Whom mean you by the three M's?
LISARDO. Mabillon, Montfaucon, and Muratori. This is
mygrand bibliographico-literary triumvirate. I would build
a temple to hold all the works of such men should they
exceed, in a ten-fold portion, their present number. But
this is mere gossiping. It is time for Philemon to wave the
sceptre ofoffice, and to command silence and attention.
PHILEMON. I hasten to comply with your wishes. In
selecting what may best illustrate the subject of ornaments of Books—that is, of early or curious specimens of
Engraving, accompanying the text of religious, scientific,
or belles-lettres volumes-we may fairly be said to be only
continuing the discourse of yesterday. That discourse,
however, was exclusively confined to Church-Rituals ; and
the main inference which I wished to be drawn from it was,
that neither pains nor expense was spared to make the religion of the country, in which such works were published,
palatable in a high degree, from the beauty of the publications, to all classes and conditions of people. Lisardo
has talked about building a temple for the reception of such
works as those for which we are indebted to the learned
"
"
morocco-bottomed arm chair, within the spacious Repository ' above alluded to,
did the indomitable Atticus sit, and call the book-spirits ' about him from their
vasty deep :' so as, ere the sun had well made towards his declension, either with
his voice or his wand, he had charmed away almost every thing that was desirable
in the above mentioned departments. Within twenty hours after this frightful
spoliation, I sat myself down, in the said arm-chair ; and with a ticked catalogue
(and in high good humour and conceit at my own supposed activity) began to
order about me,' asthe phrase is—but a mournful negative was the usual response
to every anxious quære. The broom of Mr. H , Sir, hath swept away thisand this-and this.' Well therefore may that gentleman exclaim, in the song of
the Northern Countrie, ' O the broom, the bonny, bonny broom! '
"
THIRD DAY. 127
labours of what he calls his three M's-but of what size, and
in what manner fitted up, I ask, must that temple be, which
should contain all the editions of Missals, Breviaries, Offices,
and Hours ? * Perhaps this description of books has been
* all the editions of Missals, Breviaries, Offices, and Hours. ] Panzer occupies
rather more than five pages under the leading heads or titles of MISSA and
MISSALIA VARIA. From the latter, the reader is presented with merely the
earliest impression of each Cathedral Service of the Mass, as specified by Panzer :
the York and Vallombrosa Missals being added to the list.
MISSALE
Abonense Lubec. 1488 folio
Ambrosianum Mediol. 1475 folio
(See page 19, ante.)
Aquilegiense Aug. Vind. 1494 folio
Argentinense Sine loco 1487 folio
Augustanum Aug. Vind. 1491 folio
Augustinianor. &c. Noremb. 1491 folio
Bambergense
Basileense
Bambergæ 1490 folio
Basileæ 1480 folio
Benedicti Ord. Sti. Bamberg. 1481 folio
Bituricense Sine loco 1493 folio
Brandenburgense Norimb. 1494 folio
Brixiense Aug. Vind. 1493 folio
Bursfeldense Spiræ 1498 folio
Cameracense Paris. 1495 folio
Carthusiense Sine loco et anno folio
Cenomanense Paris. 1494 folio
Cisterciense Paris. 1487 folio
Cluniacense Cluniaci 1493 folio
Coloniense Coloniæ 1481* folio
Constantiense Basil. 1495 folio
Cracoviense Mogunt. 1487 folio
Curiense Aug. Vind. 1497 folio
Dominici Ord. Sti. Venet. 1482 4to.
Eboracense Ebor. 1516 folio
(See page 9, ante. )
Ebroicense Rothom. 1497 folio
Eduense Paris. 1493 folio
Eystettense Eustadii 1486 folio
Frisingense Bambergæ 1487 folio
Not in Panzer's list.
128 THIRD DAY.
rather too much neglected ; and I would recommend the
judicious and affluent theological collector to obtain the
first and the latest (but at any rate the first) impression of
every liturgy peculiar to any Cathedral or City. More
MISSALE
Gebennense
Herbipolense
Genevæ (1490) folio Herbipoli 1481 folio
(See page 30, ante. )
Itinerantium Colon. 1500 folio
Lausannense Genevæ 1500 folio
Legoniense Salmanticæ 1488 folio
Lubecense Lubecæ 1486 folio
Magdeburgense Lubecæ 1480 folio
Marchicar. Ecclesiar. Sine loco 1487 folio
Meldense Paris. 1492 folio
Misnense Mogunt.
1485 folio
Moguntinum Mogunt. 1482 folio
Mozarabicum Toleti 1500 folio
Olomucense Bambergæ 1488 folio
Parisiense Paris. 1481 folio
Pataviense Patav. 1491 folio
Pictaviense Paris. 1498 folio
Pragense (Pilsnæ)
1479 folio
Quinque Eccl.
Ratisponense
Venet. 1499 folio
Ratisbon. 1485 folio
Romanum Romæ 1475 folio
Rothomagense Rothomag.
1495 folio
Salisburgense Norimberg.
1492 folio
(See page 10, ante.)
Sleswicense Sleswic. 1486 folio
Spirense Spiræ 1484 folio
Strigoniense Veronæ 1480 folio
Tarraconense Tarracon. 1499 folio
Traiectense Paris. 1497 folio
Trecense Trecis 1500 4to.
Vallombrosale Venet. 1503 folio
(See page 84, ante.)
Wratislaviense
Xantonense Mogunt.
Paris.
1499 folio
1491 folio
Next to Missals, in importance and estimation, are BREVIARIES ; and ofthese
I shall give a similar list, observing that Panzer fills 4 pages in enumerating
those of the xvth century only,
THIRD DAY. 129
curious information, respecting the whim, or cunning, or
credulity of the human mind, may be derived from thence
than is generally imagined. But to pursue our enquiries.
BREVIARIUM
Ambrosianum Mediol. 1475 folio
(See page 19 ante. )
Aquileiense Venet. 1496 folio
Argentinense Sine loco 1478 folio
Augustanum Aug. Vind. 1479 folio
Bambergense Bamberg. 1484 8vo.
Basiliense Basil. 1478 folio
Benedictinum Venet. 1483 8vo.
Birgittæ S. Lubec. 1492 8vo.
Bituricense Venet. 1481 8vo.
Brixinense Venet. 1483 4to.
Cameracense Paris. 1497 8vo.
Capuanum Capuæ
Carmelitarum Bruxellæ
1489
1480 4to.
8vo.
Carthusiense
Cisterciense
Venet.
Basil.
1491
1484 8vo.
8vo.
Cluniacense Sine loco 1492 4to.
Constantiense Reutling. 1482 4to.
Cracoviense Venet. 1483 8vo.
Eboracense Venet. 1493 8vo.
(See page 9 ante).
Elnense Perpiniani 1500 8vo.
Eystetense Eustadii. 1483 folio
Frisingense Bamberg. 1482 4to.
Halberstadiense Sine loco et anno 4to.
Herbipolense Spiræ 1477 4to.
Hosp. S. Joh. Hier. Spiræ 1495 8vo.
Lemovicense Castr. Lemov. 1495 8vo.
Leodiense Antwerp.
1494 8vo.
Lincopense Norimb. 1493 8vo.
Lubecense
Lugdunense
(Lubec. ) (1477) folio
Lugd.
1498 folio
Magdeburgense Norimb. 1491 4to.
Mindense
Minorum
Norimb. 1491 4to.
Mediol. 1483 8vo.
Misnense Sine loco 1483 8vo.
Moguntinum Montisolivetani Mogunt.
Venet.
1474 4to.
1493 8vo.
130 THIRD DAY.
Do not suppose, because so many ornaments appear
within old printed Missals and Breviaries, &c. that volumes
of that class or character are the earliest works which contain
specimens ofthe engraver's art. On the contrary, editions of
the Bible, or portions of the sacred text, had exhibited similar
ornaments for a considerably previous period : and if you wish
BREVIARIUM
Nobilium
Olomucense
Lodeaci 1484 4to.
Venet. 1484 folio
Parisiense Paris. 1479 8vo.
Pataviense Aug. Vind. 1490 8vo.
Prædicatorum Ord. Venet. 1481 8vo.
Præmonstraten. Ord. Sine loco 1490 4to.
Ratisponense Ratisb. 1486 folio
Romanum Taurini 1474 8vo.
Rothomagense Sine loco 1480 folio
Salzburgense Venet 1482 4to.
Scarense Norimb. 1498 (8vo. )
Segoviense Hispali 1493 (*)
Spirense Spiræ 1478 4to.
Strigoniense Sine loco 1484 folio
Teutonicum
Toletanum
Norimb.
Hispali
1492 folio
1493 (†)
Tornacense Sine loco 1497 8vo.
Traiectense Schoenhoven. 1495 folio
Trecense Trecis. 1483 8vo.
Valent. Dioces. Neap.
1489 8vo.
Viennense Lugd.
1489 8vo.
Virdunense Paris. 1499 8vo.
Upsalense Holmiæ 1496 4to.
Windesimense Delphis 1499 folio
Wormatiense Sine loco et anno 4to.
Zagebriense Venet. 1484 4to .
It does not seem material to add the earliest impressions of the several OFFICES
and HOURS. Of the former, Panzer notices only five editions in the whole ; and
of these, the earliest is printed at Florence, in the Italian language, in 1482, ' for
the dead.' Of HOURS, there appears to be about forty-four editions in the whole,
in the xvth century ; and of these the edition of 1478, in folio, for the Strasbourg Cathedral,' seems to be the earliest.
* No size mentioned by Caballero, p. 44.
+ Caballero (p. 111 ) speaks doubtfully of this edition .
THIRD DAY. 131
me to observe chronological order, I must undoubtedly begin
with what are called Block-Books -frightful things for the
eyes ofa fair Lady togaze upon... but,in the estimation of the
antiquary, beautiful and precious beyond compare ! though,
as might have been expected, from the then rude state ofthe
art, good drawing is rarely attended to ; and objects almost
become ludicrous from the absurdity of their representation.
Some honourable exceptions however are to be made. The
pages of Heineken will supply you with amusing particulars
respecting that earliest production of art, in the shape of
what is called a Block Book, -namely, the ARS MEMORandi per FiguRAS ; and a very particular account of what
is conceived to be the first edition of the same work appears
in a recent publication. I mention it again here, because,
having for a minute only cast your eye upon the rude figure
given in the work just referred to * —as intending to represent a summary of what is contained from the XIIth to the
XVIIIth chapter, inclusively, of St. Matthew's Gospel-you
may observe howvery much that rudeness is corrected in an
edition of the same work, in a small quarto volume, of the
date of 1522.+
The second publication in order, of books printed either
* Bibliotheca Spenceriana ; vol . i. p. iv-vii. Of this first edition Papillon observes : 'On ne connoit plus ce livre que par son titre .' De la Gravure en Bois :
vol. i. p. 99.
↑ an edition of the same work, in a small quarto volume, of the date of 1522. ]
This volume is also in the collection of Earl Spencer. It is curious and uncommon. The title is thus : Rationarium euangelistarum omnia in se euangelia
prosa, uersu, imaginibusque qua mirifice cöplectens.' Some verses of Brant,
of Gallus Rubeaquensis, and Simler, are on the reverse. An address of George
Simler to the reader, follows ; and the same person would appear to be both the
editor of the work and the manufacturer of the verses. St. John's Gospel is placed
the first in order, with its three representative embellishments. Of these, take
132 THIRD DAY.
THE
wholly, or partly, by means of Blocks of Wood, is called, in
our own tongue, The Mirror ofHuman Salvation.' This 6
the third-curious reader ; that thou mayst be gradually prepared for the outrageous ornaments of this bizarre tome.
13 18
NY
14
ZI
Zo
THIRD DAY. 133
publication has received abundant illustration from the
curious researches of Mr. Ottley, and has been also described
St. Matthew follows, with his five representations. Compare, therefore, as
Philemon above advises, what here ensues, with the samefigure executed perhaps
seventy or eighty years before, in the work just referred to. It is the third
in order in the present publication.
17
16
13
14
15
18
THE
ASTOR
NY
RA
134 THIRD DAY.
ASTO
THE
IBR
among the treasures of Earl Spencer's collection. As it
now lies upon the table before us, there can be no harm in
St. Mark, with his three Lions, immediately ensues. The editor might well
prefix the following distich to such a wonderful ' representation :
Intonat horribilis Leo per deserta ferarum
Marcus, dum rectas monstrat inire uias.
N
σ
THIRD DAY. 135
giving it another inspection. What say you to the following
representation of Sampson carrying the Gates of Gaza?
St. Luke, with his four figures, or representations, terminates the volume. Of
these, I select the third ; as being, upon the whole, the more striking. The
figures of the Pharisee and Publican,' and especially that of Lazarus, ' are
immediately to be recognised ; while the nakedness of the Prodigal Son ' seems
17
"
18
16
14
15
FOR
LIB LIBRARYNY
136 THIRD DAY.
You observe, the strongest of men' makes nothing ofthe
ponderous portals, but marches away with them as nimbly
as a pair of jack- boots will enable him !
no unapt representation of the supposed original . But before I close this singular volume, I must, for the gratification of collectors of fiend-like exhibitions,
give the ensuing rival figures of Satan ; the first is taken from the bottom ofthe
1st figure of St. Matthew's Representation-from that part which is meant to
describe the Temptation of our Saviour ; the second is from St. Luke's Representation, and descriptive of the same subject.
THIRD DAY. 137
Again we have the same Champion, in the act of performing
his wonderful exploit of defeating a thousand Philistines
with the jaw-bone ofan ass !
Saplonpammtmille cumâmblàazú
From these specimens of a rare and whimsical book, which may be said to
display a sort of Memoria Technica, ' the reader shall judge for himself of the
first class of Books formerly printed by means of Wooden Blocks. The lapse of
so many years has unquestionably produced a visible improvement in design and
execution. The colophon tells us that this edition was published by Thomas
Badensis, sirnamed Anshelm, in 1522. The device of the same person (who
is said to be ' uir magisterio præditus insolente') is beneath : having the initials
A B and T within a circle upon a black-striped ground. In the whole, 18
leaves ; and purchased of Mr. R. Triphook for 81. 8s. Papillon notices a previous
edition of 1504, which may probably contain the same cuts.
VOL. I. K
138 THIRD DAY.
I shall indulge you with only one more specimen; referring
you to the pages of the works before mentioned for an illustration of this Mirror -at once curious and copious-to
your heart's delight. At present, throw your eye upon the
quiet and cool manner in which Eleazar (as mentioned in
the first book of Maccabees) is sitting beneath the elephant,
about to receive both the beast and the castle of armed men
upon his back. It is a brave ' specimen of a knowledge of
natural history : but not quite putting Bewick to the blush !
6
00
00
Ifyour curiosity have in the least induced you to make
further acquaintance with the Block Books, described in the
last mentioned work, (as being found in my Lord Spencer's
extraordinary collection of almost every thing that is exquisite and rare in the book way-) you would no doubt have
THIRD DAY. 139
turned over a few more leaves, till you reached the account
of a work entitled ARS MORIENDI, or the Art of Dying.
Sometimes the title is more extended, as THE ART OF
LIVING AND OF DYING WELL -This work has sustained its
popularity for upwards of three centuries : as we have only
to take down yonder brilliant quarto volume, and examine
the fine copper-plate engravings of that subject which were
published by George Gallet at Antwerp, in 1700 ; under the
title of La Manière de se bien prévarer à la Mort,' &c.*
The parent edition is the one in Earl Spencer's Collection ;
and I well remember, at this moment, the sort of petrifying
horror with which the cuts in that edition struck me.
Heineken, in his fac-similes of these horror-striking subjects,
has given too sleek a visage and too fine a form to the
Demons Why I wish to call your attention to this work at
present, is, that there appeared an edition of it at Florence,
probably from the press ofMiscomino, † in which the subjects
were treated with comparative grace and elegance of effect.
* La Manière de se bien préparer à la Mort, &c. ] It is not intended to be
inferred that this is the last comparatively modern edition of the work above
mentioned. I believe there is yet a more recent and splendid impression of it.
✦ an edition ofit at Florence, probablyfrom the press of Miscomino. ] Philemon
might have spoken more positively upon this point. The cuts, and the borders
in particular, are quite of the Florentine school ; and the type exactly resembles
that of Miscomino, the great typographical ornament of the city of Florence,
The title is thus-from which we infer that the original edition could not have
been printed before 1452— Incomincia elprohemio della arte del ben morire cioe
igratia di dio compilato & composto per lo reuerendo in christo padre Monsignor
Cardinale di fermo neglianni del nostro Signore. M. cccc. lii. ' This title, over the
cut given in the following page, is upon signature a i. The text immediately
follows beneath the cut. In the whole, 22 leaves : comprehending signatures a 8,
b 8, and c 6. On the reverse of c vj : Finito ellibro del ben morire tucto storiato
Deogratias.' Itis without date, or name of printer ; but was probably not executed
before the year 1490. The ornaments, which occupy the spaces of capital initials,
are, some of them, exceedingly tasteful and spirited. This account is taken from
a copy in the possession of the Rev. Mr. Rice.
140 THIRD DAY.
X
But you shall judge for yourselves. The first ornament,
immediately beneath the title, is thus :
The accompaniments, or accessories as the artists call
them, are quite of a classical description ; and therefore
entirely different from what you are accustomed to witness
in the impressions of this work previously executed in
Germany. In the Second Temptation, which attends the
bed of the dying man, the feeling of Despair is supposed
to prevail : as seducing the Christian from a proper confidence in his Redeemer. Observe how this is treated. The
furniture of the room bespeaks the poverty of the dying
man : but the fiends are very much softened down from
what we see in the earlier representations ofthem,
THIRD DAY 111
1-1-1-1-1-F-FF
Compare this figure of a man on horseback, in the Third
Temptation called Impatience -with what you see in the
oldest edition; and acknowledge the superiority of expression
in the style of art of the Florentine School.
142 THIRD DAY.
The grouping ofthese figures, though borrowed from the
ancient impression, is rather prettily conceived and executed.
Examine now the last of the larger ornaments, which represents the dying man in his latter moments.
X
THIRD DAY. 143
But let us draw a curtain over these dismal and heartrending scenes ; and, still confining our remarks to the style
of art observable in the Block Books, let us hasten to the
description of a volume of less general notoriety. Approach
now, on the tip-toe of expectation -and let every eye be
strained, and every heart palpitate, while turning over the
leaves of THE CHIROMANCY OF DR. HARTLIEB :
The Doctor he was a cunning man,
And prophet eke was he ;
For in the palm of either hand
He coming events could see.
A sorry quatrain ! -which I remember to have heard, or
something like it, pronounced upon an itinerant Quack and
Astrologer, habited like an old magician
LISARDO. O rare Doctor Hartlieb ! I shall desire you
of more acquaintance, good master Hartlieb.'
PHILEMON. You shall know him to your heart's content.
And mark well, ere you look, that the copy of the Doctor's
labours, now before us, is the first and only one which ever
came into this country.* Heineken, if I remember rightly,
the first and only one which ever came into this country. ] It was purchased by
Lord Spencer for 100 guineas ; having been bought in at a public auction for 120l.
In the fly leaf of it, a ms. observation informs us that the present copy is supposed
to have been surreptitiously obtained from the Imperial Library at Vienna, when
the French army was in possession of that capital. It was purchased of a General
officer, who employed an agent for the purpose of vending it, in order to conceal
his own name. On collating it with the one [ in the Royal Library] at Paris, the
present is found to be perfect ; only the third leaf, which in the present copy is
properly placed opposite to that representing the Author and the Princess Anne
of Brunswick, is, in the Parisian copy, improperly introduced at nearly the end
ofthe work. As Brunet does not pretend to assign the pecuniary value of this
rare but uncouth gem, and as the Parisian copy cost 3000 francs, upwards of
27 years ago, ( being kept under lock and key with the Boccaccio of 1471 '-so
my ms. note informs me, ) the intelligent collector may be pleased with a
somewhat particular account of it.
144 THIRD DAY.
mentions but one perfect, and three imperfect copies ; yet a
fifth, perfect, is in the Royal Library at Paris. What a
title-page have we here ! followed by a portrait of the
Doctor himself, kneeling before his Patroness, the Princess
Anne of Brunswick ; who is about to receive very courteously the present thus tendered her.
It is a folio volume, and has the recto of the first leaf nearly filled by what the
publisher thought an ornamental title-page. At the top of this ornament are the
words Die kunst Ciromantia.' Of these words, as well as of the lower part of
the ornament, (being white flowers, surrounded by an angular chain, each upon
a black ground, ) Heineken has given fac-similes in the French translation of
his work in 1771 ; but in the original or German edition, in 1769, there is only
THIRD DAY. 145
Opposite, you observe, is a very whimsical wood-cut ; of
the whole of which Heineken has given a fac-simile, but by
no means faithful, or indicative of the peculiar style of art
which prevails in it. Look particularly how extremely
defective is the impression of the right-hand corner of this
oblong wood-cut !
a fac-simile of the ornament at the end of the book-of which, presently. The
reverse of the 1st leaf is blank, and the recto of the second leaf seems also to
have been blank-upon signature a i. On the reverse ofit, at top, is the general
title of the work, and its date with reference to the year of its composition.
As Heineken has given this-which, with the entire work, is printed in the
German language-the reader may be better pleased with its appearance in an
English form : The following book, written by the hand of Doctor Hartlieb In
German, at the request and calling of her Serene Highness Princess Ann of Brunswick, wife of the virtuous and illustrious Prince Duke Albert, Duke of Bavaria
and Count of Vaubourg. This took place on Friday being the Conception of the Glorious Virgin 1448.'
146 THIRD DAY.
By examining the right hand corner ofthe bottom of the
last leaf, we observe that the printer's name is Scapff-a
"
6
The original occupies 7 lines. Then 2 rule-lines, and 7 printed lines ; beneath
which are the portraits of Hartlieb ' and ' Anna.' The first portrait speaks for
itself, in the fac-simile in p. 144 ; which, in the original has a greenish tint,
from the paper being of a yellow colour. The portrait of Ann of Brunswick '
represents that character as sitting, and stretching forth her right hand in the
act of receiving the Doctor's work. The head dress and attitude of this figure
rather remind us of what appears in the Biblioth. Spenceriana, vol. iv. p. 484—
representing Mary, Queen of Hungary, from the ' Chronicon Regum Hungariæ,'
1488, 4to. On the recto of the following leaf, marked a ii, are 24 lines oftext,
beginning, Wan dich die,' &c. (and not · Wann’as Heineken has it in both
publications). These lines afford an explanation of the system of the author.
Beneath them, and quite across the page, (measuring about seven inches and an
eighth, by three inches and a half) is a wood-cut representing the ultimate
destinies of men, (most of them very melancholy destinies) as foretold by the
marks in their hands ; and of the whole of this Heineken has given a fac- simile ;
but in too finished and sharp a manner. The reader may rely upon the superior accuracy of what he sees in the preceding page, representing the right-hand
corner ofthis singular cut, and exhibiting the good fortune of those who have
only to hold open their laps for the wealth of this world to be poured into them.
On the reverseis the first of the gigantic hands ' above mentioned--measuring
ten inches and a quarter in height, and nearly seven in width. There is, comparatively, very little writing, or text, upon this palm. Each page-that is, each
side of the leaf -exhibits the strange appearance of a large hand covered with
type, precisely similar to what is seen in the next page. The type, however,
is sometimes smaller, but always in a running secretary- gothic ; and evidently
cut upon the block. The introductory parts, before described, are printed in a
larger type, and that upon sign . a ij. is by no means very unlike the fac- simile
given in the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. i . opposite p. xxx, as belonging to one of the
cuts from The Fifteen Signs of the Day of Judgment. ' The work, in short, is
executed upon 26 leaves ; 24 of these being upon signatures a, b, and c ; each in
eights. The first leaf, containing the title, has no signature. On the recto of c vij,
beneath the frame-work, (which is in every page) and quite in the right-band
corner, is the name of the printer-given in the opposite page : more accurately
than by Heineken. The part of the hand, also given, is immediately above this
name. The reverse is blank. Another, and the 26th and last leaf, contains a
counter- ornament to the title- page, and is entitled Die kunst Cyromantia.' The
ornamental flowers are here black, upon a white ground ; as may be seen in a
part of it given by Heineken. One side only of this last leaf is printed upon.
It remains to observe, that however this volume be of prodigious rarity, and of
no ordinary curiosity, it cannot be ranked among the ' INCUNABULA' of the Art
of Printing. Its signatures forbid the application to it of a date earlier than that
THIRD DAY. 147
C
name wholly unknown,' as Heineken has justly remarked.
What sprawling gigantic hands are these ! -upon which the
text, describing the mysteries of the Hartliebean chiromancy,
is impressed. Here is a thumb from the last hand in the
volume, and the fate which awaits marks like those represented upon it.
Saman
repbla
Wee
atan
de
I'm
M
RogCapffzy augſurg
of 1472 ; but there can be no question about each page being printed by means
of blocks of wood. Upon the whole, the Noble Owner of this treasure has no
reason to repent the sum given for it-as it now completes his series ofthe BLOCK
Books. This copy is sound and entire ; in a blue morocco binding, within a case.
Let me, however, just add that Jansen (De l'Origine de la Gravure, vol. i.
p. 115-117, ) borrows the whole of Heineken's description of this book -without acknowledgment !
148 THIRD DAY.
Whatever may be the intrinsic merit of Hartlieb, his
work was the fountain-head of innumerable similar productions. The sub-divided catalogues of Bunau, Hulse, or
Solger, may supply you with a sprinkling of publications
upon this subject ; but I cannot forego the opportunity of
directing your attention to a curious and early printed little
octavo volume upon Chiromancy, which I have no doubt
made its appearance quite at the beginning of the sixteenth
century. It was among the book-baggage in the caravan,
and is now before us. Look at these grave masters of the
art of chiromancy ! How their hands, indicative of the
subject discussed, are made to group with their bodies !
They appear at least to be an affectionate triumvirate.
a curious and earlyprinted little octavo volume upon Chiromancy. ] The title
THIRD DAY. 149
Instead ofthe white back ground in Hartlieb s book, you
observe a much better effect in the black one, relieved by
white ornaments, in the work of Master CORVUS-for such
is the black name ofthe author : Vી
For the benefit of the female part of my audience, I
shall give a free translation of the original Latin-beneath
this said hand-as thus: When a cross, like the one above
described, is found within the palm of the hand, it denotes
of this strange book is as follows : Excellentissimi et Singularis Viri in Chiromantia exercitatissimi Magistri Andrea Corui Mirandulensis.' The group in
p. 148 is on the reverse of this title. This work is dedicated to John Francis
Gonzaga of Mantua ; and is called, at the bottom of a ij, opus rarissimum.'
It is throughout in the black letter, and contains signatures a to i, inclusively,
in eights. The first of the two hand fac-similes, above given, is taken from gÿ,
recto, and the second from i iiij reverse. I suspect that this volume, or one put
forth about the same period, was the parent of several others about to be mentioned in an ensuing note.
150 THIRD DAY.
courage and pride of heart.' But beware how you carry
your thumb thus : as we are told it denotes a covetous
fellow, and one who wishes to live by good means or ill
means-( per fas et nefas ')-in other words, ' by hook or by
crook. '
Chiromancy was probably the parent of PHYSIOGNOMY ;
that is to say, books upon chiromancy preceded, and may
have given rise to, those upon physiognomy : and thus
Hartleib's work became the germ of Lavater's. Indeed
chiromancy and physiognomy usually accompanied each
other in a prodigious number of publications in the sixteenth
century ; but Michael Scot in the fifteenth, and Baptista
Porta in the sixteenth century, made a strong push to give
the latter the ascendancy ; and Porta's book certainly rendered physiognomy, from thenceforth, rather a popular
study. The commentators upon chiromancy are now
THIRD DAY. 151
dwindled into itinerant gipsies and fortune-tellers. Scot's
earliest book is of the date of 1477, * but divested ofcuts ;
nor does the later edition of 1495, at Leipsic, contain any
representations of the human face as illustrative of the
doctrine of physiognomy. To give a genealogical account
(if you will allow me that expression) of the various publications upon this latter science would be equally useless and
impracticable. I shall therefore only give an idea ofthe
degree of merit which the
generality of the cuts of
the earlier publications exhibit, by selecting those
which appeared in the productions of one of its most
able and active expositors :
I mean, IOANNES DE INDAGINE. First, however,
you may just look at the
frontispiece, which contains
the sagacious, but rather
sour-looking, physiognomy of the gentleman himself. † It
does not appear to be a flattered likeness. The specimens
* Scot's earliest book is of the date of 1477. ] See Panzer, vol. iv. p. 463.
Mr. Roscoe was so good as to send, for my inspection, a rare impression ofScot's
' Liber phisiognomie-cum multis secretis mulierum,' which was printed by
Arnoldus de Colonia in the year 1495, at Leipsic, 4to. which appears to have
escaped Leichius. There were no cuts in this impression, except an unconnected
one of a schoolmaster sitting at his desk, and two boys before him-by way of
frontispiece. I conclude, by this, that the earlier impressions have no cuts : at
least none are mentioned by Panzer.
+ physiognomy of the gentleman himself. ] Round the portrait, within a threelined border, we read AVTORE 10. INDAGINE. Above it are 5 titles, from
the principal of which we learn that the work relates a little to physiognomy,
152 THIRD DAY.
which you are about to see, are taken from a French version
of the original Latin of the same author, published at Lyons
·
but chiefly to chiromancy and Natural Astrology. This work was printed
in 1543 by Peter Regnault, in 8vo. The hands are in outline, and are well
drawn. As a supplement to what above appears, about Thumbs, take
the following, mystery-loving reader, from folio 28, with its accompanying
illustrations. Præterea in pollicis monte qui fissuras habent nimium multas,
nullo ordine, nec ita pari interuallo, sed sparsim inter se diuersas, eos haud dubiè
libidinosos et impuros, sed interim amarulentos, et etiam iurgiosos, et qui cum
mulieribus lites facilè conserant, ac morosi et difficiles habeantur. Cumque
libidine in tantum æstuent, vt satiari etiam facilè non possint, exquirantque ibi
genera insueti vsus, et monstro similima, conuersationis tamen sunt minimè
iucundæ et vitæ insuauis. Tenet eos ferè nullum sapientiæ studium, nec in
doctrinis proficiunt, sed ad alia capaciores sunt, sciteque exercent ea quæ
matutino opere fiunt. Et quæ ad luxum sunt omnia ingeniosè excogitant.' After
this, let the reader look with hesitating eyes upon any similarity in the lines of
his own thumbs to what he here beholds-as illustrative of the foregoing
position.
AR
The cuts of the Gods and Goddesses, in this curious little book, are the best
specimens ofthe art of engraving contained in it, and are worthy of the burin of
Bernard. The heads, or physiognomies, are of very indifferent execution. Peter
Regnault re-published the same heads, in a French publication entitled ' Le
Compedion et brief enseignement de Physiognomie et Chriromancie de Berthelemy Cocles, de Bouloigne, docteur de Philosophie naturelle et de medicine.
Monstrant par le regard du visage, signe de la face, et lignes de la main, les
meurs et complexions des gens, selon les figures par le liure despainctes.' His
small and pretty device (see FIFTH DAY, post) is beneath. The edition is
without date, but the hands (white, upon a black ornamented ground) are copied
from Corvus's work before mentioned ; and the descriptions or definitions in
THIRD DAY. 153
in the tasteful office of Tournes, or Tornæsius, * about the
middle of the sixteenth century. We are not informed of
French, beneath, appear to be versions of the text of Cocles. These hands,
however, are of greatly inferior execution. The same style of art, both in the
heads and hands, but somewhat improved, appears in the original text of Cocles
printed at Strasbourg, in 1555, 8vo.; which I presume to be printed subsequently
to the impression of Regnault. There is sufficient evidence of all the blocks
having been recut for this impression. I possess a copy of each of the books
just described.
* published in the tasteful office ofTournes, or Tornasius. ] Very superior to
either of the books upon chiromancy and physiognomy, described in the preceding
notes, is the work above mentioned by Philemon. Its title is thus : Chiromance
& Physiognomie par le Regard des Membres de l'homme, faite par Iean de
Indagine. Le tout mis en Francois par Antoine du Moulin, Masconnois, Valet
de chambre de la Royne de Navarre. ' Colophon : A Lyon, par Iehan de
Tournes. M.D.XLIX. 8vo. Avec privilege du Roi pour dix ans.' This book might
really have entertained her Majesty of Navarre ; and I make no doubt that
Bernard was the artist to whom we are indebted for the spirited engravings of
which the ensuing, at p. 138-9, are fac- similes. My friend Mr. Douce possesses
impressions of the original blocks upon blank paper ; but of rather inferior workmanship to those of the copy from which the above are taken.
6
Among the works upon physiognomy in our own country, about the middle of
the xvith century, I believe that of THOMAS HILL-called The Contemplation
ofMankinde, contayning a singuler discourse after the art ofPhisiognomie,' &c. and
printed by Seres in 1571,8vo. —to have been among the most popular. It is professed to be a translation ; but the title page gives us only a worthie Grecian
named Melampus' as the original author : the work of ' Mayster Dee' as affording
helpe and ayde at the beginning,' is introduced in the address to the Reader.
Afew commendatory verses, from several learned wights, precede the text. Those
of Nicolas Lee are as follow-with the subjoined version :
"
VOL. I.
'Nicolai Leihi ogdoastichon ad Lectorem.
Indole qua quis sit, vultu dignoscere, Thomas
Hillus depingit, qua ratione queas.
Plurima doctorum peruoluens scripta virorum
Optima decerpsit sedulus, instar apis.
Nec piget immensos illum nauasse labores,
Quod, quantum in sese est, vtilis esse studet.
Vt gratis donat, quæcunq; hæc munera præbet :
Sic voto satis est, si tibi gratus erit.
Here Thomas Hill depainteth plaine,
the picture ofthe minde,
L
154 THIRD DAY.
the precise judgment ofMr. Shandy upon noses like those
which you are shortly to behold ; but I will be free to say
Which way you may by countenaunce,
the disposition finde.
Pervsingmany monuments
of auncient wryters hee,
Electing still thats excellent
doth imitate the Bee.
It nothing yrkes him labors great,
nor traveyles to bestowe,
In any thing he can deuise,
that profite seems to showe.
As he doth gratis give thee these,
what ere they seeme to bee,
So hath he all his wish, if he
be gratefull unto thee.'
With regard to the decorations of this volume, they are far from being despicable. I make no doubt that a foreigner made the designs ; and it is just possible
that the engravings were executed here. They are, comparatively , of an inferior
description.
These cuts, each repeated, first appear at folios 41 , 51. The first has much
of the Venetian air and costume, and the latter even approaches something of
THIRD DAY. 155
that the looking-glass will reflect no such proboscis among
the male, and no such nasal flatness among the female, part
of my audience-as what we here see in the Lyons publi-
:
elevation of character. The history subjoined to it may be worth extracting. It
is from The Phisognomer Cocles. ' ' A certaine Gouernour, named Valentinus
Cæser, the sonne of a mightie man when he gouerned, which was a murderer,
a great deceyuer, a breaker of true fayth, a spoyler of women, and a most great
lyar had the eyes glystering, which signified that person to be gouerned of Mars :
in the night time he exercised reuels, banketing and women : and this he folowed
in the time of his most serious affayres : he seeledome gaue eare or hearde any of
his subiects causes. He was a man giuen to be solitarie, and full of thoughts and
musing, sometimes prodigall, and of no stable religion : he also was couetous,
and fearefull, yet bolde in wordes, and indued with a singuler eloquence : in
diuers publicke matters to be hearde, or in places of iustice he threatened :
and this caused, thorowe the disposition of Saturne and Mars, as aboue vttered.
He was a person hauing a most detestable witte : especially about wicked
businesses, which proceeded of Saturne and Mars. The colour of the skinne
was wan, and [he] had an aquiline nose, which witnessed the disposition and
nature of Mars.'
for
The physiognomies in outline are probably better drawn and have more
character ; but among the shaded ones, the reader will notice what seems to have
been copied from a portrait of DANTE, at fol. 101 ; repeated, I believe, more
than once. I had thought that the portrait at fol . 164, 183, 204, might have
been intended for a resemblance of Henry IV. and the scarf round the arm may
rather strengthen such conjecture. I have before noticed (in the Typographical
Antiquities) the introduction of a figure, gathering herbs, at fol. 160, reverse,
the portrait of Richard Jones the printer, by Ames and Herbert. The two men
shewing a lion, on the reverse of fol. 186, is rather a curious cut. But it is
time to dismiss Thomas Hill.' The copy, from which the foregoing account
is taken, was supplied Earl Spencer by my friend M. Neunburg. It is however
defective in one leaf of The Epistle ;' but is otherwise more clean and sound
than any one of the four copies of it which I have seen.
Mr Shandy upon Noses.] He who hath read ' The Life and Opinions, &c. of
Tristram Shandy, Gentleman,' hath therein read the humorous hypothesis
relating unto noses. But probably the same reader hath not perused Chap. vi.
of the late Dr. Ferriar's Illustrations of Sterne,' 1812, 8vo. vol. i. p. 146 : —a
work, which ranks among the most amusing ' ANA ' in our language, and which
is alike instructive to the bibliographer and philologist. The argument of the said
chapter is as follows ; Mr. Shandy's hypothesis of noses explained. Taliacotius.
"
Stories of long noses. Coincidence between Vigneul, Marville, and Lavater.
Opinions ofGarmann, Riolan, Beddves. Segar's point of honour concerning the nose.'
156 THIRD DAY.
cation. These are taken from the Ivth chapter, which dis6 courses Ofthe Judgment ofthe Nose.'
Alittle onward, we find the viith chapter discoursing ' Of
the Chin ; and illustrated by the following representations
of that unassuming member ofthe visage.
The Ixth chapter treats Ofthe Physiognomy ofthe Face,
and is well adorned by such countenances as the following :
which, however fanciful the hypothesis may seem, I do
really suspect to be bona-fide portraits. Admit, my friends,
that there is no ordinary expression of character in these
physiognomies ; and that the engraving has done justice to
the design.
THIRD DAY. 157
In the xth chapter an important judgment is pronounced
"Ofthe Physiognomy ofthe Ears. It must be admitted that
the ensuing form a contrast to each other:
But there is no end to such representations ; and therefore referring you to PORTA and LAVATER, * (the latter, the
Porta and Lavater. ] The first edition of Baptista Porta's work upon Physioguomy, was published at Hanover in 1593, 8vo. This impression must always be
secured, if the reader wish to have the cuts in their purest state. Not however
that either the drawings or the engravings have the force and truth which we
observe in the above specimens of a more ancient date. In short, the very best
cut in the volume happens luckily to be the most interesting one : namely, that
of a portrait of the author. There appears to be equal truth and spirit in this
STOR
TH
ASTOR
NY
158 THIRD DAY.
ASTOR
LI
NY
noblest work which ever has, or perhaps ever will, appear
upon the subject) I dismiss this part of the day's discussion;
embellishment ; which, about the mouth, has certainly no very remote resemblance
to the physiognomy of Lavater.
ANETL
The work is dedicated to Aloysius Estensis ; and the author does well to make
a supplemental remark, at the end of his preface-that Hæc scientia coniecturalis est, nec semper optatum assequitur finem.' The printing of this volume is
very indifferent ; and the only fair and endurable copy I ever saw of it (sold by
Mr. Evans in January, 1816) was purchased by me for eight shillings. The
re-impressions, both of the text, and of an Italian version, are little desirable ;
though that of 1643, 4to. of the latter, printed at Venice, appears to have additional matter. Porta's book was popular because it was accompanied by heads of
THIRD DAY. 159
and, with it, take leave of the subjects connected with Block
printing.
LORENZO. Suffer me to remark-what I make no doubt
you are well aware of—that short Scriptural Histories, or extracts from the Bible, were occasionally subjects of the united
operation ofengraving and printing : and from this point, or
datum, you might probably treat us with an account of a
birds or beasts-as approximating more or less to the human face : si homo
(says the author) partem aut membrum aliquod feræ vel avi simile habet, ab his
necesse est ipsum physiognomonizari,' p. 30. I should add that there is a good
portrait of Cardinal Este at the end of the Index of Chapters.
Lavater's work upon Physiognomy was translated by Dr. Hunter, and was
published in 1789, in 5 large quarto volumes, accompanied by plates of transcendent merit-executed by English artists-and principally by HOLLOWAY.
This edition was sold in numbers ; and I should hope a perfect copy of it, with
proof impressions of the plates, and in morocco binding, is yet worth 31l. 10s.
I know of few books better calculated to relieve the tedium of a rainy morning
than this magnificent work-the author and the artists contending alike for
superiority of admiration. Some ofthe portraits are of exquisite performance ; and
justify all that has been said of the charm of this species of ornament in our favourite volumes of consultation. Hear what hath been well expressed upon
this subject, in a certain work ycleped The Forest or Collection of Historyes, &c.
1576, 4to. Of the first Libraries that euer were in the worlde, and how the
men of that time vsed to haue the Images or purtraites of the learned in them.
Cap. 3.
Our common vsage or custome was ordinary in the olde age, to
wit, that they had in their secret Cabinets or Studyes, the perfect Image and
purtrait, of all suche as had in any sorte excelled in learning. Plinie writeth,
that Marcus Varro beeing yet the living, merited for his rare vertue and
knowledge in good letters, that his Image should haue place in the Library of
Assinius Polion. Cicero wrote to Fabian, that he shoulde prouide him of some
purtraits, the better to adorne and beautifie his study. Plinie the yunger
writing to Julius Seuerus saith that Ere Seuerus, a man very wel lettered would
order in his studye among other his purtraites, the Images of Cornelius and Titus
Arius. Of these things finde we euery where sufficient , and good proof : whose
Libraryes, as also those of other learned men & great princes, which after in
successe and processe of time followed, were destroyed and defaced by the
Gothes and Vandales ; vntil now that in our time by the great bountie of God,
infinit are found bothe studious and learned, that haue gathered togither huge
heapes of Books, though not indeed the tenth part, of these aboue remembred
by our Ancestors.' Sign. A, a, rev.
160 THIRD DAY.
few of the earlier publications-either of the Old and New
Testaments together-or of each of them separately—or of
portions from either ?
PHILEMON. The remark is just. But into what a field
of endless variety are you compelling me to enter ? What
Dryden says of Chaucer, may be well repeated of the subject
alluded to- there is such a variety of game springing up
before me, that I am distracted in my choice, and know not
which to follow.'
LYSANDER. At any rate give us something of this congenial subject. Remember, to-morrow I am to introduce
topics of a comparatively dry nature ; and the present may
serve as a variety and contrast to the aridity of merely
typographical detail.
BELINDA. I entreat you to muster up only a little
courage, and our disposition to be amused will render the
subject extremely entertaining, however you may execute it
short ofyour own satisfaction.
PHILEMON. It would be affectation to resist further entreaty, and so take my exertions as you find them. The
moon would go through all her changes ere such a subject
could be treated in a manner at once comprehensive and
complete. You shall have therefore only a glimpse—or a
sort of bird's eye view of the varieties and graces with
which such a discussion might be adorned.
The earliest printed book, containing text and engravings
illustrative of scriptural subjects, is called the Histories of
Joseph, Daniel, Judith, and Esther. This is executed in the
German language, and was printed by Pfister at Bamberg
in 1462.* It is among the rarest typographical curiosities
printed by Pfister at Bamberg, in 1462. ] I make no apology for introducing,
a second time, the metrical version of the original metrical colophon in the
THIRD DAY. 161
in existence ; there being at present only two known copies
of it-one in the Royal Library at Paris, and another in the
collection of the Noble Earl whose treasures we shall have
such frequent occasion to notice. These cuts are frightfully
rude, and only in the outline, as might have been expected.
They shew indeed the clumsiness of their German origin.
This partial impression of the sacred text, decorated in the
manner just described, most probably gave the idea of
publishing the entire text of the Bible, in the same language,
and with similar embellishments : and if my memory be not
at this moment treacherous, the German presses were the
earliest which exhibited the sacred volume with engravings
cut in wood. You will observe that the Mentz editions of
the Bible, in the Latin tongue, from the years 1455 to 1472,
inclusively, contain no wood-cut ornaments ; nor do the
German language-from the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. i. p . 98. This version is
literally accurate, and was supplied by my friend Mr. R. W. Wade.
Each man with eagerness desires
To learn, and to be wise aspires.
But books and masters make us so ;
And all men cannot Latin know.
Thereon I have for sometime thought,
And HISTORIES FOUR together brought :
JOSEPH and DANIEL and JUDITH
With good intent : ESTHER therewith.
To these did God protection give,
As now to all who godly live.
If by it we our lives amend
This little book hath gained its end.
Which certainly in Bamberg town
By ALBERT PFISTER's press was done ;
Infourteen hundred sixty two,
As men now reckon that is true.
Soon after good St. Walburgh's day:
Whomto procure for us, we pray,
Peace and eternal life to live ;
The which to all of us god give. Amen.
162 THIRD DAY.
earlier impressions at Rome and at Venice, whether in Latin
or Italian, contain a vestige of similar decoration. The first
Bible printed at Paris, in 1475-6, is also destitute of engravings ; so that either the Augsbourg or Nuremberg press may
be said to be the parent of graphic embellishment of the
sacred text. * The cuts, in these early German versions of
Scripture, are frequently very spirited and forcible. Sometimes we observe good drawing in them ; but almost always
vigour and effect. In short I have little doubt of their having
laid the basis of that school of art, which, if it be divested of
the grace and delicacy of the Italian burin, has at least
afforded us infinite amusement in the thousand embellishments with which the pages of early German publications are
crowded. The works of Brandt and ofGeyler, and the early
German versions of ancient Classics, are strongly confirma-
*ive ofthis position. But of these in due order.
The fruitfulness of the early Nuremberg press, in ornamental publications, is beyond conception. Sometimes
indeed these ornaments are not remarkable for decorum ;
* the Augsbourg or Nuremberg press —the parent of graphic embellishment of
the sacred text. ] I consider the German Bible executed at Augsbourg, of the
supposed date of 1473, and another similar Bible, considered to have been executed by Fyner of Eslingen, between the years 1474 and 1477, to be the earliest
of the impressions of the Bible, in the German language, which contain woodcuts. See the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. i. p. 47-50 ; vol. iv. p. 450. Afac- simile
from the former impression is given in the pages first here referred to. It is not
very improbable that, in the early stage of the art of printing in which Pfister's
Bible (of the supposed date of 1460) was executed, a sufficient number of woodcut ornaments could not be collected ; and as there are cuts to the Four Histories
of the date 1462, and to the Biblia Pauperum, both in the German and Latin
languages (see Bibl. Spencer, vol. i. p . 100-104)—each in all probability executed
by Pfister also we may conclude that these latter were of a later date than the
Bible itself; and therefore this may give additional strength to the inference
drawn in favour of the presumed period of the execution of the Bible. Not
however (it must frankly be conceded) that such inference is entirely conclusive.
THIRD DAY. 163
since, even as early as 1483 , Koberger published with impunity an impression of the Bible, in the German language,
in which the Pope was introduced, in a large wood-cut, as
being among the principal of thefallen angels! Weislinger
and Clement are very dexterous in blunting the edge of this
biting satire. My researches have not chanced to lead me
to any impressions of the sacred text, exhibiting cuts, of an
earlier period than those of which specimens are already
before the public ; but among later impressions of the
German version you must not fail to notice those which
contain the text of Luther, and which sometimes exhibit
very spirited ornaments. Indeed I know of few more puzzling subjects, in a bibliographical point of view, than that
of settling the priority of the earlier impressions of Martin
Luther's version. †
* the edge ofthis biting satire. ] This Bible is particularly described in the
Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. iv. p. 453-5. The greater part of a rainy morning might
be satisfactorily devoted to the entertainment afforded by the cuts of this Bible ;
and if good fortune should ever take the bibliomaniac to the spot where the
Spencerian copy is deposited, he will not fail to utter more than one exclamation
of delight at the beautiful condition of it, within and without !
† the earlier impressions of Martin Luther's version. ] I have endured more
than one head-ach in endeavouring to settle this knotty point : see Bibl. Spencer.
vol . i. p. 58-62. At present, therefore, I shall only submit to the curious reader
what Seckendorf, in his huge Commentarius Historicus et Apologeticus de Lutheranismo, 1692, folio, has enabled me to select. In January, 1522, Luther thus
writes to his friend Nicolaus Amsdorffinus : Interim Biblia transferam ; quanquam onus susceperim supra vires. Video nunc quid sit interpretari, et cur
hactenus a nullo sit attentatum, qui profiteretur nomen suum. [priores enim
versiones nomen autorum non memorant] Vetus vero testamentum non potero
attingere, nisi vobis præsentibus et cooperantibus. Denique si qua posset fieri,
ut secretum cubile apud vestrum aliquem haberem, mox venirem, et vestro
auxilio totum ab initio transferrem, ut fieret translatio digna, quæ Christianis
legeretur ; spero enim nos meliorem daturos esse, quam habeant Latini, nostræ
Germaniæ. Magnum et dignum opus est, in quo nos omnes laboremus, cum sit
publicum et publicæ saluti , donandum. ' lib . ii. p. 45.
Seckendorf adds that Luther applied himself with all his vigour, in that
solitude, (Wittemberg) during the whole summer of 1521, in making himself
164 THIRD DAY.
Leaving this point for your future enquiries, I resume
mygraphic theme : and without pretending to say how
many more beautiful and more interesting editions of the
"
master of the Hebrew and Greek languages ; that he might be equal to the task
he was about to undertake. The German versions (continues Seckendorf) of
1477, 1483, 1490, at Nuremberg —and of 1518 at Augsbourg - nullo populi
fructu, cui nec legi permittebantur, nec ob styli et typorum horriditatem satisfacere poterant.' Cruel criticism this, upon ancient typographical lore ! The
same authority adds, that Luther consulted theform of the publication, so that
it might come out in parts, and at a moderate price.' Yet that renowned
Reformer had something like magnificent and truly-bibliomaniacal notions respecting the manner of bringing out his magnum opus '—for thus writeth ' our
Luther' to his friend Pontanus, on the 20th of September, 1539, concerning the
Wittemberg edition of the same year. I hope the Anhault Noblemen and
Gentlemen will take care that there be at least three copies of this edition
PRINTED UPON VELLUM ; for each of which it may be necessary to procure
three hundred and forty calves-skins, formerly to be procured for 60 florins-but
now indeed at four times that price .' See Seckendorf's Comm. lib. i. 203-4 ;
lib . iii. p. 254. Upon the whole, we gather from the same authority- respecting
the earliest dates of portions of Luther's Bible-that the Gospels, the Epistle to
the Romans, and the other Epistles were published in 1522 : the Pentateuch, and
other parts of the Bible, with the exception of the Prophets, in 1524 : Isaiah and
Daniel, in 1528 ; and the other Prophets, from 1527 to 1530. In 1534 the
Bible was first published complete ; again in 1539-41 and the third and last
time in 1541-5 . It was of this latter impression that a unique copy, UPON
VELLUM (which had successively been in the possession of Luther himself, of
Bugenhagen, of Melancthon, and of Major- all zealous reformers, and all
anxious to leave some written memorial behind, upon the leaves of this precious
copy, of their faith and fortitude in the belief they professed) was sold at the
sale of the library of the late Mr. Edwards, for 85 guineas : see Bibl. Edwards,
no. 812, and the interesting note of Mr. Evans subjoined. The purchaser of this
treasure (my friend Mr. George Hibbert) may well be proud of its possession.
He fought a good battle with ***** to obtain it—but, in my poor estimation,
no price should have taken it from the shelves of the LAMBETH LIBRARY, or of
the BRITISH MUSEUM.
Before taking leave of Luther, let me offer a brief notice of a supposed portrait
of him, on the reverse of a small quarto volume, without date, but probably of
the year 1520. It is entitled De Captivitate Babylonica Ecclesiæ Præludium Martini Lutheri.' Beneath the portrait are two hexameter and two pentameter
verses. Instead of Luther, I suspect this to be a portrait of some Monk. The
crown ofthe head is shaven, with a circle of hair beneath. There is a heavy robe
upon him, a book is beneath, and his right hand is placed upon his heart. The
THIRD DAY. 165
Bible appeared, containing cuts of an earlier date, let me
mention to you the pleasure I received in turning over the
leaves of a Latin Bible published at Lyons, in folic, of the
date of 1519 ; at the cost and charges of that notable gentleman Anthony Koberger, of Nuremberg."* In this badlyprinted volume the handy-works of three artists are at least
discernible ; but among these are the more interesting productions of Hans Springinklee -a name which you may
remember to have been pronounced with respect when we
discoursed upon the manual of devotion, entitled ' Hortulus
Animæ,' published by the same Koberger, and exhibiting
the productions of the same Hans Springinklee. As I
have been Tartar enough to rob it of its prints, I will first
shew you the effort of an inferior artist, in the following cut
ofthe Temptation ofourfirst Parents, and their Expulsion
from Paradise. The representation of this double action (as
connoisseurs call it) is very common in the earlier Bibles.
cheek bones are high, and have a Scottish air.' I cannot consider this as a
genuine portrait, if all the others, uniform in their general character, be true.
The publication is, in other respects, curious. It appears to have been composed
about two years after Luther's first invective against Indulgences ; and he here
bitterly repents of the qualified manner in which he had formerly noticed them.
He now condemns them in toto '-calling them Adulatorum Romanorum
nequitiæ .' There is no printer's name to this curious book ; but a device, at the
end, of two dogs biting each other : above, are the letters RS M, and four verses
beneath. On the reverse ' LÆTA LIBERTAS.' This account is taken from a copy
in the possession of Sir Hudson Lowe, Governor of St. Helena in general, and of
Napoleon Buonaparte in particular . It is one of a very interesting sprinkle of
choice volumes which that gallant officer hath had ' grete joyaunce' in collecting.
* Anthony Koberger of Nuremberg. ] It is entitled ' Biblia cum Concordantijs
veteris et novi Testamenti et sacrorum Canonum : necnon et additionibus imaginibus varietatis ducernorum textuum,' &c. Alarge print of St. Jerom is in the
title, executed by Hans Springinklee. Colophon . Impressa Lugduni : per me
Jacobum Sacon. Expensis notabilis viri Antonij Koberger. Nurembergensis. Anno,
&c. MDXIX. xix. Oct.' This Bible was bought and sold again by me for a very
few shillings.
166 THIRD DAY.
Belinda and Almansa may well smile at the melancholy
and wretched air which pervades this clumsy production.
We will now contrast it by rather a whimsical representation
of Noah's Ark floating upon the waters after they are
abated. The mermaid, you observe, was an early favourite
among artists.
I conceive each of these cuts to have been executed by
a different artist, and certainly not by Hans Springinklee:-
to whom it is now high time to give you a formal introduc-
THIRD DAY. 167
tion. The story of Esau and Jacob, and of Boaz and Ruth
are not inelegantly expressed by the following representations
ofthem :
You shall now be treated with two more specimens from
the same volume; undoubtedly by the hand of a different,
168 THIRD DAY.
and perhaps not less accomplished artist. They represent the
two chief incidents in the story of Judith and Holofernes.
AAAAA
EN
I am not prepared to say that these cuts are not of an
earlier date ; nor will I venture to assert in how many
printed volumes, of a like cast of character, they appeared
both before and after that to which our attention has been just
THIRD DAY. 169
directed. Instances of the adaptation of the same cuts to a
variety of publications, of a similar character, are almost
innumerable. Pursuing the subject of sacred writ, of which
I would be understood just now exclusively to discourse, let
me request you to remember those which appear in our
Coverdale's Bible of 1535, and in various other publications
of the same period. They are the spirited productions of
my favourite Hans Sebald Beham, and have his monogram
or mark expressly introduced. Probably they first appeared
in a thin quarto volume, published in the German language,
at Frankfort, without date. * There is no doubt a good deal
of the air of the German School about them, but the drawing
is nevertheless spirited and correct, and the engraving may
be called of tip-top merit in its way. I have already introduced the name of Sebald Beham to your notice, who was
·
published in the German language, at Frankfort, without date. ] The following
is the title of this publication : Biblicae Historiae, artificiosissimè depictæ.
Biblische Historien, Figürlich fürgebilder. Colophon : Francofurti Christianus
Egenolphus excudebat.' Besides the cuts, of which the ensuing fac - similes cannot
fail to gratify the tasteful collector, those numbered 11 , 20, 21 , 26 , 29, 49, 60,
and 63, have also great merit. The cuts, above engraved, are numbers 30, 32,
36, 40, 63. Philemon has justly remarked that these cuts are common to
publications of about the period of Coverdale's Bible of 1535. In fact, in that
same year, they also appeared in a rare and curious volume entitled Storys and
Prophesis out of the holy scriptur, garnyschede with faire ymages, and with
deuoute praeirs, and thanckgeuings vnto God. With grete diligence oursien and
approued by the inquisitor of the Christen faithe, Maester Nycolas Coppyn, de
Montibus, Dean of saincte Peters and Chaceller of the vniversite of Louen.
Anno: M.CCCCC.xxxv. ' At the end : This boke is prentyd in Andwarpe vpon the
Lombardes walle, ouer agaynst thegolden hande By my Symon Cowke. Anno. xxxvI.
This colophon is beneath a figure inserted (according to a ms. note, by Herbert,
in Lord Spencer's beautiful copy of the book) in Tindal's New Testament of
1536, for that of St. Paul. It is executed with great spirit and correctness. The
impressions however of the cuts, within the volume, are very indifferent. The
work contains, according to Herbert, X in eights. A copy is in the Bibl.
Harleiana ; see vol . i . no. 423—where there is an interesting notice of it,
VOL. I. M
170 THIRD DAY.
equally successful in copper and upon wood. Let me now
make you more thoroughly acquainted with him in the latter
department of his art. In this little volume, now held in my
hand, look, first of all, at the simplicity of style which pervades
the representation of Samuel anointing Saul king.
You may remember that the future monarch of Israel
was found by Samuel in the occupation of seeking his
father's asses ; and the artist has, with this view, delineated
him with great simplicity and propriety of character. There
is sufficient breadth in the drapery of Samuel ; but the figure
of that divine character wants majesty and effect. He looks
rather like a husbandman who has got on his Sunday's
smock-frock. The landscape is sufficiently pretty, and perhaps in Beham's best manner. What here follows, of Esther
before Ahasuerus, is in every respect more worthy of the
characters introduced. The queen to be sure is rather a
jolly than a comely dame, but her husband is by no means
destitute of kingly dignity ; while the figure, with his cap in
THIRD DAY. 171
hand, standing behind the queen, might not have disgraced
the pencil of Titian.
We have here a different, and perhaps more interesting,
specimen. Indeed I have seldom or never seen so much
bustle and spirit -so much martial energy-compressed into
such a small space. It represents the Discomfiting ofthe
Midianites bythe army ofGideon.
This desirable little volume concludes with a triumviratical
(as the very learned Dr. Samuel Parr would have expressed
it) group of warriors, which I believe was one of the most
172 THIRD DAY.
popular ornaments of the sixteenth century. You may
remember it in a variety of publications. *
And thus much for these spirited little prints. Let me
now direct all your critical attention and connoisseurship to
a few other popular manuals of subjects selected from the
Bible, and embellished by wood cuts. Among the artists
whose talents were put in requisition for these publications,
few claim more respect, few have attained to such popularity
and eminence, as the ever-renowned HANS HOLBEIN : a
name, as dear to Englishmen as to foreigners.
LYSANDER. Forgive this intrusion ; but if once we begin
with Holbein we shall go on with BERNARD-and delighted
remember it in avariety ofpublications. ] It appears, among many others, in
a small quarto tract, of only 7 leaves, entitled Ioannis Crispi Aegei Maris,
Naxique Ducis, Bizantini Imperatoris Tributarij, ad Pont. Romanum, et Christianos
Principes epistola. MDXXXVII. ' A copy of this tract is in the very curious and
extraordinary collection of small pieces, of almost every description, forming
the greater part of the library of Mr. Lang.
THIRD DAY. 173
and bewildered with the productions of these distinguished
artists, I may forget to mention what just now presses upon
my mind-which is, whether the versions of TINDAL or of
COVERDALE Contain the earliest embellishments, attached to
the text of scripture, in this country ?
PHILEMON. The question is perfectly in order ; and requires neither apology on your part nor forgiveness on mine.
Although the text of Tindal be the first in chronological order, the text of Coverdale is the earliest with the embellish- *
* the text ofTindal thefirst in chronological order.] Mr. Beloe, in his Anecdotes
of Literature, &c. vol. iii. p. 52-57 , has given an interesting account of this
earliest impression of the sacred text in our own language. The account was
furnished him by a friend ; and as I have seen and examined this precious volume itself propriis oculis, ' I can safely vouch for its general accuracy. It is
extraordinary that neither Lewis nor Herbert should have seen it ; English
Translations of the Bible, p . 75-78. The copy here alluded to is in the Library
of the Baptist College, at Bristol. It had been procured by one of the bibliographical jackalls of Lord Oxford ; namely, by Maister John Murray of Sacomb '-
of whom in the SEVENTH DAY of this work. Lord Oxford thought himself under
such obligations to his jackall ' that he settled upon him 20l. a year for life.
What Murray gave for it, or where he obtained it, does not appear in the ms.
memorandum by Ames, inserted in the copy of it under description : but Osborne,
with a stupidity or liberality equally unaccountable, contented himself (on purchasing the Harleian library) with marking it in one of his catalogues, at 15s.—
probably in the Catal. Bibl. Harleianæ, vol . i . no. 420- where it is described as
being in the black letter, ruled with red lines, and all the initials at the beginning
of each book, representing the subject, finely coloured, as likewise all the capital
letters to each chapter and verse throughout the book adorned with different colours,
and raised with gold, neatly bound in red morocco.'
(
Ames became the fortunate purchaser of such a treasure. At the sale of his
library, in 1760, no. 1252, it was purchased by Mr. John White, of Newgate
Street, (who was rather a curious book- man, and the catalogue of whose library
I possess) for 14 guineas and a half. White sold it to Dr. Gifford (who may be
called the Founder of the Baptist-Library) for 20 guineas ; the price at which
Lord Oxford obtained it from Murray. Dr. Gifford deposited it where it now
exists, and from which it is not likely to depart. At length we reach the volume
itself. Osborne's description of it is almost ludicrous. The capital initials are
very common ; being the usual flowered ones : and the colouring or illuminations
are perfectly moderate. But it is well observed by Ames, in his ms. memorandum, that the execution of the text appears perfect to a person understanding ་
174 THIRD DAY.
ments you allude to ; but, remember, neither the version of
Tindal nor of Coverdale was printed in this country. They
are both decidedly of foreign execution. Wewill return now,
if you please, to the productions of Hans Holbein in the
department of art which occupies our present attention.
What a treasure do I hold in my hand ! It is by no
means a rare book ; but its intrinsic beauty renders it precious in the estimation of the tasteful collector. The pen of
Borbon, the press of Frellon, and more than either or both
of these, the pencil of Holbein, throws a charm and an
interest about this volume which I have rarely felt in any
other similar production. * Indeed, my friends, you cannot
printing.' Unluckily, the title- page is wanting ; and was so, apparently, when
the book was purchased by Murray. The general condition of it is excellent.
The volume contains 353 leaves ; exclusively of the Epistle to the reader, and
the Errata. The epistle is given entire by Ames and Herbert ; but the important
part of it, assigning with complete accuracy the priority of this English version
of the sacred text, is as follows : taken by myself from the original : ' Them that
are learned Christenly, I beseche : for as moche as I am sure, ad my conscience
beareth me recorde, that of a pure entent, singilly and faythfully I have interpreted itt, as farre forth as god gave me the gyfte of knowledge, ad vnderstondynge that the rudness off the worke nowe at the fyrst tyme, offende them not :
but that they consyder howe that I had no man to counterfet, nether was holpe
with englysshe of eny that had interpreted the same, or soche lyke thige i the
scripture before tyme.' &c.
The preceding is on the recto of T ij ; second set of signatures. This epistle is
followed by 2 leaves of Errours comitted in the prentynge.' The volume has
every appearance of having been executed in the Low Countries ; perhaps at
Marlbro in the Land of Hesse.'
•
a charm and an interest about this volume-rarely felt in any similar production. ] Perhaps this is rather the language of enthusiasm than the judgment
of sound criticism . However, there can be no question about these cuts of
subjects taken from the OldTestament'-being very beautiful and very interesting.
A copy of the second edition of this covetable volume now lies before me : from
the richly-stored library of Mr. Douce. The title is thus : Historiarum Veteris
Testamenti Icones ad uiuum expressæ, &c. Lugdvni Sub Scuto Coloniensi M.D.xxxix.
4to . On the reverse is an address of Franciscus Frellæus to the Christian
Reader :' in which the latter is told that the prints in this work are infinitely
preferable Veneris & Dianæ, ceterarumque Dearum libidinosis imaginibus,
THIRD DAY. 175
too much covet, or too much praise, the little tasteful
volumes, of almost every description, which issued from the
presses at Lyons about the middle of the sixteenth century.
One shelf, of nearly seven feet in length, (if I remember
quæ animum vel errore impediunt, vel turpitudine labefactant. A poetical
address of Nicolas Borbon follows ; of which the ensuing may be considered an
apposite specimen :
Na tabulā siquis videat, qua pinxerit Hansus
Holbius, ille artis gloria prima suæ :
His HANSI tabulis repræsentantur : & vnà
Interpres rerum sermo Latinus adest.
Eiusdem Borbonij Poetæ
Δίσιχον.
Ωξέν᾽ ἴδειν ἔίδωλα θέλεις ἐμπνοῖσιν ὁμοῖα ;
Ολβίακῆς ἔργον δέρκεο τουτο χερός.
Cernere vis, hospes, simulacra simillima viuis ?
Hoc opus Holbinæ nobile cerne manus.
We are next treated with some French poetry of Giles Corrozet ' Aux Lectures. '
Take the following, philological reader, as a companion to its precursor :
Donques ostez de uoz maisons, & salles
Tant de tapis, & de painctures salles,
Ostez Venus, & son filz Cupido,
Ostez Heleine, & Phyllis, & Dido,
Ostez du tout fables & poesies.
Et receuez meilleures fantasies.
Mettez au lieu, & soyent uoz chambres ceinctes
Des dictz sacrez, & des histoires sainctes,
Telles que sont celles que uoyez cy
En ce liuret. Et si faites ainsi,
Grandz & petis, les ieunes & les uieulx.
Auront plaisir, & au cœur & au yeulx.
It remains to subjoin the French description of each of the ensuing facsimiles in the order in which they are placed.
Le bon Iacob par conseil de sa mere
Eut d'Isaac la benediction :
En se faignant estre Esau son frere,
Qui se marrit de la deception.
B 4, rect.
176 THIRD DAY.
rightly) contains a number of these volumes in the library
of our host ; and Lysander, to-morrow or next day, will
not fail to give us some account of them. But to the task at
Anne ne peut d'Elcana son mary
Auoir enfans, mais le Seigneur receut
Son oraison faicte de cœur marry,
Et lui donna que Samuel conceut.
F 1 , rev.
Ieroboam enuoye son epouse,
Pour de son filz malade s'enquerir
Vers Ahias, qui sa mort luy propose
Et elle entrant l'enfant s'en ua mourir
G iij, rev.
Icy recite & nombre briefuement
Iusqu'a Iacob, la genealogie,
Depuis Adam, dés le commencement,
Qui fut soubz Dieu gouernée & regie.
H 2, rev.
Ionas transmis en Niniue prescher
"
Fut afligé par tempeste soubdaine :
Trois iours au uentre il fut d'une Balaine,
Puis uers Niniue il se print a marcher.
N (1 ) recto.
This edition concludes on the recto of N iiij -with a large device of the
Scutum Coloniense.' The imprint is on the reverse of Niij : Lugduni, Melchior
& Gaspar Trechselfratres excudebant. ' This edition is here called the second ; and
it appears that neither Papillon nor Mr. Douce were acquainted with any
previous one. But Mr. S. W. Singer, whose activity (and I may add goodfortune) in researches of this kind is well known to his friends-and whose work
upon Playing Cards,' 1816, 4to. shews to what good purposes such activity is
directed—is the lucky owner of an impression of the date of 1538 : which, from
the difference of the arrangement of the cuts , from the omission of the subjoined
French verses, (having only Latin text above each cut) and that of the preliminary pieces of Borbon and Corrozet, may be fairly entitled to the gratifying
distinction of EDITIO PRINCEPS. The colophon is on the recto of M iiij , within
an ornamental border : Excudebant Lugduni Melchior & Gaspar Trechsel, 1558.'
The same date (in capitals) in the frontispiece is beneath the smaller Scutum
Coloniense,' on the reverse of which is the address of Frellæus-as in the
subsequent impressions. I am in possession of a very clean and sound copy,
printed at Lyons by Frellonius, of the date of 1547, 4to. which is a reprint
(but by no means literal) of the second edition ; with the addition however,
on the reverse of N 3, of engravings of the Four Evangelists -very deli-
THIRD DAY. 177
present to be executed. This precious book, upon which
Papillon has devoted a few pages of his gossipping work,
contains Pictures or Cuts, from Histories ofthe Old Testament,' and has text subjoined both in Latin and French :
the latter in metre. The third and fourth cuts may be said
to belong to the Dance of Death ; at least they exhibit the
King of Terrors accompanying our first parents in their
expulsion from Paradise, and in tilling the earth. You will
no doubt admire every illustration ; but look at this-which
represents Jacob stealing the Blessing from Esau ! It is
full of simplicity and nature.
cately executed. From this impression the preceding extracts, (except the
last) and the above fac-similes, are taken : I must here be permitted to
remark-that it is not always that the first or earlier editions of books of this
character contain the best impressions. Some of the impressions in Mr. Singer's
copy are rather heavy, while others are of a light and delicate cast. In
Mr. Douce's copy, upon the whole, the impressions appear to be equally true
to the character of the originals ; a few of them however are rather coarse or
badly worked. In short, it is either from the blocks receiving an over or under
charge of ink-or from more or less carefulness of mechanical skill-that these
differences appear : it being evident, in almost all the works of art, connected
178 THIRD DAY.
There are few of these cuts, however, in which the story is
better told than in the following-describing Hannah,
the wife ofElkanah, bewailing her sterility, in the presence
ofEli.
What have we here ? As sure as I am born -the
original of Sir Joshua Reynolds's figure of the dying Cardinal Beaufort ! In Holbein, this dying figure is intended
to represent Abijah, the son of Jeroboam ; who expires at
with engraving, in early printed books, that expedition and multiplication of
copies were the chief objects in view. Let no tender-bosomed Collector, therefore,
' fret or fume,' if he possess the third, or fourth, or fifth impression of this
interesting volume. He will find therein much to charm, and much to solace him.
I must crave another parting word. Did HANS HOLBEIN, or his nephew
JOHN, engrave these cuts ? Or did LUTZELBERGER ? Read Huber, and Bartsch,
and Papillon, and Jansen : but allow only that, both in these cuts, and in those
of the Dance of Death, if the same artist designed, so the same artist engraved
each set : and that my uncle' Hans Holbein designed them, admits, I think, of
scarcely a shadow of doubt. Let me yet furtherobserve-that the cuts in
the Nuremberg Bible of 1519, (see p. 149, ante) and perhaps those of earlier
Bibles, were unquestionably in the mind's eye ' of the Designer of the preceding subjects : as the composition of Boaz and Ruth' and Judith and
Holofernes,' amongst others, evidently prove.
·
THIRD DAY. 179
the very moment of his mother's stepping over the threshold,
on returning from consulting Ahijah the prophet concerning
his fate. This group forms two-thirds of the composition ;
the mother being seen to the right, about to enter the house.
The most elaborate, if not the best, specimen of grouping
the human figure, is to be found in the following-which,
perhaps a little whimsically, is made to represent The genealogies from Adam to Jacob.
180 THIRD DAY.
Among the single figures, which are oftentimes in themselves a little volume of intelligence, let me request you to
pay particular attention to what is here intended to exhibit
the Grief ofJonah at the Unbelief of the Ninevites. It is
the only figure in the composition, and the city of Nineveh
forms the entire background.
This brings us just to the conclusion of the volume ; and
in dismissing it, I cannot but remind you that, however
Papillon may have good reason to remark that the figures
are, generally speaking, somewhat too short, yet the heads
are full of expression. The extremities are also executed
with great intelligence and effect ; and the grouping is, I
think, at once peculiar and characteristic. In short, if
Holbein had ever had a copy of this delightful book struck
off upon vellum, for his own gratification, and to his entire
satisfaction, how many guineas, LisardoLORENZO. Lisardo should never possess it. I would
come down with my Life Guards and put his Cuirassiers
to flight !
THIRD DAY. 181
LISARDO. Baware of my Corps de Reserve. I will head
them myself: not skulk in a hollow way.
LORENZO. So much the better. The General ought to
share the fate of his followers. But we are both wandering
and interrupting. Proceed, dear Philemon.
PHILEMON. Your Waterloo skirmishing affords me breath
and leisure to think of my corps de reserve. Lysander did
well, a few minutes ago, to mention the name of Bernard.
That name is a host of strength to recruit my exhausted
resources. Welcome, thou Prince of Lyonese artists !
Whether the adjunct of LITTLE or SALOMON delight thee
most, * welcome to me and to this circle be thy innumerable
graphic gems-illustrative of holy writ ! This extraordinary
genius exercised his art, both of painting and engraving, at
Lyons, for full thirty years : and the press of TOURNEs, or
TORNESIUS, was constantly employed, during that time, in
the circulation of his beautiful little pieces. Who is the
happy mortal to possess the Book ofHymns, the Metamorphoses ofOvid, and the Bible, † published at the same press,
* Whether the adjunct of LITTLE or SALOMON delight thee most. ] — C'est
sans doute lui que tout le monde appelle le Petit Bernard ; peut-être étoit-il de
petite stature ? ou bien est-ce à cause que les curieux le placent parmi les petits
Maîtres dans le Catalogue des Peintres ? Ce soubriquet a, selon toute apparence,
si bien passé en coutume, qu'on a oublié entièrement son nom de famille, et par
conséquent BERNARD SALOMON, et le PETIT BERNARD, à qui tout le monde
attribue la Gravure en bois de toutes les figures de la Bible, et autres petites
Estampes, imprimées à Lyon depuis 1550 jusqu'en 1580, n'est sans doute que
la mème personne :' Papillon : De la Gravure on Bois, vol. i. p. 206. ' LE
PETIT BERNARD, nommé per quelques uns BERNARD SALOMON, natif de Lyon
vers 1512. On l'appeloit le petit Bernard, parceque les sujets qu'il gravoit, soit
en bois soit en cuivre, étoient de petit format. Il est vrai, Sandrart prétend qu'il
fut appelé le petit, à cause de la petitesse de sa taille.' Huber : Manuel des
Curieux et des Amateurs de l'Art : vol . iii. p. 52. The Abbé Marolles had confounded Bernard Salomon with Jean de Tournes, the printer ; a palpable error,
which Papillon has properly rectified .
the Book of Hymns, the Metamorphoses of Ovid, and the Bible. ] There will
182 THIRD DAY.
and exhibiting master-pieces of art by Bernard ? Let me
first submit a hasty general criticism upon the peculiar style
of art which characterises the productions of this uncommon
genius. The first thing that strikes you is, the general
freedom of his design and execution : of his outline and
finishing. Every thing has life and spirit about his pieces,
which contain a little world within themselves. The sun
shines ; the branches wave, and the leaves rustle to the
be no great harm if we invert a little the order of Philemon-who possibly
thought the foregoing titles had more of euphony when thus delivered by word
of mouth. The Bible, or rather The Old Testament, is of the date of 1550. This
is the first, and perhaps the more desirable impression. It contains about 240
cuts, each of the dimensions of three inches and one quarter, by two and one
quarter ; and if Papillon's account of it be correct, there is merely four French
verses beneath each wood- cut- as constituting the whole of the text. Papillon
says the second edition was of the date of 1555 ; enlarged by eleven additional
cuts but I possess an Italian version of it, of the date of 1554, printed by
Tournes at Lyons, which has the fuller number of cuts. This version is by
Damiano Maraffi ; whose portrait, in wood, is on the reverse of the title-pagefollowed by a prose address to ‹ Margherita di Francia, Duchessa di Berri,' and
by the ensuing poetical compliment to the same illustrious lady :
La Regina Sabèa, poi c'hebbe i modi,
E gl' ordin visto de 'l gran Salamone :
Ripiena tutta d'ammirazione,
Roppe sua voce in le sacrate lodi.
Seruo beato, che tanto ben godi,
Ben sei felice in tanta visione
O Re, la fama, ed ogni opinione
Vinci con tua presenza, e' cuori annodi.
Ciascun tirato da 'l sacro splendore
Vostro, chiar vede, quel di voi si dice
Margherita, à pen' esser' ombr', a'l vero.
E preso da'n credibile stupore
Grida, oh casa beata, alma, felice
Di Margherita, à cui bass' è l'Impero.
The fac- similes above given are taken from this impression. Mr. Singer possesses what Papillon calls the third edition -of the date of 1558 ; entitled
Qvadrins Historiques de la Bible. Reuuz, et augmentez d'un grand nombre de
figures.' A Lion Par Jan de Tovrnes, M.D.LVIII . 8vo.; with a dedication, by C. Paradin, to Ieanne de la Rochefoucaud, Abbesse de Notre- Dame de
THIRD DAY. 183
breeze ; the cattle ruminate or low ; the mountains lift up
their magnificent heads ; and the middle or back ground,
whether a city, or a rural view, equally preserves its distance
Xaintes.' A sonnet (I presume by the same) follows this prose-address ; and
Maraffi and Paradin may here compete for superiority of poetical skill.
SONNET.
Aprochez vous Estomacs chaleureus,
Qui digerez tout ce que lon vous donne,
Conuertissans toute viande, en bonne :
Venez ici pour estre bienheureus.
Mais vous pourris, Estomacs doloreus
Qui vomissez (tant estes à malaise)
La chose, encor qu'elle ne soit mauuaise,
Dont ne trouuez rien bon ne sauoreus,
Guerissez vous, auant que d'aprocher
Cet aliment, qu'il ne vous faut toucher
Que ne soyez tous confortez et sains.
Puis quand serez bien fermes et dispoz,
Ne creingnez point prendre ces saints propoz :
Qui vous rendront es Cieus auec les Saints.
This impression contains the whole number of the cuts in the edition of 1554,
and has, in addition, a set of 62 prints for the New Testament. These measure
only two inches and a half by two inches : and in the copy under description , the
impressions, in each Testament, are very much superior to what are in my copy
of the Old Testament of the date of 1554 : a confirmation this, of what has been
advanced respecting dates being uncertain guides of the superiority of impressions. Ofthe edition of 1550, Papillon says it is so rare, that, in the course of
twelve years, he could find only two perfect copies ofit. I am unable to mention
where a copy is to be found. A copy of La Metamorphose d'Ovide figuree ;
aLyon, parJan de Tournes. M.D.LVII . ' 8vo. is also in the possession of Mr. Singer.
It is a wonderful little volume. Each cut, with the subjoined text in French
verse, is surrounded by a wood-cut border. Some of these borders are purely
arabesque others are fancifully ornamented-and some again are composed of
groups of figures, either grave or gay, beautiful or grotesque : but executed with
a brilliancy and precision which must render all rivalry hopeless. Fine impressions of these lovely pages cannot fail to prove a treat of no ordinary kind.
Papillon well observes of them : ' Je conseille les curieux de les bien examiner, car
ils le meritent-le tout d'une délicatesse et d'une liberté charmante,' vol. i . p. 213.
The central or principal cut, where the subject of the poet is elucidated, is on too
small a scale to do justice to the illustration ; and a few of these are sufficiently
⚫ tender and free.'
In the third place, let a few words (although many effectual ones may be
184 THIRD DAY.
men,
and character. The architecture has all the spirit of Canaletti's pencil. But it is in the human figures, whether
women, or children, that his chief merit, in the estimation of
some judges, may be thought to consist. They are undoubtedly conceived and executed with freedom and grace.
What then are the failings of Bernard ? Briefly these, as I
conceive. In opposition to the defect of the figures of
Holbein, those of Bernard are too tall. They are also, now
and then, put into fanciful attitudes, and look rather as if
they were acting, than moving according to the impulses of
nature. No man however did such wonders, upon wood, in
·
spoken) be said concerning The Hymns of our Little Bernard : printed by Tournes
in 1560, in 4to. This book is called Hymnes du Temps et de Ses Parties.' An
address to the reader follows the title- page : in this we are told ' le tout [est]
sorti de bonne main ; car l'invention est de M. Bernard Salomon Peintre autant
excellêt qu'il y en ayt point en nostre Hemisphere.' The text consists of French
verses by Guillaume Gueroult (of whom see La Croir du Maine's Bibl. Françoise,
vol. i. p. 328, vol. iv. p. 86) upon Time, the Morning, the Day, the Night, the
Hours, and the Twelve Months . Each of these subjects has a wood cut, (in an
oval frame, three inches by two and a quarter) being a personal or allegorical
representation of the subject described : the oval is surrounded by a fanciful
border, in outline, not always in the best taste. These engravings do not strike
me as being the most desirable of those of their author. The figures are too much
in one tone of light or shade. The copy of this very rare book, under description,
belongs to my friend Mr. Douce. It is absolutely tawny throughout, and
extremely tender-but, observes its owner, I never saw another. ' Those who
feel disposed to riot and revel ' in the beautiful books of Bernard Salomon, may
read a full account of them in Papillon : an author, after all, in spite of his
blunders and prosings, extremely deserving of commendation. His simplicity
and honesty throw a naïveté about his work which cannot fail to interest the
good-natured and sensible reader. I cannot close the subject of specimens of
early wood- cutting, without mentioning a very clever frontispiece in a little
volume entitled Prediche del Reuerendo Padre Frate Gieronimo Savonarola,
&c. In Venetia, 1540. It represents the unfortunate Savonarola in the act of
preaching. His left hand is boldly elevated ; his right is grasping the desk.
Beneath, is a scribe in a fine style of character-taking down the sermon of the
preacher The group in the foreground is excellent-reminding us somewhat of
Rafaelle's auditors of St. Paul, preaching at Athens. The engraver is designated
by the initials RO S.
THIRD DAY. 185
so small a space : and if individual characters, or countenances, in Bernard's pieces, are inferior to those of Holbein,
taken as a whole the former shew more invention of design
and more facility of execution. It must be remembered,
however, that there is no cross-hatching in the engravings
of either Holbein or Bernard ; so that these great artists,
eminent as they undoubtedly were, have not met and
mastered all the difficulties of their profession.
6 6
Yonder little volume, bound in russia, with gilt leaves,
contains (if I mistake not) the pieces of Bernard selected
from the Bible. Belinda will be pleased to hand it to me.
What a charming little bit ' (to speak according to art' )
have we here ! It represents the prostration of Noah and his
family before the Almighty ; who, in the clouds above-in
an attitude of perhaps greater spirit than dignity-is
pointing to the rainbow, over the hills, as confirmative of his
vow never to destroy the world again by water. *
The two following specimens, connected with the story of
Judah and Tamar, are good specimens of the style of
In the fac-simile of the portion of this piece, above given, the artist has
made the shadows rather too severe. The first four lines of the subjoined Italian
version are as follow :
VOL. I.
• Fermò qui Dio il patto sempiterno,
Con Noè santo, e co' suoi discendenti,
Co 'l celest' arco, e rinnouò ' l gouerno,
Che a 'l bel multiplicarfussin' intenti : '
N
186 THIRD DAY.
art peculiar to the landscapes of Bernard. They have all the
freedom and lightness of a pencil-drawing.
I am much pleased with the simplicity of the following.
There is a truth about the whole which delights me; but
the figure standing up, or bending, has perhaps the fault
of affectation before alluded to. You will immediately
THIRD DAY. 187
acknowledge that this must be Esau selling his birth-right
to Jacobfor a mess ofpottage.
נורמי
13"
Let me shew you a specimen of Bernard's manner of
introducing architecture into his compositions. You observe
there is a grandeur and breadth of effect in describing the
action of casting the head of Sheba the son ofBichrifrom
the walls of Abel out to Joab.' The figures are extremely
characteristic of the artist's style.
6
188 THIRD DAY.
But one more, and we cease. In the representation of
the Israelites passing in the edge of the wilderness,' near
the red sea, by night, and conducted by a pillar offire, the
artist has almost outdone himself. Did you ever see such a
multitude -such a host of men-brought together in so small
a space ? They seem to be absolutely in motion, and that
there would be no end of them ! The bones of Joseph are
carried by the leading men in front.
The cut, however, which faces this-and which describes
the Egyptians overwhelmed in the Red Sea-has perhaps
full as much merit. But we must now absolutely shut our
eyes upon such fascinating objects. In taking leave of so
desirable a volume, I must caution you to be always upon
your guard to have clean impressions of the cuts contained in
it. It is inconceivable the difference which a good or a bad
impression makes : -especially as the strokes of Bernard's
graver are exceedingly fine, and his pieces in consequence
become liable to clog. Dare we ever hope to find impressions of these gems unaccompanied by the text? and upon
India or Chinese paper too ?! I observe the very thought
THIRD DAY. 189
discomposes Lisardo, and he is becoming pale with despair.
Would that we had rummaged every mansion of old standing, at Lyons, when we made our continental tour, dear
Lorenzo ! Perhaps
LYSANDER. You forget the bombardment of that ancient
and interesting city, in the early period of the French
revolution. The same merciless cannon-shot, which, during
that siege, tore open the very vitals of one of the volumes
of the Spira Livy of 1470, UPON VELLUM, * might, in its
destructive course, have shattered to atoms the trunk in
which a set of these India-paper proofs were preserved !
LISARDO. Horrible thought ! Such a cannon must have
been fired by the deadliest foe to the Bibliomania. But
proceed, I entreat--
PHILEMON. Whither ? You forget the preliminaries of
our discussion. I cannot take you, like Shakspeare's Puck,
or Milton's Satan, over bog, heath, moor, and mountain—
but must here pause : that is, my researches into this department of book-engravings must terminate. We have yet a
world of variety and of interest to visit. Grant me only
patience and free will to do as I please, and —
LORENZO. Before you proceed further, pray indulge a
propensity, which I feel just now pretty strongly, to become
acquainted with the progress ofthe graphic art in the earlier
impressions of the Ancient Classics ?
PHILEMON. Much do I regret that such an investigation
6
"
the Spira Livy of 1470, upon vellum .] The late Mr. James Edwards made
the following memorandum, in pencil, uponthe margin of a large paper copy of
the second edition of my Introduction to the Classics —in the place to which it
appertained—p. 226. At the siege of Lyons, in the Revolution, the copy of the
Spira Livy of 1470, upon vellum, (which had belonged to the public library
there, and was restored to it upon the death of the Duke de la Valliere) was
struck by a cannon-ball, which tore one of the volumes most unmercifully. '
190 THIRD DAY.
demands more leisure and
my power to bestow upon it.
it strikes me that the subject is not of very arduous treatment :-for what is there, deserving the name of art, till we
come to the Valturius of 1472 ? * One of the old Italian
Classics, Dante, had comparatively ample justice done him
in the Florence edition of 1481 ; but after Valturius (ifyou
will permit me to call him a Classic) we have absolutely
nothing worthy of mention till we come to the Esop of 1479,
executed at the same place with the former, namely at
Verona ; and again at Venice in 1490 and 1497 - each of
these three impressions containing the Italian poetical version
of Zucchi. The Ulm edition, in Latin and German, has
sometimes good bold representations of the apologues of
that earliest and greatest of heathen moralists ; but the
Venice impression of 1490 † exceeds all that preceded it in
learning than it has been in
And yet, on second thoughts,
* TheValturius of 1472. ] A copious and particular account of this interesting
volume, with numerous specimens of the style of art contained in it, will be
found in the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. iv. p. 44-54. The same may be said ofthe
DANTE of 1481 (vol. iv. p. 108-115) and of the Æsor printed at Verona and
at Ulm : vol. i. p. 229-243. Respecting the Valturins, it will be seen, from the
pages of the Spencerian Catalogue, that a copy of that work, UPON VELLUM,
stood a chance of enriching the library there described. My friend Sir M. M.
Sykes is the fortunate owner of SUCH A COPY ; and what is rather singular,
although the last leaf, but one, be upon paper, yet fromthe direction of the wormholes through that, and the succeeding and last leaf, it is quite evident that this
paper leaf must have been of a pretty ancient date—as the perforations in each
leaf exactly correspond with one another. Between the prefatory matter or
table, and text, there are two blank vellum leaves ; apparently of the age of the
book. Sir Mark's copy is a large and fine one, but the beautiful printing of
Jenson, ofthe Spiras, or ofJ. de Colonia, is wanting to give the pages a thoroughly
bewitching aspect !
+ the Venice impression of 1490. ] The cuts in this impression were repeated in
that of 1497, printed at the same place. Lord Spencer possesses a beautiful
copy of this latter ; (Bibl. Spen. vol . iv. p. 435) but the fac- similes above given
are taken from a copy of the edition of 1490, in the possession of Sir M. M.
Sykes, Bart,
THIRD DAY. 191
freedom of design and delicacy of execution. We will first
examine the central compartment of the frontispiece. There
is tolerably good grouping in what you here behold. It seems
resolved, however, that the good Æsop' should always be
made ludicrously deformed ; and accordingly you see him
here with a head which would have suited a man whose
stature might have reached to the top of the canopy under
which he sits. The Scribe and Auditors are rather skilfully
designated.
ESOPVS
Let us next extend our admiration over a wider surface.
The whole of what is here presented to you is well worthy
ofcommendation. The subject is The Thiefmarrying the
Woman.' The figures are a little too short ; while, in the
Verona impression, there is a pretty group of rustics dancing
in the back-ground-but the purity of taste in the arabesque
border which surrounds it makes ample amends for every
other deficiency.
192 THIRD DAY.
The ensuing forms a quiet and not inelegant contrast. The
female has quite the air and costume of a Grecian character.
THIRD DAY. 193
I should be glad to know which of us could ward off the
troublesome insect here introduced in a more graceful
manner? Admit, however, that the gentleman is rather
clumsily built.
194 THIRD DAY.
In these specimens you may recognise something of the
style of art which pervades the Hypnerotomachia or
PoliphiloLISARDO. Cannot you touch upon that enchanting book ?
PHILEMON. Surely there has been enough, and more than
enough, lately said about that extraordinary volume-which
has been described to repletion. I must pass it over.
LISARDO. Nay, but one specimen or so?*
PHILEMON. You forget my authority, which is absolute.
I am inflexible : -and must further remark, respecting the
classical volumes of the fifteenth century, that less of skill
and of taste appear to have been devoted to them than to
* but one specimen or so.] As Philemon may possibly be thought to exercise
his authority a little too rigidly, in not granting Lisardo the indulgence which he
solicits, the reader may not be displeased if greater courtesy be shewn in this
subjoined note. Not however that I wish to make a thread-bare exposition of
the Hypnerotomachia : for after what appears in the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. iv.
p. 145-165, it does seem little short of insanity to bring forward any further
specimens of art from that common, but enchanting, volume. Deign, however,
virtù-loving reader, to cast thine eyes upon the pretty fac-similes which are here submitted.
THIRD DAY. 195
other works ; although I cannot refrain from awarding the
due meed of praise to the decorations which appear in the
Strasbourg editions of Terence, Horace, Boethius, and Virgil,
The preceding forms the central compartment within a large cut surrounded
by an arabesque border, in perfect taste, on r ii recto. The circular ornament
below, placed above the group of young bacchanals, is taken from h vij, reverse,
and is full of beauty. As to the infantine group round the young Bacchus, with
its accompaniments, (on l iiii, recto) the whole has so joyous and appropriate an
air, that I can readily anticipate the approbation of the tasteful for its insertion
in the present place.
196 THIRD DAY.
of the dates of 1496, 1498, 1501 , and 1503-from the press
Gürninger. The style of art, however, in these publications
is generally feeble and coarse ; and their chief interest consists in a display of the costume of the times of the printer.
Afew groups from the Breydenbach of 1486 are worth the
whole of them.
LORENZO. Did you never meet with a French Breydenbach of 1488, with copper-plate illustrations ? +
* Strasbourg Editions— from the press of Gürninger. ] All the works above
specified are in the same style of art ; and that style is sufficiently exhibited in
the second volume of the Bibl. Spenceriana, pp. 87-95 ; 426-438 . The Boethius
of 1501, and the Virgil of 1503, equally display the same disproportion of design,
and looseness of style of engraving. There is something, however, rather surprising and interesting, that such a profusion of labour and expense should have
been devoted to all the impressions above mentioned ; and it is certainly a little
unaccountable, that no Historian or Poet of antiquity was made the subject of
graphic embellishment till so late a period . The pages of the work just referred
to exhibit sufficient evidence of the meritorious execution of numerous embellishments of other, miscellaneous, authors, during the xyth century.
+ French Breydenbach of 1488, with copper-plate illustrations ?] The doubtful
manner in which I had mentioned these supposed copper- plate embellishments,
in a note in the Bibl . Spencer. vol . iii. p. 219, attracted the attention of Monsieur
Brunet-author of a bibliographical work too well known to be here specifically
mentioned, and which has entitled himto the hearty thanks of posterity. In consequence of my having observed that he had made a strange mistake in supposing
that some of the larger views of the towns were engraved upon copper,' he was
pleased, in two successive letters to me, to enter upon a defence of that position,
and to justify his own inference with a pertinacity very natural and very commendable in a writer who has so much reputation to lose :--not however that the
point was of great importance in itself. In his second letter, of the date of
July 10, 1814 , he gives a particular description of the Lyons edition of 1488 ;
and the recently lucky discovery of a copy of this date, by Lord Spencer himself,
among his book-treasures at Althorp , has enabled me to impugn Mons. Brunet's
observations with a tolerable degree of confidence.
Monsieur Brunet justly remarks that the Lyons impression of 1488, in French,
is not a literal version of the Mentz edition of 1486 : that however the arrangement of the chapters may be the same, the ornaments in each faithfully copied,
and the substratum of the text nearly similar, yet the translator has often added
from his own stock of materials. This impression therefore must be distinguished
from the subsequent French edition of 1489, ( in all probability also printed at
THIRD DAY. 197
6
PHILEMON. Never ; nor does such a work exist. With
' wood-cut' illustrations, if you please, dear Lorenzo; but no
Lyons, though no name of place be subjoined) which is unquestionably a literal
version of the original Mentz edition of 1486 ; and in which the cuts are precisely the same. My valuable correspondent adds, that the large cuts of the
towns, &c. in the copy of the edition of 1488, which was sold at the Roxburghe
sale (see Bibl. Roxburgh. no. 7259) for the extravagant sum of 841. must have
contained those said cuts from the edition of 1489-which were used in several
editions ; and he concludes this pleasant controversy in the following manner :
J'ai vendu moi- même, il y a une douzaine d'années, dans une vente publique,
un exemplaire de l'édition de 1488 imparfait des cartes, et rien n'aura empêché
qu'on ne l'ait complèté aussi de cette manière. Enfin, Monsieur, avez vous
besoin d'une preuve bien certaine que les cartes de l'édition de 1488 ne sont pas
les mêmes que celles des éditions de Mayence? Je vais vous la donner. La
grande carte de la terre sainte, où se voit Jerusalem, porte dans les éditions
d'Allemagne et dans l'édition de 1489, les noms de lieu, et les explications en
latin, tandis que dans l'édition françoise de 1488, ces mêmes mots de texte sont
enfrançoise : d'après cet éclaircissement, voyez, Monsieur, si vous persistcz dans vos conclusions !'
There is anair of good- humoured gaiety, and of triumph, in Monsieur Brunet's
conclusion, which I should be sorry to damp, or to convert into defeat : but I am
obstinate or infatuated enough still to persist ' in my own inferences. And first
--dispassionate reader- how comes it to pass that the smaller cuts, in the impression of 1488, are not also upon copper? That they are not, is unquestionable.
They are however fresh designs and fresh engravings-not the blocks of the
Mentz edition used a second or third time- and are very close and faithful copies
of the embellishments in the same edition . Secondly, why, if the same work
were printed at the same place, in the succeeding year, should the publisher of
the latter impression go to the expense of having large views of towns, &c. cut
upon blocks of wood, when the same embellishments had already appeared upon
copper the preceding year ? There is, I think, a prima facie presumption against
this latter conclusion ; but there is irrefragable evidence that it cannot be correct,
because these larger cuts, in the impression of 1488, are REALLY AND TRULY
EXECUTED UPON WOOD- and the eyes of Messieurs Brunet and Heineken
haye been equally deceived in this particular. Asto the variations mentioned by
my correspondent, these may be easily accounted for. Such variations are
readily made in wood-by cutting out, and stopping up-(or pegging, as our
technical phraseis) as my own experience in these matters has frequently proved.
Let the reader examine pages 68 and 96-7 : there, an aperture in the block made
room for the metal types introduced—and if an aperture be effected , that vacuum
may surely be supplied by materials either of wood or of metal. May I now,
therefore, give the retort courteous ' to my worthy correspondent-and say,
voyez, Monsieur, si vous persistez dans vos conclusions?'
"
198 THIRD DAY.
copper-plates. To return however. Leaving classical ground,
and regretting that we have no early Livy or CæsarLISARDO. You appear to have forgotten a work, which also
received abundance of embellishment-the Navis Stultifera
of Sebastian Brandt.
PHILEMON. It had not escaped me ; but the same reason
which compels me to say nothing, here, ofthe Poliphilo, also
induces me to take no notice ofthe work which you mention:
namely, because it has already and lately received a sufficiently copious illustration; * and copies of it begin now, like
insects when drawn forth by warmth from their crannies, to lie
upon every bookseller's shelf and upon everybook-auctioneer's
table. Again therefore I must resume the despotic authority
with which you have invested me ; and Master Brandt is
already and lately received a sufficiently-copious illustration . ] See Bibl.
Spenceriana, vol. iii . p. 203-214. Philemon seems still to retain his shy or
churlish feelings in respect to the gratification of Lisardo's wishes. I shall
therefore continue the courteous ' strain held forth in a preceding note ; and
again endeavour to amuse the reader by a farewell specimen from the work
above mentioned. First, admit the spirit and point with which the ensuing is
represented :-
THIRD DAY. 199
6
not the youth for my money' at the present moment. We
will therefore step over the threshold which divides the xvth
from the xvith century, and enter at once upon some ofthe
more extraordinary productions of the art of engraving as
seen in books of this precise period.
Hark ! methinks I hear the tramping of horses' feet :-
the clangor of the war-trumpet, the groans of the dying,
and the shouts of the victorious ! See the banners, how they
float in the air ! How the light from the helmet or cuirass
flashes across the field ! —and now observe the stately march
Where shall we find a pair of ass's ears better placed than upon this figure ?
the whole of which is most admirably conceived and executed.
We have next almost the drivelling ideot : forgetting that ' a bird in the haud
200 THIRD DAY.
of the conquerors, the nodding of the plumes, and the
harvest of spears that stand thick and glittering around !
The magnificent volume which has given rise to these
reflections, or to this imagery, is now before us-and is
commonly known by the name of TEWRDANCKHS. * It is a
is worth two in the bush .' The cunning animals cry out ‘ to-morrow' —and ' the
Fool ' is dolt enough to conceive that they will then come to him !
Trag
Crab
Crab
commonly known by the name ofTewrdanckhs ] After the labours of Koeler,
Vogt, Fournier, De Bure, Gruber, and more especially of Camus, little remains to
be done in illustration of the singular and splendid volume above mentioned by
Philemon. Let it however be premised that Lambecius had thus noticed it in his
THIRD DAY. 201
folio volume, in poetry, of the date of 1517 ; commemorating
the martial exploits of the Emperor MAXIMILIAN I. Almost
every page is embellished, as you observe, with a spirited
Comment. De Bibl. Cæs. Vind. lib. ii. c. cccxx11 . (vol. ii . col. 897. Edit. Kollarü.)
Volumina quatuor germanica chartacea in folio, quibus continentur Adversaria
Historiæ rhythmicæ variorum periculorum Imp. Maximiliani I. , vernaculo
sermone DERTEWRDANCK inscriptæ ; cujus etiam perfectum aliquod exemplar in Augustissima Bibliotheca Cæsarea adservatur, quod Norimbergæ typis
Joannis Schönspergeri A. 1517. in membrana impressum, et multis elegantissimis
Imaginibus coloratis mirifice exornatum est.' Subsequent writers (enumerated
by the preceding authorities) have also directly, or indirectly, treated of it. The
last edition of Koeler's Disquisitio De Inclito Libro Poetico Theverdanck, 1790, 4to.
with the notes of Hummel, as well as the interesting Memoir of Camus ( Mémoires
de l'Institut, vol. iii . p. 170-211 ) upon the same volume-are now before me ;
and to both these latter the attention of the curious must be more particularly
directed. The notice of Gruber will be found in the second part or volume of
the Specimen Bibliotheca Germaniæ Austriaca of Vogel, p. 435-444. 1783, 8vo.
From these, united, we may remark : first as to the name of the work-Tewerdancks. This is a feigned name for the Emperor Maximilian : see Koeler, p. 6 ;
and the diverting note thereto appending. Secondly, as to the author of the
work : Lambecius mentions this work, with several others, ab ipso Imp. Maximiliano I. prosa oratione compositum ' -and Camus observes that there is in
the Imperial Library a packet of 48 leaves which contain the first 74 chapters of
Tęwerdanck, written in the hand ofthe Emperor himself, with many and different
erasures of parts of the printed text ; and in another parcel, are the designs for
the cuts destined to adorn the impression. This is said upon the authority of
Khauz and Hummel. Koeler, however, duly considers the relative weight of
what has been advanced upon the subject of the authorship, and gives it to the
Emperor's Secretary, MELCHIOR PRINTZING-although the Emperor himself
may have suggested the plan, or even composed a small portion of the verses.
Camus adds : ce sentiment me paroît raisonnable. ' Such was the courtly complaisance of some foreign antiquary, that in the Rhediger copy of the edition of
1517, at Wratislaw, the Emperor is said, in a ms. memorandum, to have also
engraved the cuts ! Upon which Hummel (in his notes to Koeler) with almost
equal courtesy observes, Delineatas esse [ab ipso Maximiliano] dicere debuisset' !
We have yet to learn, I believe, that the Emperor Maximilian ever drew anything but his sword !
In the third place, as to the printer, and the impressions of the work. The
printer was unquestionably HANSEN SCHOENSPERGER; and however the word
• Nuremberg' may be inserted in the colophon of the first edition, of the date of
1517, it is the opinion of Koeler, and of Camus, that the work was absolutely
printed at Augsbourg ; the word Nuremberg ' having been inserted purely out
VOL. I.
202 THIRD DAY.
wood-cut ; and if we allow Maximilian himself to have been
the inventor of the work, Pfintzing the author of the text,
Schoensperger the printer of it, and Schaeufelin the artist
of compliment to Pfintzing, who was provost of that city at the time of the
publication. Moreover, the second edition has expressly the word Augsbourg '
in the colophon ; and we know that Schoensperger printed in this latter city from
the year 1481 , regularly, and never had a printing-office at Nuremberg. Panzer
and Heummel join in this latter conclusion ; but Breitkopf thinks it more probable that the first edition was executed at Nuremberg, as the Emperor resided
there about the time of its appearance. It is true (as Camus remarks) that the
word Augsbourg is introduced in the colophon of the copy belonging to De Boze ;
but this is probably too summarily inserted to be relied upon . See Bibl. De
Boze, p. 145-6, folio edition of the first edition, 1745. In regard to the
impressions of the work, those of 1517 and 1519 are chiefly and exclusively
desirable ; the re-impressions of 1537, 1553, 1564, 1589, each in folio ; and
1596, 8vo-as well as those of 1679 and 1693 folio (the two latter under the care
of Schultz, an engraver at Ulm-but upon which Koeler pronounces a most
indignant criticism ; see p. 31 , 2) being inferior both in purity of text, and
splendor of embellishment. Read Camus upon their varieties, and consult
Brunet (Manuel du Libraire, vol . iii. p. 319) as to what constitutes a perfect
copy of the FIRST EDITION ; which we find to consist in having two sets of
signatures : namely, a to z, and A to P: each in eights-except d, i, o, r, v, z ;
C, F, I, M, O, which have only 6 leaves each -and P 7. At the end are 8
leaves, on signature A, containing a key or summary of the poem, and an Indexwith the colophon as given by all the bibliographers.
A perfect copy of this first edition, PRINTED UPON VELLUM, ennobles the
shelves of the Althorp library. It is without a stain ; and, more enviable felicity !
without a coloured cut. All is fresh and joyous and magnificent throughout.
Let Koeler revel in his luxuriant descriptions of three coloured copies, printed
upon vellum, in certain foreign libraries-(his words are so tempting I can scarce
forbear transcribing them-see p. 30) it will never be the smallest diminution of
gratification to the Noble Owner of the Althorp copy, that our brave friends
SCHOENSPERGER and SCHAEUFELIN stand in their native genuine attire, within
the red-morocco surtout of that delicious tome ! No meretricious, flickering hues—
nohalf-faded purple and decomposed white, and flaunting yellow-but downright
black ink, and white paper-producing an effect at once, sharp, clear, rich, and
perfect and yet, full of colour, full of expression, and full of character ! A
beautiful copy ofthis first edition, upon paper, is in the library of my friend Mr.
G. Hibbert ; and another is in that of Mr. Douce. This latter friend will, I
trust, shortly furnish the bibliographical world with his promised ' notices ' ofthe
Tewerdancks of 1517, and 1519.
In the fourth place, as to Schaeufelin the unquestionable engraver of the cuts,
THIRD DAY. 203
by whom the designs and engravings were executed, we may
be said to state the outline of the subject in a very fair
manner. You are not however to imagine that the martial
exploits of Maximilian, which gave rise to these spirited
representations, did not also give birth to other similar
exhibitions-connected with his own achievements. Lisardo,
as I expected, has quickly taken the hint: for see, what a huge
folio volume he is opening-as corroborative of the foregoing
observation ! Those immense wood-cuts are intended to give
a general representation of the conquest and triumph of
the arms of this mighty Emperor. * What magnificence,
Papillon and Huber may be consulted (especially the former, vol . i . p . 106-8-147)
to some advantage. In the catalogue of De Boze, Albert Durer is erroneously
said to have engraved them. They are, in the whole, 118 in number. Ofthe
book itself, Huber well remarks- que les plus fameuses bibliothèques se font
honneur d'en posséder un exemplaire.' Manuel, &c . vol. i. p. 147. Koeler concludes his Disquisition with an epilogue shewing the utility of this book ' —as
affording peculiar gratification in the several branches of history, moral philosophy, and philology.' See p. 32-3. Mr. Lang possesses an extraordinary copy
of a ms. fac-simile of the entire work ; executed with a pen and India ink.
representation ofthe conquest and triumph of the arms of the Emperor.] An
interesting little history might be written respecting the graphic decorations
which the EMPEROR MAXIMILIAN caused to have executed for the illustration
of his own exploits ; and the obvious conclusion to be drawn, from such a profusion of materials collected , is , either that the Emperor was much in love with
the fine arts, or with-himself. Common charity induces us to draw the first,
and a knowledge of human nature inclines us to draw the second, conclusion. Be
it either way : most certain it is, that the shelves of the Imperial library were
well loaded, in the time of Lambecius, with drawings, engravings, and papers,
relating to the aforesaid Emperor ; and beyond all doubt of a contemporaneous
period. Read Lambecius ; vol, ii , col . 894-898. The work which Lambecius
calls Der Weise Kunig, ( The Wise King ' ) and which he says is in every
respect worthy of being made public by the press, ' was in fact published at
Vienna, in 1775, in folio . Mr. Ottley however possesses the singular treasure of
a few of these cuts struck off upon the reverses of certain state- paper documents,
or summonses for appearances before the Emperor, printed at Inspruck, in a small
black letter, as early as the year 1500 ; this date being expressly mentioned in
the documents. These impressions are beautifully clear and brilliant. The work,
as printed at Vienna, contains 237 wood-cuts, after the designs of the celebrated
"
204 THIRD DAY.
variety, and richness of outline and detail ! What freedom
and correctness both of drawing and engraving ! -Such are
the dazzling attendants upon war-thecaptivating accompaniments of successful conquest. Banners, and gay clothing, and
HANS BURGMAIR -a contemporary of Wolgemut, Durer, and Schaeufelin ;
and the wonder may be, how these large blocks of wood had preserved their
original state of perfection during a course of at least 250 years ! Lambecius has
given a fac-simile of the frontispiece, upon copper ; but unsuccessfully. Copies
of this ænigmatical work ' (as Lambecius styles it) are by no means of rare
Occurrence.
6
We now come to notice the work above mentioned by Philemon. In the year
1783 Gruber had thus spoken of it : Nunc alter historiam Maximiliani mirum
in modum illustrans liber, inscriptus : Triumpf, seu quam plurimis nitidissimis
figuris distincta descriptio triumphi, quem Maximilianus Imperator in honorem .
et memoriam rerum a se gestarum haberi voluit, ex Cod. MS. Bibl. Cæs. , sub
eodem Viennensi prelo sudare dicitur. Verumtamen (adds Gruber) optanda et
editori et typographo maior, quam in priore adhibita fuit , sollicitudo et adcuratio,
ut tam sumtuosum, tamque nobilis materiæ, opus cum dignitate in publicum
emittatur.' Spec. Bibl. Germ. Austr. vol. ii. p. 437. It is clear, from this
observation, that Gruber was unacquainted with the existence of impressions of
these wood- cut ornaments as old even as the time of the Emperor himself. My
friend Mr. Ottley (whose rarities of this description are almost beyond number
and price) possesses a suite of original impressions, probably as old as those of the
'Weise Künig,' just noticed ; but at any rate contemporaneous with the Emperor
Maximilian-who, in all probability, had a few sets struck off for his own gratification. Bartsch, who in his Peintre Gravure, vol. vii . p. 229-240, is copious
and interesting upon this production, tells us that the Imperial Library was
already in possession of 90 of these ancient impressions, before even their existence
was known.' Mariette had 87 of them; which were sold at the sale of his Prints
(Cat. de Mariette, p. 406, no. 1402) for 720 livres. Mr. Ottley possesses more
than either of these numbers. Since the time of Mariette, however, 40 additional
original blocks were discovered at the castle of Ambras, near Inspruck. It should
be observed that Sandrart had seen a few of these original impressions, and had
supposed that the blocks had perished in a fire at Augsbourg. The fruits of the
more recent discoveries appeared at Vienna in an oblong imperial folio in 1796 ;
but it is due, I believe, to an English antiquary, of a reputation too confirmed
to stand in need of my humble eulogy (I mean Mr. Douce), to state, that
it was owing to his knowledge of the existence of the blocks, and his entreaty
to have impressions of them made public, that the late Mr. J. Edwards (with
his usual love of the fine arts), engaged, when abroad, in conjunction with
Bartsch, to have a number of copies for his own disposal. Of these, I learn, that
only two were printed UPON VELLUM ; one of which is in the library of Sir M.
THE
ASTOR
LIBR
Ti
CR
ASTO
LIBRARY
FAC-SIMILE of the 36th Cut of the TRIUMPHS O
་་་
OF THE EMPEROR MAXIMILIAN. See p.
205.
TRARY OR NYLIBR
THIRD DAY. 205
'spirit-stirring music :-the stately march,the loud shout, and
eager gaze and vehement acclamation of admiringmultitudes!
You have every thing of the kind in this marvellous tome.
Ah, my Lorenzo ! -contrast these with the virtuous and
heartfelt delight which we should all have enjoyed from
M. Sykes, Bart. at Sledmere. It was purchased at a sale in 1804 for 105 guineas.
It should be added, that Burgmair was the designer of these subjects, ( 135 in
number), and perhaps the engraver of a few of them.
This sumptuous volume is at present exceedingly common in our own country,
and of a very limited price. The prefatory matter is in German and French,
and few shelves are made of dimensions sufficient to hold such a cumbrous tome.
The cuts in it are really extraordinary, and of a size quite gigantic for the
material upon which they were executed , Coming all together, as they do,
without the intervention of text, they lose considerably their due effect ; but in a
volume of 500 pages of text, any three of them would be sufficient to delight and
astonish the reader. The ACCOMPANYING FAC- SIMILE forms the 36th cut ; and
is executed on one piece of box-wood ; (Bartsch says the original blocks are of
pear-tree) being, I presume, nearly unequalled for its dimensions in the exercise
of modern art. It will be observed that the spaces are much choked, as was the
original-it having been executed upon a thick vellum paper ; whereas, in
impressions upon browner and thinner paper, the execution appears more delicate
and finished. The freedom and spirit of the design-in all these splendid exhibitions of ancient art-are quite admirable.
Before I conclude the subject of large blocks of wood, introduced as graphic
decorations to printed books, let me only remind the reader of the spacious
dimensions of those cuts which accompany the reprint of Rastell's Chronicle, ofthe
date of 1811, 4to : being fac-similes of the portraits of the kings in the original
impression. That reprint was executed by Mr. Joseph Harding ; and I have
preserved rather a curious letter which he sent to me during the progress of it.
It should be premised that the blocks were of apple tree ;
Dear Sir,
I send you the proof which contains thefirst portrait of the Kings,
but the blocks are in such a deplorably wretched state, from having been cut upon
soft wood, without having been bound with brass, that they have warped and
cracked into all shapes but those of square or flat ; so that we are obliged to saw
awayhalfan inch in some instances (vid. separate proofs of Wm. I. and Hen. IV. )
to bring the block square ; -and to insert glue and saw-dust into crevices, and
cut the surface again to render the impression complete. As this process cannot
be done till the last moment before the blocks are locked up for press, lest they
again return to their imperfect state, you will perhaps trust us for doing our
utmost to render them complete. I am, &c.
JOSEPH HARDING.
206 THIRD DAY.
the execution of those works of art and of peace which
monarchs have it so frequently in their power to promote.
The same genius, whose pencil has done such wonders for
the military costume, might doubtless have produced almost
equal admiration in the embellishment of civil life. Gaze as
fondly as you please, Lisardo, at yonder fine battle-piece of
Bourguignone-but let me draw the attention of Lysander
and the ladies to this lovely landscape of Lorraine ! The
shepherd here pipes his evening song : the labourers retire
homewards the departing sun-beams grow fainter and
fainter, and seem to sleep upon the lake : and the shades of
evening are stealing upon the lengthened visto, where the man
of study just rises from his finished lecture ! —But I amwandering. Do not yet close this first edition of your favourite
Tewrdancks, without giving a guess whether the text be
executed by means of blocks of wood, or moveable metal
types ?* For my own part, I incline to the opinion that it is
the result of the latter operation : but shall not quarrel
violently with those who embrace a different opinion.
:
I have just observed that the publications which relate to
the exploits of Maximilian are very numerous. Yet I know
of few representations of that Emperor, in the form of an
engraving upon wood, which strike us in a more formidable
manner than what we observe in this thin and brilliant
* whether the text be executed by means of blocks of wood, or moveable metal
types. ] Vogt, Fournier, and Papillon, thought it impossible that such an effect,
as we observe in the text of this work, of the dates of 1517 and 1519 , could be
produced in any other way than by blocks of wood ; and I own they have
' shewn cause,' why it should not be otherwise, in a very ingenious and satisfactory manner. Catal. Libror. Rar. p. 842, edit. 1793 ; L'Art de graver en Bois,
1758, p. 73-4. De La Gravure en Bois, vol . i . p . 106-8 : p . 147-8. Camus, on
the contrary, and supported by rather a masterly exposé,' concludes such effect
could not have been produced but by metal types. He has given two fac-similes,
upon copper, of the original text ; and upon the whole I declare myself a
Camusite upon this momentous typographical question.
"
THIRD DAY. 207
3
the triumphal arch of Maximilian.] This work (says Mr. Ottley) is composed,
according to Bartsch, of no less than 92 engraved blocks, of various dimensions;
volume of graphic decoration : taken from the designs, by
Albert Durer, for the Triumphal Arch of Maximilian. *
AST
THE
COR
L/
NY
208 THIRD DAY.
Examine, for a minute, the splendid cut of the same
Emperor and his consort, which faces this whole length portrait. The freedom of the cross-hatching in the back-ground
gives it all the spirit of a pen and ink drawing. Battles, in
endless variety, succeed-but gaze a moment upon the complicated and bloody struggle which this decoration exhibits !
which, when joined together, form one print, of the prodigious size of eleven feet
and one quarter in height, by nearly ten feet in width. It was entirely engraved
from the designs, and under the superintendence of Albert Durer, with the
exception of one small block, which Albert, it appears, did not live to see finished.
An old copy of this work entire, is of the greatest rarity ; but small compartments
of it are not unfrequently to be met with separately. These pieces measure six
inches and seven eighths in height, by five and three quarters in width. Two of
THIRD DAY. 209
Away with such scenes of slaughter ! -Yet a word before
these martial subjects are entirely dismissed : for I must
remark to you that the German School ofArt is prodigal
beyond description in productions of this character, about
the period of which we are treating. Thus, in the Cæsar of
1532, and Livy of 1538, each printed in the German
language, * (from the press of Schoeffher) we observe a
number of wood-cuts (frequently repeated in the same
volume, and some of them common to both translations)
which display almost equal spirit with what are seen in the
earlier engravings in the works relating to Maximilian the
First. Look at the following, from the Cæsar of 1532 :
and, first, observe how cautiously these knights are pricking
the blocks bear date 1515, which Bartsch thinks was the year in which the work
was commenced. Origin and Early Progress of Engraving, &c. vol . ii . p. 734.
Aportion of this performance (being the first 24 cuts) is in Lord Spencer's
collection.
The cut, given at page 207, follows the title, and is surrounded chiefly by
implements of war ; a greyhound being to the left of the figure, and a book
before it. A bird is flying close to the point of the sword, and on the other side,
being the right hand upper corner of the cut, are four compasses. Above the
cut are the following verses :
Got hat sein guad an im ertzaigt
Dann er zu frumkeit was genaigt
Geschickt zu ritterlichem schertz
Dartzu stund im sein mut vnd hertz
Das fing er an in seiner ingent
Darin er wuchs mit grosser tugent
This inscription is upon a scroll, and there can be no doubt that the letters (a
little larger or thicker than those of the text of the Tewrdancks, but precisely of
the same character) are cut upon wood. The fac-simile, given in the preceding
page, is taken from the lower part of the cut upon the 7th leaf. Some of the cuts
have figures between five and six inches in height, accompanied by elaborate
back-grounds, and are in the finest style of Burgmair's execution.
* printed in the German language. ] There was a sumptuous edition of a version
of Livy, in the German language, published at Frankfort upon the Maine in
1571, folio ; containing more elaborate cuts than those in the above-mentioned
edition, but upon the whole, not more spirited or interesting.
210 THIRD DAY.
their way in the forest ; just having left their castle-gate.
They seem to be anticipating the ambushed foe."
6
There is both grace and dignity in these warriors -who
seem to be meeting to spare the further effusion of human
blood ; or who, if in alliance to prosecute the same cause,
appear at least to be upon very good terms with each other.
www
THIRD DAY. 211
I am perfectly persuaded that these cuts are executed by
one and the same artist, who probably also designed them
upon wood-and I wish Mr. Ottley or Mr. Douce, or some
other erudite graphic antiquary, would give us a disquisition upon that peculiar school of art from which they may
be said to have issued. But, to the volume before us.-
Belinda must not be too much shocked at the ensuing
representation of an assault-in which the besieged seem to
have little chance of effectual resistance. This piece may be
said to be done to the life !
The town is taken ; and mark with what a strut and
swell the two musicians follow in the train of the conquerors. Thatfifer quite wins my heart!
212 THIRD DAY.
I must really put away these terrific volumes, and
strive to entertain you by productions of a different description: but before we take our farewell of German Versions of
the Classics, look, Lisardo, for half a minute, at the spirited
engravings which are crowded into this small folio, entitled
the Offices of Cicero ! * Although the date be 1540, there
can be no doubt that the engravings are of an earlier
period, and that they may be found in several other productions. Fewornaments in the volume have so much expression
as that of the portrait of the Patron and Corrector of the
entitled the Offices of Cicero. ] Officia M. T. C. Ein Buch-So Marcus Tullius
Cicero der Römer, zü seynem Sune Marco, von den tugentsamen ämptern,
vnd zügehörungen, eines wol vnd rechtlebenden menschenn, inn Latein geschribenn, Wöllichs auffbegere, Herren Johansenn vonn Swartzenbergs, &c. verteütschet, Vnnd volgends, Durch jne, inn zierlichers Hochteütsch gebracht, Mit vil
figuren, vnd Teutschen Reümen, gemaynem nutz zü güt, inn Truck gegebe
worden.' We learn from the preface that the first impression of the translation
THIRD DAY. 213
translation, JOHANNS FREYHERR ZU SCHWARTZENBERG,
(copied from an original of Albert Durer) who was probably
an ancestor of the illustrious Austrian General, of the same
name, whose recent deeds have made so strong an impression
upon the memory of his countrymen.
BRARY
ASTO
THE N
OR
was completed in 1530 ; the present is probably the second impression of it.
Most of the designs are those of Hans Burgmair ; his initials are in the cut
on the recto of fol. LXXVIII . The initials H W are in the cut on the reverse of fol. LXXIII : but neither Christ nor Bartsch satisfy us respecting the
name of the artist for whom these initials are intended. On the reverse of
fol. xci is the colophon ; mentioning the book to have been printed at Augsbourg
214 THIRD DAY.
Animals, landscapes, quiet or agitated scenes, are touched
with the same intelligence and spirit ; and the exhibition of
The dancing Bear,* on the reverse of folio XXXIII, confirms
the truth ofthe wise man's remark, that there is nothing new
beneath the sun.' I know you will be all gratified by this
merry morceau; although Bruin hath rather a sombre
physiognomy.
As somewhat connected with the foregoing specimens, and
before we bid entirely adieu to martial bustle or splendid
equipments, let me just open a little volume in the class of
ROMANCES-ycleped Don Flores de Grece ;t and let me
single out for your approbation this contest between two
knights ! They go to work in right earnest.
in December 1540. My own copy was purchased of Mr. R. Triphook, for 21. 2s.
It had received a submarine soaking.
* See the OPPOSITE FAC-SIMILE.
+ ycleped Don Flores de Grece. ] The title is thus : La Cronique dv tres
Vaillant et Redovté dom Flores de Grece, surnommé le Cheualier des Cigues,
Second filz d'Esplandian , Empereur de Constantinople, &c. Mise en Francoys,
par le Seigneur des Essars Nicolas de Herberay, Commissaire ordinaire en
l'artillerie. &c. A Anvers, Chés Iean Waesberghe, &c. M.D.LXI. 4to. There is a
privilege for exclusive sale at the back of the title. The upper part of the compartment ofthe wood cut, in which the title is placed, is of extraordinary beauty
THIRD DAY. 215
216 THIRD DAY.
Would you wish to see the representation of dubbing a
Knight ? Methinks it is well expressed in the following ;
wherein the grouping is good and the expression graceful. *
Now observe the proper fruits of chivalry and knighthood. See how courteously the ' preux chevalier ' approaches
the lady of his choice, to receive his spear at her hands, and
whom he is resolved to win by his prowess ! And the fair
and merit; and the italic letter, in which the table is printed, is equally neat and
elegant. My romance-loving friends will give me a terrible scolding for not
exploring with curious eyes all the Launcelots and Arthurs that ever were printed,
for the sake of further embellishments :-but I am here only a traveller-or
pattern-shewer. Yet let them look to the Biblioth. Spenceriana, vol. iv. p. 405-9 ;
and, ifthey will, to the prettily-executed wood-cuts in the German translation of
Amadis de Gaul, published at Frankfort upon the Maine in 1583, folio . Where
the impressions are not blurred, the effect is very pleasing : but all these cuts are
much too small for the tremendously-voluminous pages in which they are
introduced.
* The reader will observe the same mark or monogram, in the centre of the
engraving, of which mention is made at p. 41 , ante. A representation of the
same subject ( ordaining a knight of Chivalry ') is given at page 341 of the first
volume of the Typographical Antiquities-fromthe French publication of Monsieur
Barbazan. There is more spirit in the above.
THIRD DAY. 217
dame, too, hath a right comely aspect and modest air in
parting with the same spear !
Generally speaking, the Romances of the xvith century
do not exhibit much felicity of graphic embellishment.
Historical, miscellaneous, or facetious publicationsLISARDO. Pray indulge us with an account of these
facetic-in the way of early art.
PHILEMON. I anticipated this question on the part of
Lisardo ; but if a month be scarcely adequate to dojustice
to the account of early engraving, as connected with sacred
subjects, what a period must be devoted to that which had a
wider range of circulation, by having touched upon the more
popular subjects of Drolleries and Extravagances ! No-I
will be brief only ; but in this brevity will mention two
books of very different complexions, and which you may
examine at your leisure. One of them is a sort of seriocomic production : the very title of which-and yet more
the title-page-will cause Almansa and Belinda to prick up
their ears, and palpitate with apprehension ! ..What have we
here ? LE LIVRE DE LA DIABLERIE ! The frontispiece
makes one start aghast !
VOL. I. P
218 THIRD DAY.
Eloy
SatBay ',
THIRD DAY. 219
6 The author, whose name was Eloy Damernal,' is made
to take down, in short hand, the reports delivered to Lucifer
by Satan. You observe the work is written in old French
poetry,* and has every black-letter charm of recommendation. The plan of the poem is shrewdly conceived. Lucifer
it is written in old French poetry. ] I could almost find in my heart to
quarrel stoutly with Monsieur Rigoley de Juvigny for not having, in his edition
of the Bibliothèques Françoises of La Croix du Maine et Verdier, vol . iii. p. 485,
added something to De La Monnoye's meagre note concerning this curious and
perhaps original work. Goujet has no notice of it, and perhaps the author was
not of sufficient notoriety to attract the attention of the pains-taking and accurate
Niceron. De Bure, vol. ii. no. 1414, has little more than a memorandum of the
existence ofthe edition of which we are about to treat : namely, the one printed
by Michael le Noir in 1508, folio . Barbier, in the copious Index (vol. iv. ) of
his Pseudonymes and Anonymes, 1806, 8vo. appears to have omitted Eloy
Damernal, or Damerval. It shall be my endeavour to supply these deficiencies.
The above fac- simile contains the greater part of the frontispiece. On the
reverse we read :
Cest ung bon liure vtille et abrege
Lacteur longtemps a vaquer a louurage
Pour expliquer son cueur et son courage
Michel le le noirfaicte a limpression
Tous deux les mette dieu en sa masio.
Alittle beyond what is read above by Philemon, the poem runs thus :-
Lucifer.
Voila de bons propos pour rire
Est il de telz folles au monde.
Sathan.
Ien congnois par tout a la ronde
Sans nombre et de telz folz aussi
Qui dient et font tout ainsi
Pour chose quon leur sceust donner
Le samedy apres disner
Jamais ilz ne besongneroient
(ca. xliii . )
Raison pourquoy ilz pecheroient. Sign. D v.
The following may be a desultory, but not altogether uninteresting, manner of
giving the reader some general notion of the contents of this extraordinary
volume. There is, I think, much vigorous painting in the ensuing description of
the prevailing amusements and pastimes of the age.
220 THIRD DAY.
commands Satan to go abroad, in the world, and report
to him the various vices and crimes which he beholds.
At first, the servant is rather restive in executing the
'Le premier chapitre du deuxiesme liure des mondains de leur estat, et passe
temps dānable.
Sathan.
Or disons pour commencement
Crestiens par mon damnement
Lucifer font auiourdhuy rage
Par tout tant sont de grans courage
Ilz sesbattent ilz se rigollent Ilz saillent dansent & crarollent
Au sons des harpes & tabours
Ilz passent en soulas leurs iours
Et prennent des plaisances trop Comme dit le saint homme iob
Trestous en diuers passe temps
Diuersement passe le tems Eschamps, esboys, villes, maisons
Selons les diuerses saisons
Les vngz qui ont les cuers gentilz
Sont curieux & ententifz
De nourrir chiens furez oyseaulx
Comme dame & damoiseaulx
Qui sont produys de gentillesse
Et extraitz de haulte noblesse
Et sen vont pour eulx consoler
Tantost chasser tantost voller,
Prennent sangliers biches & serf
Par ces bois & par ces desertz
Ralles perdriz : les beaux faisans
Aux gybiers ioyeulx & plaisans
Et autres oyseaulx de riuiere
Car bien en scauent la maniere
Comme rusez & bien apris
Les autres sur cheuaulx de pris
Font les ioustes les beaulx tournois
Ou ilz despendent mains tournois
Sesbatent a courir la lance
Pour les dames a leur plaisance
Ou a oultrance aucunes fois
Dont suis plus ioyeux toutefois
THIRD DAY. 221
commands of his master ; and heaps upon him as many
curses as Caliban does upon Prospero. I will endeavour to
read to you, as intelligibly as possible, the opening of the
Les autres vont par ces boquetz
Cueillir les fleurs les beaux bouquetz
Chasser aux lieures aux connins
Tant masculins que feminins
La dyent de bonnes lecons
Les autres sen vont aux tessons
Aux ours aux loups & aux reguars
Non pas si folz ne si conarde
Quilz nayent yuer ou este La belle bouteille au coste
Pour boyre chascun sa lippee
Les autres vont a la pipee
Tromper les poures oysillons
Les prennent mieulx quaulx gresillons
Au bray au hu au trebuschet
A tant dengins que le gibet
La vous vont quetant comme espies
Mesanges gays Kalendes pies
Merles pluuieurs troyes mauuis
Tarins qui chantent a deuis
Serins aloettes royteaulx
Brasses cailles & passeteaulx
Quilz prennent aussi a la rois-n*
Es champs bruyeres & buyssons
Les autres prennent les poissons
Aux lacz aux lignes aux filez
Aux engins dont ilz sont stillez
Les gros barbeaulx a la commee
Les anguilles a la verinee
Carpes becquetz chauennes truytes
Sont par eulx prises & destruytes
Dardz gardons garboz gouions ables
Loches & verons : ilz font dyables
De bien pescher chasser voller
Iamais ne sen peuent saouler
Cest tout leur soulas & desir
A bien grand peine ont ilz loysir
De reposer boire & gouster
Tant ont grant haste de troter
A ces poissons oyseaulx & bestes
Sic.
222 THIRD DAY.
third chapter, which corroborates this observation. You
must prepare for rough and antiquated phraseology :
Comment Sathan soubhayte plusieurs maulx a son
maistre Lucifer.
Sathan
Chapitre. iii.
Vien feu ardant tout plain de souffre
Et dhuylle bouillant en ton gouffre
Te puist on plonger maintenant
Comment te vas tu demenant
Lucifer.
Je croy bien ce sont ieux honnestes
Paillart sathan quen veulx tu dire
Veulx tu pourtant sur eulx mesdire
Et les reprendre de cela
Tu ny congnoye ne sol ne la Ne blanc ne noir ne dur ne mol
Somme toute tu nes gung fol Sign. E i.
Some of the Games and Sports, prevalent at the period of the composition of
this work, are not inaptly here described.
Lucifer.
Vrayment si fais ie moy aussi
De raison malleur en prendra.
Sathan vng beau iour qui viendra
Car si Dieu ne prent mercy deulx
Ilz viendront en ces lieux hydeulx
Tu ne parles pas en berger
Mais conclus bien pour abreger
Dont ie suys content de toy
Di sus mon beau filz compte moy
Que font les autres sil te plaist.
Sathan,
Ce qui te plaist ne me desplaist
Les autres ne sont pas agilles
Comme ceulx la ne si abilles
Mais comme mes vrais escolliers
Affin quilz nusent leurs souliers
Ilz ne hobent de leurs maisons
La iouent en toutes saisons
THIRD DAY. 223
Que me veulx tu lucifer
As u songe au puis denfer
Et trouue en tes vieulx registres
Que ie doye auoir tant de tistres
Aux quilles au franc du carreau
Aux trinc au plus pres du cousteau
Aux dez au glic aux belles tables
Sur coffres sur bancz & sur tables
Avn tas de ieux superflux
Ala condemnade & au flux
Ala quarte qui est ieu chault
A quoi leur plaist il ne men chault
De iour en iour a nouueaulx ieux
En yuer au long des beaux feux
En este dessus la verdure
Ainsi tant comme argent leur dire
Sesbatent la communement
Les vns assez paisiblement
Les autres en blasphement dieu Comme on loit souuent en maint lieu
Qui est heresie prouuee
De dieu mauldicte & reprouuee
En le despitant maulgreant
Desauoant & regnyant
Sa mere aussi la chose est telle
Auec toute la lryrielle
Voyre si hault pour parler court
Que qui ne loyt il est bien sourt. E ii rev.
Take warning, fair readers, from what ye find here developed : ' Comment
les femmes se douient honnestement vestir et aorner.
Sathan
E dieu filz vouloient aller
h A Sainct pierre se conseiller
Pour se garder de periller.
Et aussi au doctieur Sainct pol
Leur cas ne seroit pas si fol
Silz auoient tres bien notee
Sa belle epistre a thimotee
Ilz en seroyent beaucoup plus sages
Femmes dit il en beaulx langages
Se doibuent vestir et aorner
Et honnestement atourner
Chapitre. Ivi.
224 THIRD DAY.
Si tu deuoyes enrager
Et ta malle mort abreger
Si parferay ie ma besongne
Villain en despit de ta troigne
En sobriete et vergongne
Aceste fin que nul nen grongne
Non pas dit il en cheueulx tors
Nen or nen pierres, nen tresors
Nen vestemens si precieux
Qui volontiers sont vicieux
Mais en telle maniere et port
Que tous en facent bon raport.
Ki recto.
The dialogue afterwards becomes rather piquant with the respective collocutors :—
Lucifer
Tous mes cinq sens sont esperdus
Douyr ung si bon quolibet
Je me prendray a mon gibet
Tant suis ioyeulx faulx sathanas
En ta vie ne me donnas
Si ioyeuse colacion
Ne tant de recreacion
Je suis de ceste heur tant aise
Ou fin fons de ma grant fournaise
Quil mest aduis que ie suis en gloire
Mais ie te prye dy moy encore
De noz bons enfans vng petit.
Sathan
Croy que ien ay bon appetit
Tout ce que ie ten ay compte
Mon beau lucifer ca este
Enten bien de leurs enfans masles
Mais ilz ons tant de filles malles
Et peruerses ainsi maid dieux
En plus de cinq cens millelieux
Que force mest de ten parler
Deux ou trois motz au fort aller
Car ce sont trop notables filles
Mais quoy ie vueil que tu mestrilles Bien au vif le ventre et le dos
Si tu noys tantost de bons motz
THIRD DAY. 225
Auant que ie voyse vers toy
Il est hors du sens ie le croy
Il me souuient dung chien qui volle
Cest dommage quon ne le brusle
Et diras ie le te prometz
Voire se tu veulx que iamais
Malle pie ne me couua
Or disons donc puis quainsi va. Q v. rect.
Lucifer.
Si iamais dyable fut mauldit
Ie requier dieu que soit toy.
Pour les bons motz que dire toy. Tü. rev.
Satan complains of fatigue and hunger from the execution of the orders of his
master. He has been four days, trotting backwards and forwards,' without
eating-and thinks a roasted serpent ' no unsavoury dish. He even threatens
Lucifer with devoration !
Lucifer.
Iamais diable ne parla mieulx
Que toy villain ainsi maid dieux
Et men sens bien tenu a toy
Ie te diray raison pourquoy
Ie regarde que de cest an
Tu nas pas eu mon beau sathan Plus de trauail bien seur en suy
Que tu as en tout le iour duy
A menseigner beaucoup de bien
Dont ie te prise & ayme bien
Affin donc que ne soye ingrat
Vers toy larron plain de barat
Mais recongnoisse mieulx de fait
Le grant plaisir que tu mas fait
Sathan.
Ne ten ay ie pas assez dit
Il ny en a plus lucifer
Ie tay cy dit sans point truffer
Tout ce que te vouloye dire
Auis mest quil te doit suffire
Cestadire en especial
Mais touteffois en general
Ie te vueil bien tout au propos
Dire encore deux ou trois mots
226 THIRD DAY.
Tout vif ou millieu de sa roue
Par force de brayre il senroue
Le dyable saiche quil lui fault
Lucifer
Haro Sathan le cueur me fault
Et puis tantost ie feray fin
Ie dy ces parolles affin
Que ie men puisse aller a coup
Car tu me tiens icy beaucoup
Je desiunasse voulentiers
Il y a quatre iours entiers
Que ie ne mengay moquin moquant
Cest pourquoy iay fain. ce fut quand
Ie mangay vng serpent rosti
Mentens tu bien sot rasoty
Lequel si friant ie trouuay
Qua peu tint que ie nen creuay
Dieu que ien mengay bien mon sot
Mais te diray ie poure sot
De quoy aussi pour abreger
Jay maintenant fain de menger
Enten villain rabarbatif
Lay fain de te menger tout vif Pour donc mener a fin mon compte
Que tout ce iour duy ie te compte
Si tu mas tresbien escoute
Ie tay dit viellart redote
Quil y a ie tasseure bien
Des crestiens fort gens de bien
Sans nombre auiourdhuy sur la terre
Quoy que ie leur face grant guerre. Sign. Virect.
These arch-devils now begin to grow furious with each other ; and Satan is
quite outrageous with his master.
• Comment lucifer pour tout saillaire a sathan donne plusieurs maledictions.
Lucifer.
athan ie suis de toy content
f Merueilleusement en mon ame
Si requerer dieu villain infame
Apres que tay bien escoute
Chapi. cc.xv.
THIRD DAY, 227
De despit et de malle rage
A bien peu tient que ie nenrage
Que dyable faistu la dedans
Vienca tost.
Iarrache les dens
Sathan
Quil tenuoye mal au coste
Es rains, en laine et es deux cuysses
Si grant que mourir tu en puisses
Car iamais ie neuz tant de ioye
Ne de plaisance a grant monioye
Que tu mas donnee auiourdhuy
Pourquoy de vray bien tenu suy
Et oblige nen doubte point
De prier pour toy en ce point
Mais quoy parlons encore vng poy
De ces chrestiens par ta foy
Pour dieu acheue le surplus
• Comment Sathan dit a lucifer quon fait pechez infinis par le monde.
Sathan.
e ne ten diray iamis plus
i Ne ten ay ie pas chien mastin
Assez dit depuis le matin.
Chapitre. cc.xvi.
X. v. rect.
The concluding reply of Lucifer to the latter part of Satan's remarks (here
extracted) is as follows :
Iamais donc plus ne men demande Ie men vois et te recommaunde
Trahistre murtrir faulx lucifer
Atous les grans dyables denfer
De ceste heure a mon partement
Lucifer.
Si fay ie toy semblablement
Mauldit sathan vaten ta voye
Que le grant dyable te conuoye.
: ·
Et y vaquant tant longue espace
Il luy plaise de sa grant grace
De men faire pour mon guerdon
Misericorde et vray pardon
228 THIRD DAY.
Avne sorciere esdentee
Que belial ma presentee
Maintenant en vne chauldiere.
Tant que ma poure ame lassus
En soit auec le doulx iesus
Sauluee en fin non pas perie
Icyfinit la dyablerie.
Avery little onward we read the colophon, thus :
Maistre guillaume dequercu
Et maistre pierre charpentier
Ce liure icy tout entier
Ont visite deligemment
Et postille semblabement
Cest la dyablerie deloy
Et lont trouuee de bon aloy
Et approuue il lont ainsi
(Sign. B iii.)
#
Fidel et catholique aussi
Et chascun deulx par son beau signe
Testifie que il est digne
Destre Imprime honnestement
Car maint y a enseignement
Limprimeur est Michel le noir
Qui a paris a son manoir
En la ruc saint Jaques en somme
A la roze blanche cest homme
Et vray libraire et vsite
Jure en luniuersite
Qui la mis en impression
Et tout a bonne intencion
Lan mil cinq cens et huytsansfaulte
La matiere en est fort haults
Mais pardonnez a lacteur
Et depriez le createur
Quan la fin luy soit amyable
Et quil ait ioye pardurable
Souuiengne a tous de ces ditz
Dieu doint aux lisans paradis.
Amen.
Jep finist la deablerie. (X vj rect.)
The foregoing account is taken from a very beautiful copy of this curious
work, in purple morocco binding, in the possession of Messrs. I. and A. Arch,
booksellers.
THIRD DAY. 229
The other work of drollery, alluded to, is entitled Upon
the Fidelity of Concubines towards Priests '—but I find it
is left behind. No matter : I am sure it is quite unfit
for the unreserved examination of female eyes ; but such
bibliographical enthusiasts as Lysander and Lisardo, may
find a pleasant grove for their wits to walk in' when they
choose to give a close attention to that rare and curious
volume. For the rest, you may notice the drolleries in the
a close attention to that rare and curious volume. ] That close attention '
which might be censurable in female readers (even were they masters of the
Latin and German languages in which this work is written) becomes a sort of
prescribed duty to the inquisitive and thorough -bred antiquary ; and my best
thanks are due to the Chapter of Lincoln Cathedral, for the loan of a volume, of
which perhaps not three collectors , since the time of Dean Honeywood, (who
may be called the founder of Lincoln- Cathedral library) ever possessed a copy-in
this country. The title of the volume, above alluded to by Philemon, is thus :
De Fide Concubinarum in Sacerdotes. Questio accessoria causa ioci et vrbanitatis
in quodlibeto Heidelbergess determinata a magistro Paulo oleario Heidelbergensi.'
It is a thin quarto, without date, is printed in a small and rather rude gothic
type, and contains signatures A, B, C, in sixes, and D with 8 leaves ; a blank
leaf forming the eighth. I had prepared myself with numerous specimens of
the contents of this droll book, but the limits of my work and the patience of my
reader must be equally attended to. Let us first listen to the description of the
pangs and miseries of love—as described in the hexameters and pentameters of
the renowned Philip Beroaldus. It belongs to a part beginning—' Questio
minus principalis ad me data fuit hec. Cur ceci amatores mulierum easdem
plus colunt venerantur et amant quam deum optimum et verum'....
Philippi Beroaldi cupido.
Ut sine febre dolet, sine morbo languet amator
Et somni vigiles, irrequieta quies
Ut rubet vt pallet subito, mutatque colores
Siue pudor vexet pectora, siue timor.
Nunc scio vt infracte voces, mutilataque verba
Et coram domina cor salit atque tremit.
Ut quam longa graui suspiria corde trahuntur
Ut modicus risus, multus amaror inest.
Ut gaudet leta, plorat plorante puella
Induit et vultus vultibus alterius.
Nunc scio vt infelix domine vestigia querit
Et reperisse timet, mobilitate leuis,
230 THIRD DAY.
frontispieces of the books printed at Basil ; which were
usually designed by Holbein, and printed in the office of
Froben. Take the following, which appears indeed in three
different publications to my own knowledge.
M
BIS
Genua labant, quotiens fastose limen amice
Transit, et in toto corpore membra tremunt.
Nunc scio quantus amor supra caput instet amantum.
Atque omnem sophiam consiliuque fuget.
Condita quam paruo sint larga absynthia melle
Lurida vel quantum pocula fellis habent.
I shall next present a specimen of the mellifluous intermixture of the German
with the Latin language.
6
De concubinarijs ordine tertijs materno amore minime affectis turpi vt meruere
meritriceo vocabulo Breda sua insignientibus.
Nunc de sacerdotibus, qui non habent vsque adeo molles & effeminatos
animos : scz müterliche hertzer, qualis fuit quidam canonicus herbipolensis, cuius
concubina balneum intrans audiuit ceteras canonicorum famulas ex cognominibus
& familiis dominorum suorum appellari (verbi gratia) cum exituri essent balneas,
clamabat lotrix pedum aut fricatrix posteriorum. Langent myner frowen von
schwartzenberg ein tüch. Et iterum. Langent myner frowen von finsterloch ein
tüch. Et rursus. Langent myner frowen von weyting ein tüch. Canonici vero
illius qui de grünbach erat concubina nominabat solo nomine suo Dorothea,
neque adiectum fuit mein frow von grünbach, venit domum, flet, lachrymat,
plangit, spretam se dicit, sese a domino suo nequaquam diligi conqueritur, is causam
inuestigat, respondet illa : ecce iam in balneo omnes mee professionis mulieres
pfaffen kellerin and thümherren frowen erber geschlecht a dominorum suorum
cognominibus meruerunt appellari, his auribus enim audiui, Langent myner
THIRD DAY. 231
The Basil Books must not be dismissed without begging
you to seize every opportunity of enriching your cabinets
frowen von schwartzenberg ein tüch. Langent myner frowen von finsterloch ein
tüch Und langent myner frowen von weytengen ein tüch. Ego autem sola sicut
scabellum pedum vestrorum Dorothea vocata sum. Respondit canonicus, quia
cor matris non habuit. Sunder er hat ein mansz hertz. O bestia, interrupit illa e
vestigio. O frylich bin ich die best woltent irs anderst glouben : prosequit canonicus. Ecce bona Dorothea mater mea adhuc superstes est que vulgo die
grünbechin appellatur ; si tu in hoc cognomine cum ea concurreres, fieret confusum
chaos, aut enim tu pro matre aut mater pro concubina mea apud ignoto posset
dijudicari. Verum ne te omnino defraudem, restant adhuc alia duo cognomina,
sum enim archidiaconus, inde vocor ein landtzrichter. Sum et archipresbyter,
inde vocor ein ertzpriester. Optionem habeas eligendi quod vis e duobus, vt aut
appelleris a primo, Ein lands hür, aut a secundo, ein ertzhür. Et tantum de his
qui materno in concubinas non afficiuntur affectu. A v. rect.
It is perhaps time to give the curious a specimen of the graphic decorations'
in this amusing volume. They are pretty much in the style of art of some of the
Basil books towards the very beginning of the xvith century.
Spero
232 THIRD DAY.
with fair specimens of the same. Sometimes, I admit, they
are very coarsely executed ; but in general there is a felicity
of invention, and a spirit of execution about them, which
Take what follows in good part, gentle reader. Thou shalt rarely find subjectmatter of the like nature in other tomes : Fuit insuper quedam matrona que
eligit sibi studentem quendam stolidum alliciens eundem paruis munusculis puta
mitris ligis pectoralibus plicalis zonis ex serico confectis & si qua sunt similia.
At ille, multum gauisus, ex ea quesiuit, cur nam mihi tantum honorem exhibes
cum tamen de te nihil bene meritus sim nec tibi quicquam impendi. Respondit
amasia, fraudis & doli plena, non vellem reuera me aliquid abs te recepisse
nec cupio sed tantum de tua presentia & aspectu lector & exulto. Ille autem
bonus homo, fiui eius intentum & latentem animum non intellexit. Paruo vero
tempore transacto, excogitauerat ipsa viam qua per paruis maiora esset receptura.
Appropinquabat ei gemens, & lachrymans, quesiuit ille cuculus. Eya quid mali
pateris : in quibus rogo deficis? Respondit. O mi socie, ceterorum charissime,
te in meis anxietatibus nolo molestare, quoniam si certior de meo dolore efficereris
pro me plurimum dolores. Esto igitur letus, & desine contristari, quoniam
satis est me mestam & consternatam esse. At denuo post pusillum temporis
abunde fleuit. Ipse vero contristatus, tandem his verbis eam alloquitur . Angorem
animi tui atque defectum scire desydero ; & quam breuiter abs te enarrari cupio.
At illa obticuit, nihil ei respondens. O vesanum hominem. O stultorum numerum
infinitum, de quorum numero tu vnus existis. Consyderasti ne vnquam vulgi
illud dicterium communissimum. Hund hincken, frowen weinen, vnd kremer
schweren, daransol sich nieman keren. Ille non minus pristinum repetens verbum
collachrymando dixit. Eya mea amasia, quid nam contristaris. Subiunxit ipsa
dicens. Ach ach causam doloris mei tibi enarrare est mihi difficile . Est quidam
pannicida quam sine parata pecunia, sub bona solum spe mihi ante hac dederat
septem vlnas panni pro facienda tunica, & vlnarum quelibet floreno constat :
terminus autem solutionis mihi ab eodem impositus effluxit : et nisi hodie ei
satisfecer extra ciuitatem sum expellenda. Id autem mihi inter cetera tamen
dolorem affert quantum verbis vix consequi possum, quod a te separari debeo, &
tuum deinceps aspectum minime contemplari. Ad hec omnia cuculus retulit.
" Eya sis leta, sy frölich myn Hreta. Ich wil dich nitt lossen in dynen nöten.”
Mox itaque iudeos ac christianos iudaizantes visitare intra se cogitans & suam
dilectam iuuare, impignorauit tunicas : vendidit libros : vt ei succurrere posset.
Cum seipsum rebus suis ita spoliasset, sedet in cubiculo inspiciens mitram, pectorale & reliqua parua munera a sua amasia recepta, ingeminiscensque dixit.
" Au au wee gsteest du mich so thüre, ich gauch ich narr, was hon ich daran zü
steure, ich hab mein kleider versetzt und verkaufft, was thun ich nun au ich armer
narrischer mann wie ist es ein ding vmb derbuler fan, wol hin tüfel hab dir das halb teil daran.”
Post pusillum vero temporis precepta illius sueui stulticia a parentibus suis
ab alma vniuersitate reuocatus ex fatuo tamen amore perligatum pectus habens &
THIRD DAY. 233
render them objects of attention to the curious. In particular, fail not to secure a fine copy of Polydore Vergil's
History ofEngland, printed by Bebelius at Basil, in 1534,
folio. That volume has generally an inviting aspect, and is
also intrinsically curious and valuable ; notwithstanding it
is obtainable at a very low price, from the present want of
a proper taste for early publications relating to our History.
The decorations which surround the first page of the dedication to Henry the Eighth, and more especially those of the
"
prorsus excecatum discedere ab ea nequit nisi ei prius vltimum vale dixisset,
obtulit se hora qua vna esse poterant. Cum audit illa profectionem cuculi, iterum in fontem lachrymarum resoluta est his verbis. "Au we au we hit vnd nymerme,
dyn abscheid bricht mir mein hertz in tausent stuck vnd macht mir gro hertzen leidt,
Fatuus collachrymans dixit Ach mein Brett, kan ich esgeschicken, so darffest mein
nilt lang beyten so wil ich dir bringen der kirhwych, es sy dunsach das der tüfel
darinnen sye." Nolens ergo arripere iter versus patriam, veniens ad rheni fluuium
cogitabat intra se, & verbis seipsum alloquitur. " O miserabilis homo, est ne tibi
hodie trans hoc mare magnum & spaciosum nauigio transeundum : neque tua
dilecta tibi hodie reuisitanda. Au wie ist mir dasso ein grokie sach. Mox sibi in mentem venit cum reuersus fuerit ad eam. Oquam magno gaudio afficietur redit
festinansque serotino tempore venit ad locum fetoribus & stercoribus plenissimum,
inter duos domus inclusum in eynen schönen palast mit erckern von cloacken wol
besetzt, darin isz allein hoch trappen eyer vnd winckel wurst. Ascendit iuxta morem
pristinum prope amasie cubiculum. Fuerant autem fenestre serate ac clause tandem
introspiciens per rimas vidit in cubiculo lumen cereum ardentem, aliumque socium
illic sedentem & caligas suas exuentem iuxta. 1. accedat alter. ff. de concubitu
clericorum & mulierum. §. narrabo. Mox ipse cum tristicia magna descendens,
pergit ad coquine foramen circa locum lauandarum scutellarum, zu gutem tütsch
vor das Kuchen lo'ch, vocem paruam & gracilem emittens qua ab ea dinosci posset.
Ipsa vero eundem audire nolens dixit, “ vsz hundt das dich der narrisch ritt schut,”
respondit ipse : " Au gretlin fyn ich sich wol wie es zu gadt in dynem kemerlin, du
haltest an mir als ein ful armbrust, wol hin zum tüfel do du hin solt vn müst, Ipsa
huiusmodi percipiens altissima voce cantauit. Sichstu sur do schlag der tüfel sü
noch dann wil ich mynem willen thün vnd solt es mich immer geruwen. Pariter &
ipse in suo recessu canendo inquit . Ich truw der lieben nit wol, ich truw der lieben
nit wol, sye hat mich grantz verlossen dye wylich kein gelt mer hon. ” &c. &c. &c.
I am not sure whether the preceding extract should have occupied the place
here assigned to it ; but the following embellishment seems to belong, in some
measure, to the subject of which it treats-namely, the hard- heartedness,
indifference, and cruelty of that sex, who are generally and more justly called
VOL. I. Q
234 THIRD DAY.
first pageoftheworkitself, are quite beautiful and magnificent.
Let me also, in the course of chit-chat, urge you to take particular notice of some ofthe title pages of the earlier editions
tender, attentive, and affectionate. The story in this cut is represented with
some humour ; but it is a little too much perhaps in the Hogarthian style.
The reader is here treated with a column of Latin and German : and shall
then be dismissed from the toil of further perusal :
T vt cognoscas latius
E Ludi magister fatuus
Se multum ratus amari
Amore volens cremari
Replentur vini veteris
Iocus hic fuit celebris
So nym gar eben war
Dasist wyt offenbar
Von eynem wyblin schon
Hiefz sye mit im heim gon
And woren güter ding
Garscon sye yn vmfieng
THIRD DAY 235
of Erasmus's Greek Testament; * and indeed to the greater
number of pieces from the pen of Erasmus, put forth from
Non immemor rei sue
Gratulando illi suaue
Multos hinc extorquet nummos
Abit & querit alios
Nec hunc curabit miserum
Necuit post huic lintheolum
W. U. H. M. G.
Sic speculans Poetice
Omne delesti gaudium
Graue paris cordolium Non fuerat autem ita
Illi prius non audita
Sonabat. Mira dicam
Iudeo portat tunicam
Ut eam posset adire
Quo placentur eius ire
Ad ipsam vbi venerat
Illa blandiri non cessat
Mox aperit stultus peram
Rem refero vobis veram
In cubiculum ducitur
Subter lectum absconditur
&c. &c. &c.
Ir schantzen nam sye acht
Bald yn züm narren macht
Das ist ir aller art
Lag im an sicher hart
Die wil sye pfennig hat
Do in geschriben stat
Er kuntz vszlegen fyn
Das was dye gattung syn
Weinen Vnd hertzenleidt
Iamer Mencklich Gespreit
W. U. H. wild vnd hert
I. M. G. ist meyn gefert
Der güt gesell was ein gauch
Zwo sergen den mantel auch
Mit seckel wol beschwert
Gar bald er zü irfert
Do was es gar noch nacht Bifz sye das gelt raufz bracht
Wolt also gelieben sich
Sye sprach heb dich an mich
Hoffet ein güten müt
Er meint es wer als güt
Sign. D v, rev.
I cannot dismiss the notice of this very curious and uncommon book, without
intreating the forgiveness of the philologist for occasional errors, I fear, in the
transcription of the German : the original being printed in a very barbarous
style.
quité beautiful and magnificent. ] The reader will think me Basil-mad in the
frequent mention of this fine book : see Typog. Antiq. vol. i. p. xlv. I secured
my own copy, in its old binding, but a little worm-eaten, for 5s. -at the sale of
Mr. Goldsmid's library.
title-pages of the earlier editions of Erasmus's Greek Testament. ] A copy of
the third edition , 1522, folio, is now before me. The title is entirely enclosed
by an elaborate wood-cut border ; having at top the citadel of happiness,' and
at bottom a walled arena-into which Genius, in the character of an old man,
with a stick in his hand, seems to be forbidding the intrusion of a parcel of
frolicksome boys. Fortune,' Opinions,' ' Persuasion, ' personified by females, are
within this arena. The evil passions are represented round it ; while the side compartments are filled by representations of the discipline, or afflictions, of human
nature in its progress to the happy citadel. The reverse is occupied by a
border, nearly equally elaborate, but in a different style of art. The dedication
236 THIRD DAY.
the office of Froben. * It is true, almost all the engravers,
engaged in these works, flinched from the difficulties of
to Leo X. follows on the second leaf,with a third and different embellishment. In
short, the several parts of the New Testament are distinguished by these bold
embellishments ; but one of them, in the beginning of St. Mark's Gospel, might
have been spared with great credit to the publisher of so serious a work. Indeed,
one can scarcely trust one's eyes in viewing some of the bizarre ornaments in
impressions of the sacred text. Did the publishers put their wits, or their sense
of shame, in their pockets ?
pieces from thepen ofErasmus, put forthfrom the office of Froben. ] The
Basil School of Art seems to me to have quite an exclusive and peculiar character.
I select the following-from the Encomium Moria of 1521, 8vo. There is much
prettiness in this top-and-bottom decoration of the title-page of the edition just
mentioned.
MD-XX
It is due however to the name of FROBEN to observe, that the whole length
wood-cut of ERASMUS, which (in my copy) faces the title-page of the 1st volume
ofthe OperaOmnia of the same illustrious character-of the date of 1540 -published by Froben's son Jerom, and his son-in-law Episcopius-is, as well in itself
as its accompaniments, one of the most delicate and brilliant performances which
the artists of that school and period ever produced. Look, tasteful reader, at the
OPPOSITE FAC-SIMILE -and admit at least the correct outline and propriety of
expression in the portrait of the great philologist ! I do not fear the comparison-
THIRD DAY. 237
TERMINVS
238 THIRD DAY.
cross hatching; but they exhibited, nevertheless, a considerable degree of boldness of effect. If you happen to possess
the works of Ptolemy, in the Latin language, printed by
Petrus at Basil, in 1551 , folio * —you will find it to be
not only a very curious volume in itself, but to present you
with a number of embellishments particularly corroborative
of the foregoing remark.
LISARDO. Pray do not forget Sebastian Munster.
PHILEMON. Nor Geyler, either. They shall each have
a transient notice of approbation ; but the latter being first
in chronological order, claims our earliest attention in consequence. What ! -do I yet witness those writhings of
vexation which possessed you, Lisardo, on finding a great
portion of the works of Geyler, crowded with wood-cuts to
excess, † carried off in a late sale, at the point of the bayonet
ifyou should even remember the bronze whole length at Rotterdam: -nor will I
take off my cap to the supposed superior representation of him, from the burin of
Albert Durer. Why is the lively and sagacious Erasmus usually represented
with a sleepy or downcast eye? and why are his features marked with a grossness, or severity, fit only for an half- starved Eremite ? I will not even exempt the
small profile of him, in wood, on the reverse of the title-page of the Adagia,
(printed in Froben's office in 1536, folio) from the application of this criticism ;
although this latter, upon the whole, when well printed, is a very desirable
resemblance of the great original .
* Works ofPtolemy—printed by Petrus at Basil, in 1551 , folio. ] Mr. Triphook
shewed me a complete copy, in fine condition, and in its ancient vellum surtout,
of the respective pieces above alluded to. Are most of these title-page decorations executed by the artist whom the initials I. F. are intended to designate?
These initials (certainly not intended for IEAN FRANCESCO, or IEAN FISCHER, as
we might suppose from Christ's Dict. des Monogrammes, p. 174-5) occur in one of
the border ornaments of the Polydore Virgil, mentioned at page 235, ante. If so,
the same artist executed the magnificent wood-cut (from the design of Hans
Holbein) which is republished in the third volume of my edition of the Typog.
Antiquities, facing p. 462 ; and his productions appear in the edition of the
Salisbury Prymer, noticed at page 527 of the same volume, in which a fac- simile
of one of the cuts (but not by the same artist) is also given.
a great portion of the works ofGeyler, crowded with wood cuts to excess. ] The
THIRD DAY. 239
by Atticus ?! They were treasures, undoubtedly, in their
way-and published at Strasbourg full twenty years before
the Universal Cosmography' of Munster.
portion of the works of Geyler, above mentioned , are thus described in the
Catalogue of the sale by auction (by Mr. Evans) alluded to by Philemon :
400 Geyler's Commentary on the Four Evangelists, in German ; with very
curious wood-cuts, Strasb. Gruninger. 1522.
401 Geyler's Pater Noster, a Collection of Moral Discourses, with three large
wood-cuts, Strasb. 1515. Geyler's Questions and Answers for the Conduct of
Life from the ten commandments, curious wood-cuts, in German, Strasb. 1520.
Geyler's Sermons, in German, with three large wood-cuts, Strasb. 1510. Geyler's
Sermons for Easter Day, in German, with curious wood-cuts, Strasb. Gruninger,
1520.
402 Geyler's Pomegranate, a Collection of Moral Discourses in German, with
curious wood-cuts, and a portrait of Geyler inserted, Strasb. 1516.
403 Geyler de Arbore Humana, Moral Discourses in German, with curious
wood-cuts, Strasb. 1521.
404 Geyler's Ant, a Collection of Moral Discourses, with wood-cuts, Strasb.
1517.
These articles, collectively, produced the sum of 15l. 13s. 6d.; and were purchased by my friend Mr. Heber ; whose name all the book-world now knows to
be synonymous with that of ATTICUS.
Geyler is also the author ofthe Nauicula sive Speculum Fatuorum, published at
Strasbourg in 1511, 4to. from which a few extracts are given in the Bibliomania,
p. 158 ; and of which a copy, at the forementioned sale, (no. 510) was sold for
10l. 10s.; although Grolier's copy of this same work produced the enormous sum
of431. at the sale of Mr. Edwards's library in 1815 : see no. 163. The wood-cuts
in it are full of spirit and drollery. It is a sorrily printed performance, in a close
black letter ; containing cuts, which for the most part are copies of those in the
Navis Stultifera of Sebastian Brandt ; and those which we observe on sign. r i, rev.
and sign. t vj, rev. (not to mention others) will be found in the Bibl. Spencer. vol . iii.
p. 211, 212, copied from this latter work. There is, at the end, a short biography
of Geyler, by B. R. Selestatinus : from which we learn that he was born in 1445,
and died in 1510 ; leaving behind ' a library filled with books of all kinds ...not
wanting either in poetry or history ; but chiefly rich in the theological department. ' The Sermons ' which were found on his decease we might probably
dispense with ; but the loss of a Navis Sapientum ' and of a Navis Pœnitentum'
(which are reported to have survived him) is not so easily to be reconciled.
Geyler seems to have been a man of great simplicity of habits and generosity of
disposition—' nemini vnquam sine munere passus est abire : quicquid enim ex
sacerdotij censu, vltra vitæ necessaria supererat, id omne in vsus pauperum
erogabat.' Sebastian Brandt was his intimate friend ; and even the Emperor
240 THIRD DAY.
1
LISARDO. No more of Geyler, I entreat you. I have
scarcely yet recovered the shock which that defeat occasioned
me. But of Munster, speak long and largely : for I revelled
even in the loan of a copy of it, bound in vellum, and
stamped upon the exterior with golden ornaments, belonging
to that worthy bibliopolist, Mr. Robert Triphook. That
copy had been onceLYSANDER. Order ! Order ! Here is digression as well as
interruption. Proceed with your Universal Cosmography,'
good Philemon.
PHILEMON. That work was first printed at Basil in 1544
and 1548 , in the German tongue ; and first in 1550, in the
Latin-always in folio-and if I were to say it contains
hundreds of cuts, of one description or other, I should not
greatly exaggerate. Maps, towns, animals ; human beings
of every degree and station ; portraits of eminent men-in
short, we have here a rich but rough harvest of every species
ofgraphic entertainment. I say rough-because these cuts,
you observe, are executed in rather a rough but most spirited
manner. The original drawings, probably made upon the
blocks themselves, musthave had abeautiful appearance or,
ifupon paper, and now in existence, I hardly know what sum
Maximilian treated him as a familiar ' and companion ; consulting him also in
matters ofstate-importance. His biographer describes him as ' of a lofty stature ,
with curly hair, of a spare countenance, and with a slender body ; but healthy,
and subject to few complaints. He made two meals a day, and loved a moderate
glass of wine. A great number of clergymen and every member of the senate
attended his funeral. His death was indeed lamented by the whole of Alsace. '
Rest his ashes in peace ! His works will long survive him, and deserve to be
better known. I must however observe (what appears a little extraordinary) that
a French translation of the work of Geyler was printed at Strasbourg, in the
same year with the Latin impression just mentioned, under the title of La Néef
ou l'Embarquement des fols par Geyler, de Kayserberg, avec beaucoup de fig.
en bois. ' in 4to. So says the Catalogue de Mariette, p. 374, no. 1129.
THIRD DAY. 241
ought not to be given for them! I will just point out a few
of the more striking specimens of the human figure, and
leave you to draw your own conclusions. We have here the
soldier, the mechanic, the labourer, and the nobleman-each
in appropriate attire and with appropriate expression.
242 THIRD DAY.
THIRD DAY. 243
Animals and Plants are also admirably executed in this
volume ; but it is now time to lay it aside. Perhaps too
much attention has been already bestowed upon it ; although
I own it to be a great favourite.
BELINDA. And I too ; for it seems to be a repertory ofmuch
that is both curious and useful. Yet my love of natural
history, and of plants in particular, induces me to ask you
whether the period, in which you have at present placed us,
be remarkable for good productions in the botanical department ?-for a slight inspection of a recent specimen of a
Mentz Herbal, of the xvth century, + has rather produced
wonder than satisfaction.
It may be necessary to mention that the above fac- similes are not arranged
in the order in which they appear in the original ; and I have, in three instances,
placed two within one frame.
ta Mentz Herbal of the xvth century. ] I presume Belinda to allude to an
edition of an Herbal in the German language, published at Mentz in 1485, folio ;
and described, with fac-similes of the cuts, in the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. iv. p.
503-8. Let the botanical virtuoso beware of giving credence to the cuts which
appear in the German version of the Ortus Sanitatis, printed at Augsburg in
1486, 4to. It exhibits such objects (says Jungendres) as the sun never before
shone upon.' Disquisit. &c. 1740, 4to. p. 38, 9.
"
244 THIRD DAY.
PHILEMON. As my partiality for the same pursuit is not
so decisive as your own, you will the more readily forgive
but a very slight notice of this subject. I remember however
to have been formerly much pleased and astonished with a
folio volume of the History of Plants, printed in the office
of the immortal Plantin * (you know how I love that man's
memory !) about the middle of the sixteenth century. Indeed
the earlier writers upon botany, whose works have had the
good fortune to be well embellished, are without number ;
yet I must observe that few productions of this kind have
been published in a more pleasing as well as more commodious form than those of Fuschius ; † whose portrait strikes
* History ofPlants-printed inthe office ofPlantin. ] The volume above alluded
to is the Historia Plantarum, seu Stirpium ' of Matthias de Lobel, with an
appendix of notes by the same author, and by Pena, of the date of 1576, in folio.
It is briefly noticed by De Bure, vol . ii . no. 1560 ; but I shall not easily forget
the pleasure I derived from an attentive examination of a fine copy of it in the
Library of York Cathedral. Few botanical volumes contain such accurate and
well-executed representations of the original subjects . This work, however, was
preceded by ' Stirpium Adversaria nova perfacilis vestigatio luculentaque accessio
ad priscorum præsertim Dioscoridis et recentiorum materiam medicam,' &c. by
the same authors, and published at London in 1571, folio, according to the
Biblioth. Vanderiana, pt. i. p. 258, no. 761 ; 1729, 8vo. De Bure has by no
means exhausted the subject of curious botanical publications ; as a glance at the
pages of Los-Rios may testify. See his Bibliographie Instructive, p. 29-30.
t in a more pleasing as well as more commodiousform than Fuschius. ] The little
volume from which the above portrait, as well as the ensuing fac- similes are
taken, is entitled Plantarum Effigies, e Leonartho Fuschio, ac quinque diuersis
linguis redditæ ,' 1549, 12mo. Beneath the portrait (on the reverse of the titlepage) are the ensuing verses :
Hic Fuschi effigies, quo videas virum
Quiplantas variè pinxit et optimè.
Nonaginta mea hæc pagina quinque habet,
Cui quaterna cadit post numerum parë.
Numfrontem caperas è vice tantula?
Let the reader next examine and admire what is here given as specimens of
the style of art in this little volume. The Fir- Species (always a magnificent tribe,
and with which, whoever chooses to delight himself to satiety, must examine the
costly pages of a publication relating to the ' Genus Pinus '-by Mr. A. B. Lambert
THIRD DAY. 245
us, with no small satisfaction, in this little botanical manual,
executed in the middle of the same century ; and perhaps
from an anterior publication.
and Dr. Maton ; wherein these erudite writers have covered themselves with the
very foliage of immortality ! ) has a very neat appearance in these representations.
246 THIRD DAY.
For the rest, consult the Catalogue of Botanical Writers
by Seguier, with the appendix of Bumaldus, published in
1740, quarto : but more especially the very excellent catalogue, by the late Mr. Dryander, of the incomparable library
of Natural History of Sir Joseph Banks ; in which -as in a
wood of ancient growth and primæval grandeur, amidst
insects ofall hues, reptiles either nocuous or innocuous, and
wild beasts that walk abroad or love the lair-' you may
disport at ease, and solace yourselves without injury, and to
your heart's delight. Such a collection should not be suffered to be dissipated ; as neither years nor centuries can
erase the name of the Owner of it from the records of
The birds have here a pretty effect ; although the whole be probably borrowed
from one of Matthiolus's editions of Dioscorides :-and with these we may take
leave of master Leonarthus Fuschius.
The work of Fuschius was first printed in 1542, folio. Let me only here advise
thereader, in his pursuit after volumes of this description, to avoid coloured copies;
in spite of the eulogy pronounced by De Bure upon a copy of the Ortus Sanitatis
of1491, ofthat description, in the Bibl. Instructive, vol . ii . no. 1554. I will also
just add, that the wood-cut decorations of our Herbals, by TURNER, GERARD, &c.
are uniformly (from the year 1569 to 1600) of foreign workmanship, and very
admirably executed.
THIRD DAY. 247
imperishable fame. You see, although I know nothing of
botanical subjects myself, I am disposed to speak with due
reverence of the cultivators of that branch of science .
ALMANSA. Did you not promise us some account of
Books which contained specimens of the favourite Sports
and Pastimes of the day?
PHILEMON. Have you then forgotten what was yesterday
placed before your eyes from the Missals of the xvith
century? or has Strutt written in vain ?
ALMANSA. I have forgotten neither ; but books of
Hawking or Hunting
PHILEMON. Your servant, Lady Almansa ! I see you are
bitten with theHawkingandHunting-Mania; and have been
wading through the introduction to the reprint of your sex's
ancient treatise upon these subjects-JULIANA BERNERS. *
Turbervile (as Lysander well knows) rendered these pursuits very fashionable in the times of Elizabeth and the First
James ; and the cuts in his publication, evidently offoreign
execution, shew a master in the art of design. Lorenzo happens to possess the second impression, of the date of 1611 ,†
"
- JULIANA BERNERS. ] The first edition of the Book of Hawking,
Hunting, and Coat Armour, supposed to have been compiled or superintended
by the fair Dame just mentioned, was printed at St. Alban's in 1486 : see the
Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. iv. p. 373. Lord Spencer's copy is the only perfect one of
which I have accurate intelligence. Its value may be judged accordingly. This
work, with the addition of a treatise upon Fishing, was reprinted by W. de
Worde in 1496, folio ; and Mr. Grenville is the fortunate possessor ofan unique
copy of this impression UPON VELLUM. The latter impression, with Biographical and Bibliographical Notices ' was reprinted, in the black-letter, with facsimile embellishments, by my friend Mr. Joseph Haslewood, in 1810, folio ;
who may be said to have therein exhausted the subject of early editions of the
work under notice. Since that publication, however, an edition of the date of
1586, 4to. printed by E. Allde, and which had hitherto escaped him, has been
submitted to the same friend : whose bibliographical hawk-ardour yet continues
unabated.
the second impression of the date of 1611. ] The first impression was in
248 THIRD DAY.
which came out in the reign of James I.; and in which
the courtesy of the Publisher substituted the figure ofthe
Anglo-Scotch monarch for that of the Virgin Queen in the
previous edition-wherever such figure occurred. Of these
two works, that upon Hunting is thought to be from the
pen of Gascoigne and not of Turbervile. The ornaments
in it are undoubtedly much inferior to those which we see
in the Book of Falconry : * where the Bewick of his day
has thus represented the king of birds-called the Brown or
(
1575, 4to. The second is said to be augmented with many new additions,' but
inaccurately ; as it is a mere reprint of the first. The design of The Booke of
Faulconerie or Hawking, by George Turbervile Gentleman,' is pretty stiffly laid
down in the Induction or Proeme ' to the work itself, thus : mine Author in
this treatise, and Booke of Falconrie, following the accustomed order of the
learned, and common practise of such as doe write, hath layde downe a Hawke,
the Subiect of his deuise, of which he is determined at large to speake, with full
shew and declaration of the true nature and properties of all Hawkes,' &c.
Enough of this dry detail.
ornaments in it-much inferior to those in the Book of Faulconry. ] The
wood- cuts of the animals, both in the works of Hunting and Faulconry, are copies
of those in Vennerie et Fauconnirie of Jaques du Fovilloux, Paris 1535, 1562,
folio ; of which latter work my friend Mr. Douce possesses a copy of each
edition here noticed. After all, the old works upon Faulconry have been
clumsily embellished. The same cut has been made to represent various birds ;
and it should seem that the ornaments have been uniformly badly worked at the
press. Perhaps our Bewick would have wanted force for such illustrations ; but
there can be no question as to the effect which the burin of SCOTT would
produce. His animals are quite wonderful. Yet, what are all the books, in black
letter, and in roman letter, united, compared with a good picture byWOUVERMANS,
upon the subject of hawking ? I should rather have said, with the picture, by
the same artist, in the possession of Mr. Duncombe of Duncombe Park ! It was
in the summer of 1806 when I saw this wonderful picture (then the property of
'Hastings Elwyn, Esq .' ) sold by auction by Mr. Phillips : Heaven, earth, air,
birds, horses, ladies, and gentlemen-everything therein was gay, joyous, harmonious, and captivating : a serenity, a transparency, a tone and colour throughout
the whole-quite unprecedented and unequalled. It was well called ' The Grand
Hawking : a matchless picture of this charming painter -finished with a delicacy
and spirit of pencil that cannot be surpassed'-and well might it bring the sum of
900 guineas !
THIRD DAY. 249
Yellow Eagle. The author's description partakes, I think,
of the spirit of the artist's representation.
The browne or yellow Eagle after Aristotle's opinion, is
called in Greek Guyseon, which doth signifie in the French
tong " kindly and no bastard born," because it is of al other
kinds of eagles, the true and right eagle, and he doth cal
him by ye Greek word Chrysaitos, by reason of his golden
mayle ; and in Latin he is termed Stellaris, and Herodus.
VOL. I. R
250 THIRD DAY.
This is that Eagle, whome we call the Eagle royall, king of
birds, and sometimes the Bird of Jupiter ; and that Eagle
which ought to bee taken and accounted the principall best,
being more huge and large then the best, and besides more
rare and daintie to be seene. For she doth haunt most commonly the toppes of high and craggie mountaines, and doth
there prey vpon all sorts of, fowles, as also Hares, Kidds,
Goats, and such other like wild and sauage beasts of the
field.'
A little onward we find this Eagle performing all the
offices of the Hawk-but we must hasten to an exhibition
of the figure of KING JAMES. You see it here, at the
bottom of a large cut, entitled How to flee a Hearon. '
THIRD DAY. 251
His Majesty is approached by two of his attendants, who
are also occupied in viewing the aery contest' which goes
on over their heads. A group of poursuivants is behind
him. * Whether James gave an extraordinary fee to the
artist to represent him a second time within the pages of the
popular volume under discussion, I will not take upon me
to affirm ; but I can safely promise you a graphic treat of
no ordinary kind, in requesting your attention to the
ensuing representation of the same Monarch. ↑ You
group ofpursuivants is behind him. ] The size of the entire cut, in which the
figure of James is introduced, is five inches and six eighths, by nearly four inches,
and seven eighths, of an inch : facing p. 113.
+ ensuing representation of the same Monarch. ] I consider the cut at page 252
to be a fine specimen of the art of engraving ; and notwithstanding the impression
of it, in my imperfect copy of this edition (see p. 362, 1611 , 4to. ) be extremely
defective, yet Mr. Ebenezer Byfield, in the fac- simile here referred to, has done
wonders for this fascinating embellishment.
There are few works, at all connected with exhibitions of the human figure, in
which the hawk is not introduced. The old schools of engraving abound with
instances of this kind ; and the dry touches of Mechlin, Schoen, Boticelli, and
other brethren of the burin, three centuries ago, are oftentimes relieved by the
stately and graceful figure of the hawk perched upon the fist . It even appears
in the fresco paintings of Andrea Orgagna at the Campo Santo at Pisa - of the
fourteenth century ; but in few printed volumes will this winning animal be found,
more varied in attitude and occupation, than in the Cosmography of Sebastian
Munster: see p. 242, and what here follows :
252 THIRD DAY.
observe it comes immediately beneath the title of A Treatise
and briefe discourse of the cure of Spaniels when they be
any way ouer-heat : deuised and written by M. Francesco
Sforzino Vicentino the Italian Gentleman Falconer."
Whatever be your regrets or mortification, we must now
really bid adieu to Hawking, and look about for other
subjects of amusement in the ornaments of books printed
bid adieu to Hawking. ] Yet a word before we bid adieu ;' as I have a
strong propensity to make the reader acquainted with a French treatise entitled
La Favconnerie de Charles D'Arcvssia de Capre, Seigneur D'Esparron, de Pallieres,
et du Revest, en Prouence. A Rouen.' 1644, 4to. A writer in the Gentleman's
Magazine, in the month of June, 1813, bewails the absence of poetry upon the
THIRD DAY. 253
during the sixteenth century. But time is running on-and
we shall lose our garden-promenade. ' See, the horizon is
filled by black-clouds !
enchanting subject of Hawking. He had probably never looked into the pages
of this gossipping work ; if so, at page 327, he might have read as follows :
Poeme de la Favconnerie.
Ie n'escry les effects d'vne amoureuse flame ;
Libre et sans passion i'ay possedé mon ame,
Ie n'ay iamais senty vn langoureux soucy,
M'estimant fortuné d'auoir peu viure ainsi,
Et me voir occupé en meilleur exercice :
Sçachant que l'ocieux ne peut estre sans vice
Le plaisir du berger est à la bergerie,
Le soin du mesnager à la mesnagerie,
Du soldat aux butins, de l'amant aux amours,
Et ma felicité c'est de chasser tousiours .
Tousiours ie suis aux champs trauersant les campagnes,
Chassant, courant, volant, imitant les compagnes
Du troupeau Delien : exerçant tel deduit,
Depuis l'aube du iour iusqu'à ce qu'il est nuict.
Trois fois vingt ans n'ont peu me lasser de la chasse :
Car en chose qui plaist iamais on ne se lasse.
Ie suis tousiours plus frais quand auec le doux vent
Ie voy haut vn oyseau qui se bande & se pent
Droit sur mes espaigneux, faisant la Cresserelle :
Lors si la Perdrix part, on voit en deux coups d'aisle
Descendre cet oyseau, sans laisser plus aller
Cette pauure Perdrix, qui ne peut reuoler.
Mais combien de plaisir auons nous pour riuiere
A uoler les Pié-plats, bien qu'il ne dure guere ?
Voyant nos trois Faucons dans le ciel se porter,
Les iettant contre vent pour les faire monter :
&c. &c. &c.
This work has some tolerably good copper- plate embellishments. Subjoined
to my copy of it is ' La Favconnerie Du Roy, avec La Conference des Favconniers,'
by the same author, of the same date. This comprehends only 51 pages ; of
which the last 11 are devoted to ' Instructions Domestiques ' in very sorry metre.
In the third place, and of the same date, is the Discovrs de Chasse : ov sont
representez les vols faits en vne assemblée de Fauconniers.' There is much quaintness and amusement in this third portion ; and the opening of the vith Discourse,
at p. 71, entitled Comme le Fauconnier se doit comporter en ses plaisirs, au
declin de son age, en quoy les femmes doiuent estre maistresses, et en quoy non,'
254 THIRD DAY.
LORENZO. For that reason abandon all thoughts of a
walk before dinner. Indeed, if you finish the topics which
you proposed to select as the concluding portion of your
Decameronic labours, we must even postpone the repast of
dinner a full hour beyond sun-set. But do not let us
trespass. You are absolute Sovereign of the day.
PHILEMON. Nothing, my amiable friends, could more
effectually contribute to my gratification, than the assurance
ofyour being well-pleased with the exertions that have been
already made-even without advancing a single additional
step towards the discussion of any other subject however
popular. But as you have given me an arbitrary power,
and as I find the topics selected to-day more various and
more perplexing than those of yesterday, I must really conclude with the notice of only two other additional subjects.
LISARDO. Two hundred additional ones-if your tongue
and lungs allow of it. But mention the two.
PHILEMON. They are, first, Books of Emblems ; and
secondly, Italian Classics ; but remember, I must be brief
upon both subjects : as each of them is capable of affording
a little volume of illustration. I see the countenances of the
ladies sparkling with gay anticipation ! What gems, what
-in which a gentleman complains of the stinginess of a wife in retrenching the
hunting and hawking establishment of his particular friend-has a good deal of
naïveté and humor about it. There are also anecdotes of chases, and hawk
amusements, which occurred in the vicinities of certain towns. Nor is this portion
without poetry, but of a very sombre complexion. The last treatise is entitled
' Lettres de Philoierar a Philofalco ; and in the 14th letter we read ' D'un oyseau
troublé la nuict des esprits. ' This 4th treatise concludes with a Summary ofthe
Royal Falconry, and of the Birds which his Majesty (Louis XIIIth) had discovered. It is a curious document ; and the king seems to have been one of the
most active and ardent faulconers in Europe : rising at break of day, saying his
prayers in the oratory, then breakfasting, going to his cabinet of birds, and
afterwards partaking of the amusements of the chase, or of hawking. ' It concludes with three poetical stanzas by Esparron Sur la Favconnerie dv Roy.'
THIRD DAY. 255
singularities, what amusing conceits are they likely to
behold ! —and which two observers of the same subject shall
draw the same conclusion ? But to the point : and where
shall we commence our remarks ? ' Tis like a menagerie of
exotic birds : of species without number ; and of colours,
bright as the sun, or soft and varied as the rainbow ! Here
comes ancient and honest Alciatus-with the almost endless
impressions of his works ; * some with copper-plate, others
with wood-engraving, decorations. Upon the whole, however,
* Alciatus, with the almost endless impressions of his works. ] The library of the
Marquis of Blandford is supposed to contain the richest collection of emblems in
this country. This department of it is called Symbola et Emblemata ;' and
forms the seventh Fasciculus ' in the privately printed catalogue of the Bibliotheca Blandfordiensis. ' I gather the following editions of ALCIATUS'S EMBLEMS
from the same pages : Paris, 1542, 12mo.: Paris, 1544, 12mo.: Lugd. 1551,
8vo. Lugd. 1564, 18mo.: Antv. 1565, 18mo.: Antv. 1566, 24mo.: Franc.
1583, 12mo.: Antv. 1584, 18mo.: Lng. Bat. 1591 , 18mo.: Paris, 1602, 18mo.:
Antv. 1608, 8vo. : Paris, 1608, 8vo.: Patav. 1621 , 4to.: Batav. 1622, 12mo. :
Antv. 1648, 18mo. There are, however, earlier and rarer impressions. Gerdes,
Vogt, and De Bure omit the mention of Alciatus altogether, in their respective
works upon bibliography ; but Bauer notices a Latin impression of the Emblems
as early as the year 1532, in 12mo. It is however very summarily noticed.
Bibl. Libror. Rarior. vol. i. p. 12. Yet that an edition existed before the year
1534, is quite certain ; for in a prefatory dedication, dated 1534, accompanying
the Parisian edition of 1535, in Latin, (in the collection of Mr. Freeling) it is
expressly observed that there was a previous edition published in Germany,
extremely in correct, and without the consent of the author.' Los-Rios mentions
a French edition of the date of 1536, in 8vo.- ' en rimes Françoises,' and adds :
' On a donné plusieurs éditions de cet ouvrage qui ne valent pas, à beaucoup
près, celle-ci, qui d'ailleurs est exécutée en vers François. Les curieux en
recherchent les exemplaires qui sont absolument rares. ' Bibl, Instruct. p. 106.
This probably may be the first French edition. An edition of the date of 1540,
printed at Paris by C. Wechel, and in the possession of Mr. R. Triphook, is now before me. It is in Latin and French verse, and contains a dedication to
Philippe Chabot, Conte de Burancoys et Charny, &c &c. by Iehan le Feure ; in
which the writer thus pleasantly observes iay ainsi choisy pour ceste fois, au
moyen de ce que plusieurs gentilz homes de la court, se delectent no seullement
a faire paindre, ains a faire effigier de orfaurerie diuersitez de ymages, quilz
nommet deuises, y adioustans quelques sentences propres et consonantes : A quoy
256 THIRD DAY.
I am not sure that I should place him quite upon the
pinnacle of emblematic reputation—if you will allow of this
substantive-adjective. But soft ....what interesting little
volume-published just at the time of the earlier impressions of Alciatus-in its faded yellow morocco surtout, do
I here hold in my hand ? "Tis the Hecatongraphie of
Corrozet. The embellishments, you observe, are within
pretty arabesque borders, and are little more than what may
me semble ce present liuret estre tres conforme, et dont ma hardiesse a cueilly
occasion de le faire comparoir pardeuant vous. Toutesfois si ce petit besoing se
treuue debilement pourueu dauctorite pour assister soubz vostre lecture, il poura
paruenir deuant ma dame vostre treschiere amye et espouse : Laquelle (ainsi
que promet mon espoir) conuertira sa bonne grace deuers quelque feuillet de ce
liure. ' The embellishments are without borders, and rather coarsely executed.
At page 42, we see the Emblem ( In occasionem ' ) which Cratander used for his
device at Basil.
It remains to mention the Aldine edition, in Latin, of the date of 1546, 8vo.;
and of very considerable rarity. It is the only impression noticed by Brunet.
Manuel du Libraire ; vol. i . p. 32. Renouard says it contains 47 leaves of text,
and a 48th leaf for the anchor ; and that the 84 wood-cuts contained in it, form,
in later editions, the second part of the book. Notwithstanding (according to the
same authority) Rhosithinus, the editor of it, chooses to speak rather contemptuously of the work, the public appear to have entertained a different and a better
regulated opinion. L'Imprimerie des Alde ; vol. i. p. 246.
* the Hecatongraphie of Corrozet. ] The title of this desirable little volume is
as follows : Hecatongraphie. c'est à dire les descriptions de cent figures &
hystoires, contenants plusieurs appophthegmes, prouerbes, sentences & dictz tant
des anciens, que des modernes. Le tout reueu par son autheur. Auecq'
Priuilege. A Paris chez Denys Ianot Imprimeur & Libraire. 1543,' 8vo. Onthe
reverse is a petition from Ianot, stating the expenses of the work, and requesting
permission for exclusive printing and selling. The permission, dated 1540, is
granted for 3 years exclusive sale. This privilege is followed by a poetical
address of Giles Corrozet aux bons espritz et Amatevrs de lettres '-concluding thus :
Aussi pourront Ymagers & Tailleurs
Painctres, Brodeurs, Orfeures, Esmailleurs,
Prendre en ce liure aulcune fantasie,
Comme ilz feroient d'vne tapisserie.
Recepuez doncq' le liure tel qu'il est,
E s'il vous vient à gré, & il vous plaist,
THIRD DAY. 257
be called outline performances. The descriptions of the
subjects are uniformly in French metre. Let us first read
De vray, sera occasion entiere
De mettre au jour quelle belle matiere.
Plus que moins.
HVICTAIN.
Quand vous serez à vostre bon loysir,
Et que na'urez pas grandement affaire :
Quand vous vouldrez prendre quelque plaisir,
Et à l'esprit par lecture complaire :
Quand vous vouldrez sçauoir quelque exemplaire,
Propos moraulx de la philosophie,
Et ce qui est maintesfois necessaire,
Lisez dedans cest Hecatongraphie.
Niceron makes mention of a previous edition of it, in 1540 ; concluding this to
be the second. See his Mémoires des Hommes Illustres, vol. xxiv. p. 154, where
a much more ample account is given of the productions of Corrozet than in Du
Verdier, &c. (Bibl. Françoise, vol. ii. p . 286-9. —iv. p. 50) or Goujet, Bibl.
Françoise, vol. xiii. p. 98-103. I shall probably introduce this poet, bookseller,
and printer, to the reader's attention, in the FIFTH DAY of this work; and shall
here only beg leave to remark, that precisely the same decorations, as to the
frames or borders of each print, appear in Le Theatre des bons engins, auquel
sont contenus cent emblems,' also printed by Janot at Paris, but without date, in
8vo. The privilege conceded to the printer is dated 1539 ; and Los-Rios mentions an edition of the date of 1546 : Bibl. Instructive, p. 105. The dateless
edition , and most probably the first, is at this moment sub oculis . ' It is
dedicated by Guillaume de la Perriere to Margaret queen of Navarre ; and
Perriere seems to have composed the verses, which are less copious than those of
Corrozet. The central cut within each border is larger and more shaded than in
the Hecatongraphie ; although I am not sure that the style of art be quite so good.
Upon the whole, this is a curious and covetable volume. In the possession of Mr.
R. Triphook.
"
•
I have cursorily noticed the style of art ' in each of the preceding works.
About the middle of the xvith century, in France, a profusion of publications,
exhibiting nearly the same character of ornament, made their appearance :
distinguished for the neatness, or sharpness, or general brilliancy of their execution ; and Wechel and Janot seem to have been the popular publishers of such
works. The curious collector has no doubt more than once, in the course of his
voyage autour de sa bibliothèque ,' taken down Le Grand Combat des Ratz et
des Grenovilles'-published by Chrestien Wechel in 1540, in a tiny quarto
258 THIRD DAY.
what is said beneath this inviting subject of ' Doulceur en
mariage -to which every lady present has such good
reason to assent,
Combien qu'en mariage on trouue
Espines, chardons, plainctz, & pleurs,
Il y a aussi espreuue
Grās plaisirs, fruictz, fueilles, & fleurs.
E iii, rev.
volume-and viewed with astonishment or delight the wood-cut, representing the
aforesaid combat, on the reverse of the title-page ! Tis a mightily spirited performance. Yet rather more akin to the style of art observable in the fac-similes
above introduced by Philemon, are the wood- cuts in the French version of the
first ten books of Homer, by Maistre Huges Salel, Abbé de Sainct Cheron, printed
at Paris, in 1545, folio, by Iehan Loys, and containing a privilege for 10 years
exclusive sale. To confirm this remark, let the reader cast a critical eye upon
the ensuing specimen ; being a portion only of the central compartment within a wood- cut border.
But where would this Emblem-Illustrating Spirit cease ? ‹ Dixi .'
THIRD DAY. 259
There is something very pleasing in the following illustration of Amytie entre les freres,"
Si amytié se treuue es estrangers,
De combien plus entre amys & parēs
Doit elle auoir ses effectz apparens,
No pas fainctifz, dessoyaulx ne legiers ?
E viij, rev.
Suppose we adapt one of the borders from another ornament, to this central piece-representing a man before a
chess-board? Take it altogether, there is much prettiness of
effect. *
muchprettiness of effect.] The prettiness of effect ' must alas ! be purely
ideal. A tale of woe belongs hereto. Know then, gentle and generous reader,
that upwards of twelve months ago, the cut, which was here to have gratified
thine eye, was executed with all due care and precision ; and a rare and comely
embellishment it was ! But know further, in the management of such a host of
embellishments as grace the pages of this, and the preceding book, of my
Decameron, that cut, rare and precious and comely as it was-is now found
missing ! Five guineas were devoted to it ; and Dame Prudence will not suffer
another like sum to be advanced! What must be done? Read the subjoined
verses, and fancy the man to be playing at chess, and the arabesque border around him :
Le fin nous faict tous egaulx.
La terre est egale a chascun,
Par tout les pays & prouinces,
Aussi tost faict pourrir les princes,
Que les corps du pauure commun.
Sign. Dii, rev.
260 THIRD DAY.
Let us now put Master Giles Corrozet aside, to make
room for a performance which exhibits rather more finished
specimens of art. Observe, dear Lorenzo, the facility and
freedom of execution which every where pervade the
ornaments to the explanation of Egyptian Hieroglyphics by
a learned wight, who has the sonorous name ofOrus Apollo.*
6
"
Orus Apollo. ] This gentleman is mentioned by name in Perriere's preface to
the Theatre des bons engins.' Whether the above edition, of the date of 1545,
be the carliest, I cannot take upon me to determine ; but I can safely affirm that
the embellishments contained in it present us with uniformly beautiful specimens
of engraving upon wood. The title of it is thus : Orvs Apollo de Ægypte de la
signification des notes Hieroglyphiques des Aegyptiens, cest a dire des figures par
les quelles ilz escripuoient leurs mysteres secretz, et les choses sainctes & diuines,
&c. On les vend a Paris a la rue sainct Jacques a lenseigne des deux Coches par Iacques
Kerver. 1543. A privilege for six years exclusive sale is on the reverse ofthe
title-page ; and, at the conclusion of the address Auxlecteurs francays, ' which
ensues on the following page, it is said si ie congnoys quæ ce myen labeur uous
soit agreable uous aures bien tost le grec & le latin de ceste oeuure & aultres
choses ou uous prendres plaisir.' I am surprised how Philemon omitted to notice
the very first emblem ; which, for delicacy and effect, is exceeded by none. It
is called 'Comment &par quelles figures ils signifioient laage et les ans du temps.'
The embellishment facing it has equal cleverness ; but some of the landscapes
are of uncommon beauty and effect. For a masterly specimen of cross-hatching,
examine the lioness and her whelp, on the reverse of k viij. The animals,
throughout signature 1, are of peculiar spirit ; although a few of them are not
THIRD DAY, 261
We have here too, I conceive, the earliest edition-printed
in 1543, by our old acquaintance Jacques Kerver. Where
the impressions are not too powerful or heavy, we cannot
fail to be struck with their beauty, force, and truth ; as the
ensuing, among many others which may be brought forward,
abundantly prove. Let us first see the human figure well
represented ; although the subjoined text be rather dull and
represented in the most graceful or delicate manner : and titles are given to
subjects of embellishment which might defy the most cunning observer, or the
most deeply-read hieroglyphist, to connect. The first cut of signature m has perhaps greater superiority of design and execution than either of those selected by
Philemon. It represents a faulcon in the act of destroying a bird-emblematic
of those who leave their children to perish by desertion. Will my friend
BERNARDO venture to match me ' a faulcon, in all the lore of Berners and
Turbervile, which shall dare to measure beaks with this magnificent creature?
The 'bit of landscape, ' forming the back-ground, on sign. m ij, recto, has great
merit. Philemon is right in observing that these cuts are not all executed by the
same hand. There is evidence of at least two different styles of execution. My
own copy of this interesting volume, in yellow morocco binding, but not free from
stain, was obtained of Messrs. Payne and Foss for 21. 2s. The curious library of
my friend Mr. Freeling has supplied me with the notice of a Parisian edition of
the date of 1574, 8vo.; containing the very same cuts, somewhat differently
arranged, within fanciful borders, not always remarkable for being appropriate.
This edition is executed on thin and coarse paper, but has a comparatively
copious text both in Latin and French. The bottom compartment of the
ornamental title-page partakes of the style of art of Benvenuto Cellini.
262 THIRD DAY.
obscure. None but a superior artist could have executed
this morceau.
Coment ilz demonstroient celluy qui copte les heures
&y prendgarde que les grecz appellent horoscope.
There is a vast deal of spirit in some of the animals
introduced; yet it is evident that they are not all executed
by the same hand. This salamander, however, spits fire
in capital style !
10
Comment ilz signifioient ung homme brusle dufeu.
Pour signifier vng homme brusle du feu ilz paignoient
vne salemandre pource que chascune teste elle occit:
Sign. i vj, rev.
THIRD DAY. 263
7
OfBirds, perhaps the most finished specimen is what you
here behold : yet I admit that it is preceded and succeeded
bysome very pretty exhibitions of ornithological skill.
Comment ilz signifioient celluy qui se garde des
aguetz &trahisons de ses ennemys.
As a companion to the preceding, look how prettily the
Puet is made to sing upon the vine stocks ; indicative of
an abundant approaching vintage.
Let us bring forward only one more specimen ; of
greater merit perhaps than any which has preceded it, onthe
264 THIRD DAY.
score of drawing and composition. You will smile at the
subjoined text ; although the story have received pretty
general assent.
Comment ilz signifioient lhomme appetant & desirant
les belles choses.
Quant ilz voulloiet signifier vng homme qui appete choses
belles & pour ceste cause choit en dommage ilz paignoient
vng poisson appelle Seche pource que la Seche quant elle
cognoit quelle est chassee & quon la veult prendre elle iecte
hors celle humeur noyre quelle a dedans son ventre &
trouble leau tant que lon ne la peut veoir & ainsi eschappe.
Sign. m viij, rev.
But adieu now to Orus Apollo : -and let my old favourite
Claude Paradin come forward with his Heroic Emblems ! "*
Claude Paradin with his Heroic Emblems. ] The joint name of Gabriel
Symeon might also have been added. In the collection of the Marquis of
Blandford, the earliest edition of the devices of these authors is of the date of
1551, at Lyons, 18mo. in the French language. I possess two Latin editions,
each printed in the office of Plantin : one of the date of 1562, the other of that
of1567. The impressions are generally better in the latter. Of the first appearance of this work, in either language, I am unable to speak with accuracy. It
seems to have been attended with uncommon success and popularity : delighting
the fancies of the young, and refreshing the memories of the old. Indeed it
THIRD DAY. 265
I love the capriccios with which his little work is embellished.
There is more boldness in the designs, but less delicacy in
the engravings, than what we observe in those ofthe previous
presented a very instructive picture of historical information. Thus, take the
following; from page 68, edit. 1567, entitled Vltorem vlciscitur vltor ' -and
elucidated by the subjoined story from Froissard.
Charles the VIth of France being intent upon invading Britany, to revenge
himself upon the Duke of that province, threatened to demolish every town
which shut its gates against him. He was inflexible in this determination ; and
in a weak state of health, on a hot day, set out from Mans witha large retinue to
carry it into effect- As he rode forwarde in the forest of Mans, a great sygnifycacyon fell to hym .... Sodaynly there came to the kynge a poore man, bare
heeded, bare legged, and bare footed, and on his body a poore whyte cote : he
semed rather to be a foole than wyse, and boldely sodaynly he toke the brydell
of the kynges horse in his handes, and stopped the horse, and sayd : Syr kyng,
ryde no further forward for thou arte betrayed .... The kynges herte and his
blode was moued .... and as he rode vpon a fayre playne in the heate of the
sonne, whiche was as than of a marueylous heyght, he had on a iacke couered
with a blacke ueluet, whiche sore chafed hym, and on his heed a syngle bonet of
VOL. I. S
266 THIRD DAY.
works: but the fault may probably lie at the doors of the
printers of the various editions-for it is rarely that you
observe a dozen cuts well struck off. Yet beware of being
deceived by priority of dates ; examine copies with your
scarlet, and a chaplet of great perles, whiche the quene had gyuen hym at his
departure, and he had a page that rode behynde hym, bearynge on his heed a
chapewe of Montaban, bright and clere shyneynge agaynst the soune : and
behynde that page rode another bearing the kynges speare, paynted redde,
and frynged with sylke, with a sharp heed of stele : ....and as they rode thus
forth, the page that bare the speare, whether it were by neclygence, or that he
fell aslepe, he lette the speare fall on the other pages heed that rode before hym,
and the heed of the speare made a great classhe on the bright chapewe of stele :
the kynge, (who rode but afore them) with the noyse sodaynly started, and his
herte trymbled, and into his imagynacion ranne the impressyon of the wordes of
the man that stopped his horse in the forest of Mans, and .... wenynge in
hymselfe to be in a batayle inclosed with his enemyes, he lyfte vp his sworde to
stryke, he cared nat where, and cryed and sayd : On, on vpon these traytours,'
&c. See Mr. Utterson's edition of Lord Berner's version of Froissart, 1812, 4to.
vol. ii. p. 572-4. Poor Charles had a brain fever ; and this was the incipient
cause of his death. So much for the helmet and spear.'
What a comical looking symbol or device have we here-with the quaint title
of Colligauit nemo ?'
·
THIRD DAY 267
own eyes, and choose those in which the cuts happen to be
the more delicately executed. See, here, in this edition of
1567, how successfully the following appears to be represented. I am much pleased both with the quaintness ofthe
motto, and the felicity of the illustration-the latter from
St. Gregory in which we are informed that the pompous
and vain attempts of the ostrich to fly, resemble the imposing exteriors of the religious hypocrite, who would make
you believe that his interior sanctity was equal to his
external pomp : but all within is base and treacherous.'
Nil penna sed vsus.
Alittle onward we have the following representation of
the well-known adage of The Snake in the Grass ; ' which
teaches us to think upon the probable future visitings' of
In the subjoined text we are told that such an object was attached to Augustus
Cæsar's triumph after his conquest of Egypt : by which Cæsar wished it to be
understood that no one had before so vanquished the country of the Crocodile. '
Fol . 71 , edit. 1567. But there is no end to these apt and interesting HEROICA
SYMBOLA. Yet before you say farewell to them, take a peep, curious reader,
into the pages of Mr. Douce's Illustrations of Shakspeare, &c.; and view three
pleasing fac-similes from the same work-in vol. ii. p. 126-8.
268 THIRD DAY.
conscience, while we are heedlessly perusing works ofa suspicious and even dangerous tendency. * Sir Joshua Reynolds,
as you may remember, has treated the subject in a very
different, and somewhat more captivating, style.
아
The whimsicality of the ensuing has always much gratified
me. I should tell you before-hand, on the authority of the
text of Paradin, that it happened that a serpent had twined
itself round a key belonging to one of the houses of the
Lacedemonian senator, Leontychidas. The circumstance
being related to the soothsayers, they contended that this was
some prodigy which affected the senator. But Leontychidas
very shrewdly remarked : that to him there appeared
་
works of a suspicious and even dangerous tendency. ] I subjoin a specimen of
the original. Dum legimus flores, et humi nascentia fraga, tam accuratè a
colubro nobis cauendum est, quàm is facilè nos mortifero veneno suo perimere
potest. Sic et speciosis ac plausibilibus autoribus librisue legendis vigilandum,
ne in absurdus aut minus æquas sententias, opinionesue incurrentes, animorum
iacturam faciamus. Edit. 1562, fol. 42, rev.
THIRD DAY. 269
nothing whatever portentous in the occurrence-had the
key (says he) entwined itself round the serpent the inference
might indeed have been of a very ominous nature! By this
facetious reply (adds Paradin) the wary senator ridicules
the foolish superstition of the soothsayers. Apply it also,
my friends, to half of the superstitious fooleries of the times
in which we live. The key and the snake shall now speak
for themselves,
8
Among the more striking embellishments, which combine
both grace and intelligence, we observe the two following.
Indeed the Snake seems to be the perpetual symbol, in the
artist's imagination, of every thing cunning, clever, and permanent. The first is made to illustrate the text of the sixtyfifth Psalm-of the Almighty's crowning the year with his
goodness.'
270 THIRD DAY.
The second is called Wisdom the Keeper of Things ;
indicating the true government of all things to be best preserved by the key of wisdom and prudence.'
THIRD DAY. 271
And so farewell to thee-Master Claude Paradin... Why
do you so temptingly provoke me to continue this discussion,
by holding up my favourite Plantin edition of the EMBLEMS
OF JUNIUS ? I see both Belinda and Almansa, although
neither of them be Latinists, are recreating themselves with
that interesting impression. The composition and execu-
·
* The Emblems ofJunius. ] The Emblems of Adrian Junius, the champion of
Laurence Coster, appear to have been first published in the office of Plantin, in
1565, 8vo. This volume is dedicated to Arnoldus Cobelius ; and contains, in the
latter part of it, fuller explanations, (or Ænigmaticum Libellus ' ) dedicated to
Arnoldus Rosenberg. Every page is surrounded by the same fanciful and not
inelegant border. The text, in the Italic type, is beautifully executed ; but the
engravings, which seem to have been very finely cut upon the blocks of wood,
are rather blurred in the impressions. There is a short and pleasing letter of
Sambucus to Junius, facing the first Emblem, and dated February 1564, beginning
thus : I have received your Emblems ; of which you entertain too modest an
opinion, as the judgment of the public will shortly convince you : for they are
equally distinguished for their propriety, elegance, and variety ; and are worthy
both of the author and of the press from which they issue. In regard to my own,
[Emblems] which you seem so anxious to possess, they will scarcely be published
before April, on account of the delay in executing drawings and engravingsand when you see them, you will have little inclination to read them ; justly
considering them as the refuse of rubbish,' &c. Let me here further observe
that the subscriptions to the cuts are in Latin verse ; as thus-to the one first given
in the following page :
Impunitas ferociæ parens.
Insultant pauida hic natio musculi
Clausis muscipulæ carcerefelibus.
Sublato que metufortè periculi
Crescit tunc animus degeneri insolens.
The second emblem, given in the same page, the xxx1111th in number, is thus
described :
Vinum ingenij fomes.
Vuiferum Bromiu, volucrem sed præpete penna,
Quid tacitæ posuistis Amycle ?
Tollit humo ingeniū Bacchus, mentē erigit altā
Pegaseáque uelut vehit ala.
Upon the whole, the style of art does not equal that which we see in the work
of Orus Apollo ; although there be greater richness of light and shade in some of
the more finished specimens. A beautiful copy of this desirable volume, from
the library of Mr. Freeling, has supplied me with the foregoing description.
272 THIRD DAY.
tion of many of the embellishments appear to be close
copies of those in Orus Apollo. There is something very
diverting in the 4th emblem-representing Impunity to be
the parent of ferocity.' Grimalkin is rarely made to act such
a part ; and will take sweet revenge' anon.
The ensuing is, in every respect, a charming composition.
The young Bacchus seems to revel in his enchanting cup.
THIRD DAY. 273
But farewell now to Authors of Emblems. Farewell to the
Hugos, Boissards, De Brys, Othos, Sambucuses, Quarleses,
Brunes, and Cats, * of the sixteenth and seventeenth
* Hugo, Boissard, De Bry, Otho (Vænius), Sambucus, Quarles, Brune, Cat.]
What a cluster of quizzicals have we here ! They shall be briefly dispatched.
And first of SAMBUCUS. The library of the Marquis of Blandford contains the
following editions of his Emblems : 1564, 1566, 1584 ; each in duodecimo,
printed at Antwerp : again at Leyden in 1599. Subsequent impressions contain
only repetitions of the foregoing, of inferior workmanship. The ornaments are
executed upon wood. BOISSARD claims our notice next. The same library
supplies us with impressions of the dates of 1588, 1595, each in quarto. The
ornaments are of copper : inferior to those of Brune and Cat. DE BRY's well
known reputation will bespeak the reader's attention to his Emblems, published
at Franckfort in 1593, 1596 , each in quarto. The latter are called ' Emblemata
Sæcularia ' and are the work of John de Bry ; the former, of Thomas de Bry.
When these copper- plate productions happen to be well printed, they are
estimable acquisitions to the curious. OTHO VENIUS is a most prolific author in
the way of Emblems. His Amorum Emblemata,' were first published in
quarto, without date : theEmblemata Divini Amoris, ' in 1615 and 1660 ; each
at Antwerp, in 4to.: the Emblemata Amatoria,' in 1618, 18mo. at Amsterdam :
the same, Selectiora ,' in oblong octodecimo, in the same year : the Emblemata
Horatiana,' at Antwerp in 1612, 4to.: and Brussels, 1683, 4to.: again at
Amsterdam in 1684, 12mo. and large 8vo. These publications are quite sufficient to prove the intellectual fecundity of Otho Vænius. The style of art
observable in his emblems, which are executed upon copper, is generally coarse
and inelegant : the figures are fat and short ; and the masses of light and shade
are too heavy and abrupt.
"
The Pia Desideria ' of HuGo, were probably the most popular work of this
description in the xvIIth century. The city of Antwerp produced four editions
from the year 1623 to 1632 : again in 1676 ; each in duodecimo. The earlier
editions have probably the more desirable impressions of the cuts, which are
upon copper ; and, in spite of an occasionally ludicrous effect, are very pleasingly
and successfully executed. The figures are usually too short and thick. This
popular performance was republished by Edward Arwaker at London, in 1686,
1690, 12mo, but with inferior skill. The Proteus, ofte Minnebeelden in
Sinnebeelden' of J. CATS, was published in 1627, 4to. at Rotterdam. The
ornaments are upon copper ; and very brilliantly and strikingly executed. The
subjects are sometimes droll, ludicrous, and terrific ; always well engraved ; and
in compositions of a quiet and natural cast of character , I hardly know where to
recommend the reader to more pleasing specimens of the Dutch School . Cats's
Spiegel,' &c. was published at Dort in 1636, and at Briel in 1652 each in
12mo. Let not the Emblems of our old friend QUARLES (whose Judgment
"
274 THIRD DAY.
centuries: They form a rare set of diverting book-wights :
and when the sun withdraws his beams, and the heavens
are obscured by clouds, and the rains descend in torrents,
let me betake myself to their quaint and ludicrous, but not
unamusing, illustrations. The fashion of Emblems seems to
have expired with the productions of Quarles.
I come now, as the last topic selected for my share of this
Decameronic discussion, to notice the ornamental publications of Italian Classics ; because, generally speaking, the
great authors of Italy have had more justice done to them,
in the way of graphic embellishment, than those of Greece
and Mercy for afflicted Souls ' was reprinted, with an introduction, &c. by a
descendant of Reginald Wolfe, Esq. King's Printer, in 1809, 8vo. ) be here
forgotten. They may vie with those of Hugo for popularity—in this country.
Whether the dateless edition, or the one printed in 1635, 12mo. be the first, I
will not pretend to determine : but the artist who engraved them was WILLIAM
MARSHALL and whoever has had the felicity of examining my friend Mr.
Douce's copy of this dateless impression, will be abundantly convinced of the
beauty and spirit of the ornaments. A clean copy of this ancient impression is
of the rarest occurrence. The Emblems of Quarles have been lately republished
at Bristol-with wood-cut embellishments-but when one thinks of their author,
and looks into this impression of his once-popular work, the exclamation of
quantùm mutatus ab illo
comes instantly ab imo pectore.' A brief word for Master BRUNES, and we
hasten to close this emblematic discussion : for I have no inclination to extend
the catalogue of works of that description. Brunes's Emblems were printed in
1661, at Amsterdam in 4to.; accompanied, like those of Cats, by a Dutch text ;
and, like the same work, with copper- plate embellishments. What has been said
of Cats may apply to the work of Brunes : and fine clear impressions should be
cherished by the curious. Why are the Emblems of BEZA omitted by Philemon ?
Was heforgetful of their being attached to the Icones, or Vera Imagines Virorum,
&c. Illustrium, of the same writer, in 1580, 4to. ? These Emblems are XLIII. in
number, and are of peculiar delicacy of execution ; but being heavily printed
upon a thin and coarse grained paper, they lose much of the merit of their execution. The borders are elaborate, and perhaps of rather too much importance
for the subjects contained within them-so as, in some degree, to injure the
effect. I select a very prettily composed subject, forming the viith Emblem.
THIRD DAY. 275
and Rome. Therefore, without stopping even to mention
by name those works which exhibit Portraits of Eminent
The subjoined verses are a specimen of the moral strain which pervades each
description.
Nil spectasse dapes, nil deglutisse iuuabit,
Hæc nisi ventriculi cuncta calore coquas.
Sic cœtus spectasse pios, diuinaque verba
Audisse attenta nil licet aure iuuat,
Hæ nisi percipiatque fides, imóque reposta
Pectore, diuino freta calore coquat.
Whyhas Philemon forgotten to mention the Choice ofEmblems ' of GEFFREY
WHITNEY? Had he seen the delectable copy of that amusing book in the possession of my friend Mr. Bolland, it would have made an impression upon his
mind, at least of a no quickly- perishable nature. Whitney printed his copious
quarto in 1586, at Leyden, In the House of Christopher Plantyn,' by his son-inlaw, Raphelengius ; and this is probably the only English book which owes its
existence to the matrices and puncheons of the immortal Plantin. I wish it were
better executed-for the love I bear towards the memory of that great typographer : but the embellishments are generally indifferent, and almost all of
them are copies of what had appeared in previous publications, especially in
Paradin. Yet we have sometimes original designs, and not despicably executed
engravings. The text, in verse, is generally a translation of the Latin ; and almost
every subject or version is dedicated to a particular individual-principally to
Cheshire and Lancashire Gentlemen .' See the Censura Litteraria; vol. v.
p. 233-5 ; and the dry but accurate account of the book in Herbert, vol. iii.
p. 1675. Perfect and clean copies are of the greatest rarity.
"
276 THIRD DAY.
Men*-without balancing the Basilioologia against the
Heroologia (connected as you may conceive these works
to be with what has been previously advanced) I shall beg
leave to remind you of some of the more elegant publications
of Italian Authors, in the sixteenth century, which display
no mean proficiency in the arts both of design and of
engraving. Not that you must expect any thing like a
works which exhibit portraits of eminent men. ] There would scarcely be any
reasonable limits to a catalogue of works of this description. At any rate
they must here be only briefly alluded to ; or rather I choose to notice but four
eminent authors, whose productions of this kind are probably deserving of particular mention. I mean RoVILLIUS, BEZA, BOISSARD, and HOLLAND.
" First then, ofGulielmus Rovillius. His Promptuarium Iconum Insigniorum à
Seculo Hominum , subjectis eorum vitis, per compendium ex probatissimis autoribus
desumptis,' was first published, I believe, at Lyons in 1553, 4to. From the preface,
it appears that Charles V., Henry II. , and Solyman the Great, were all reigning
at the time ofthe publication. Mycopy is of the second edition- ' Editio secunda,
illustrium virorum, qui à prima successerunt, imaginibus aucta atque locupletata.
1578. The work is divided into two parts. The first part contains portraits, with
subjoined biographical sketches, from Adam to Christ : the second, from the nativity
ofChrist to the year 1580 : concluding with the portraits of Gorræus andJoubert.
(The portrait of Gorræus is precisely similar to what is prefixed to the account of
Richard Pynson, in my edition of our Typog. Antiquit. vol, ii. p. 400-1). Let us
' begin at the beginning.' After a dedication to Henry II. of France, the
publisher discloses the object of his work, and speaks of the advantages of medallic
representations : (the entire ornaments being circular, and generally of the dimensions first above given). Sunt etenim, (says he) vt à sapientibus dictum, vultus
animorum indices : in quarum rerum considerationem nos Antiquariis, et studiosis
omnibus gratificari cupient es nulli neque labori, neque sumptui pepercimus ad
eiusmodi eiconas cephalicas vndique conquirendas, ex diuersis gentium oris, et à
magnatibus viris auro, ære, argento, conflatas percussasve aut gemmis exculptas,
prout maximo cuique visum fuit sui, et suæ charissimæ antiquitatis memoriam
conseruare ... Metallinas illas seu Medallinas effigies lineamentis ad Archetypum
deduci, ac deinde imprimi curauimus : suscripto ad singulas snmmario rerum
memorabilium argumento ex optimis quibusque Historiographis et Chronicis
breuiter collecto : servato que temporum, ætatum, Imperiorum, ac Regnorum sibi
succedentium, aut concurrentium ordine. Totumque opus ab rerum & personarum
inuestigatione prompta, PROMPTUARIUM dici placuit.'
There is a great deal of delicacy and even brilliancy in most of these embellishments ; and it is much to be regretted that the name of the artist who engraved
them is studiously suppressed. I know of no similar performances which come
THIRD DAY. 277
methodised account of the early progress of good taste among
the Italian publications here alluded to : although I may
near them on the score of merit. The female heads are sometimes of peculiar
grace and spirit. Take the supposed portraits of DALILA and the ERYTHREAN
SIBYL, from pages 57 and 83.
DALID
SIB.ERY
RAEA
The head of CHRIST, at page 9 of the second part, is the largest in the work,
and shall here speak for itself: the heads of CAIAPHAS and PONTIUS PILATE,
from the preceding page but one, being placed beneath.
INPACEDEVS HOMO
CAYPHAS
CHRISTVS REX
XVENIT
FACTVS EST
LOSE
PHYS
P.IV
PILATES
278 THIRD DAY.
remind you of the Monte Sancto di Dio of 1477, and of the
Dante of 1481, each containing very admirable designs and
I make no doubt that a great number of the more modern characters were
taken from very faithful medals of the originals. Thus, at page 252, the portraits
of CARDINAL BEMBO and PAULUS Jovius, are placed side by sideBEMBVS
CARDI
AN.A
„
AGENS. LXXVII
AOI
PAVL
TS.COMENSIS
.
PETR
and at page 282, we have a similar arrangement of FRANCIS II. and his unfortunate consort and widow, the well known and ever lamented MARY STUART,
Queen of Scotland. The portrait of Mary seems to me to have a very genuine
air. It is curious to read the cautious description of her by a contemporary,
publishing her portrait :
FRANC
LED
G.FRANC.
EX
FRANC
.
MARIAD.G
ET
SCOT.REG
MARIA STUART, defuncti Regis Scotiæ filia, Christianissimo Francorum Regi
Francisco secundo, nupsit, antequam Regni gubernacula is teneret, superstite
Henrico patre eius inuictissimo. Cum hæc esset Franciæ Regina, habita est
ab omnibus omnium formosissima et virtute præstantissima : verum fortunæ iniuriis, post regis obitum, in patriam reuersa, fuit obnoxia, et hodie, ob suspicionem
alicuius facinoris, in carcere detinetur.' There is an appendix, with portraits
of eminent Greek and Roman learned men, and a few of the middle ages ;
and each part contains an index of the characters represented. Upon the whole,
this is one of the most elegant and successful publications of the kind with which
I am acquainted. The collector will do well to attend carefully to the impressions ; as they are from very delicately executed engravings upon wood, Such a
THIRD DAY. 279
engravings upon copper. You will also remember that
editions of the Ancient Classics, when put forth in Italy,
copy as that in the collection of Sir Hudson Lowe (see p. 165, ante) does not
frequently occur for purchase.
Secondly, of Theodore Beza. His work, under the title of Icones, id est
Vera Imagines Virorum Doctrina simul etPietate Illustrium, &c. (to which XLIIII
Emblems are attached-see p. 274 ante) was first published at Geneva in 1580,
by I. Laon, in 4to.: the volume being frequently cut down to the size of a large
octavo. The work is dedicated to James the VIth of Scotland ; and a portrait of
that monarch, when a youth, is on the reverse of the title-page. This cut, like
all the rest, is executed upon wood ; and however dissimilar may be the youth
from the manhood of James, I make no doubt of the engraving having been
executed from a faithful original. It is here again introduced to the reader's
acquaintance, divested of its ponderous oval frame and circumscription -
[ IACOBVS. 6. DEI . GRA. REX. SCOTOR.'] as the recent and successful researches
of Mr. D'Israeli, connected with the literary and political character of our
James I., may give an additional interest to the physiognomy.
Beneath, we readIN VTRVQUE PARATVS.' The dedication of the author,
which follows, like almost all the prefatory prefixes to the older works containing
graphic embellishments, is provokingly silent respecting the artists by whom the
280 THIRD DAY.
frequently partake of the elegant taste prevailing in the
particular place in which they were published ; and while
portraits were executed. Not a painter or engraver is mentioned by Beza. He
says : Me quidem certè testari possum tantorum hominum non modò libros
legentem, sed etiam expressos vultus intuentem, haud multò aliter affici, et ad
sanctas cogitationes impelli, quàm si coram adhuc ipsos docentes, admonentes,
increpantes, his oculis aspicerem. Hanc igitur causam habui cur istas (non
omnium quidem, quod iusta fortasse reprehensione non careret, sed præstantissimorum, et quidem mortuorum dūtaxat, ne viuis adulatus videar) imagines
partim iam nactus, partim adhuc nancisci sperans, vacuo nondum repertis spatio
relicto, alteras, addita breui singulorum vitæ ac studiorum descriptione edendas
putarem .' All this is well of its kind ; but the authenticity of those ornaments
which constitute (as in this instance) the chief value of a work, should doubtless
receive some distinct notice by the author. As to the portraits themselves,
generally speaking, I consider them to have been executed from faithful originals ;
but they are stale, flat, and unprofitable.' No half-tint-no gradation of light
and shade--no flow of outline- and a uniform ignorance of good drawing. The
countenances are rather spotted, than made mellow by light and shade ; and
the flesh and draperies receive most injudiciously the same characteristic touch.
They have all white back-grounds and elaborated borders : the worst possible
accompaniments of an engraved portrait. I should think (with the exception of
the heads of Peter Martyr and Simler, ―sign . P i. P iij . —which nearly resemble
porcupines as much as human beings) that the same artist engraved all the
ornaments. This work was translated into French by Simon Goulart, and republished with the same heads, under the title of Vrais Pourtraits des Hommes
Illustres,' &c. at Geneva, in 1581 , 4to.: see Cat. de la Valliere, vol. iii. p. 377,
no. 5625. It is rather extraordinary that the original work of Beza is not
noticed by De Bure or Brunet.
"
Thirdly, for the Icones Virorum Illustrium,' &c. of I. I. BOISSARD ; with
copper-plate engravings by De Bry. I shall only here notice the first and best
edition, in 5 parts, in 4to. of the date of 1597-1532. The accurate Brunet
(vol. i. p. 192) tells us that the first 4 parts contain each 50 portraits, with
biographical sketches, composed, in the first 2 parts, by Boissard and in the
3rd and 4th parts, by I. A. Lonicerus : the 5th part has only 20 portraits,
without any accompanying biography. There is another similar work of Boissard,
under the title of Bibliotheca Chalcographica Illustrium Virorum, &c. with engravings by De Bry, Furckius, and Ammonius ; 3 vols. in 4 ; 4to. The first
volume contains the portraits of the 5 parts in the preceding work, without biographical notices. The remaining volumes are composed of 4 parts in continuation in the whole work, 430 portraits. The imprint of Heidelberg, 1669, is in
some copies. I candidly own my indifference to these works of Boissard. The
engravings have a brassy and cold effect ; and there is too great a sameness of
THIRD DAY 281
the Verona Valturius of 1472 remains fresh in remembrance,
we need not seek other instances to confirm this position.
expression in the generality of them. Boissard is a fine illustrating fellow for
cutting up!
Fourthly of HOLLAND, and his Heroologia, containing portraits of some of the
more eminent and learned men who have flourished in our own country from
the year 1500 to 1620 : in folio -with engravings chiefly by Pass and Janson.
In the whole, 66 plates. This is the favourite volume of a thorough-bred
Grangerite ; who, without pity or remorse, plunges his trenchant scissars into
the very abdomen of the tome. I shall here however address myself to the
collector of books, and not of prints and begin by observing that there are
other portraits which please me better than those published by Henry Holland.
I admit the mechanical skill with which these are executed : softness, brilliancy,
splendour-you have them all here-to perfection ! But there are some portraits,
in human nature, which are neither soft, nor brilliant, nor splendid : and honest
IOHN BAYLE, in the ancient wood-cut representations of him, with his quick
eye and bushy beard, likes me better ' than the silken touches bestowed upon
his visage by the burin of Simon Pass. I could mention several other illustrations
which support-either my prejudice, or my fair criticism ... The women and
men have also too close a resemblance to each other : that is to say, the male
portraits are too much effeminised. There is another objection to this fascinating
volume. The paper is thin, and the text is printed on the reverse of the plates :
so that you sometimes see, across the breast, or the forehead of the most delicate
portrait, a staring word, in capitals or otherwise, which reminds one of gunpowder inscriptions upon the skin of sailors . There are, I believe, a few copies
without letter-press ; and Mariette's was of this number. The late Mr. Edwards
obtained this copy, which had annexed to each portrait, the name of the col
lection from whence it was taken.' See Bibl. Edwards, no. 50. It was sold for 131.
Another copy in the same collection (no. 49. ) formerly belonged to Buchelius,
who wrote the Latin verses signed A. B. under each portrait ; and who made
corrections and additions in a very neat hand, throughout the volume, apparently
with a view to a new edition'—and was purchased by Mr. Miller for 15l.
6
From the Heroologia it seems but a natural and short step to go to the
Basilioologia ; a work, of which it is not surprising that foreign bibliographers are
ignorant. It is called · Basilioologia : a Book of Kings ; being the true and lively
effigies of all our ancient Kings ,' &c. 1618, folio : but the royal embellishments
of the volume form only the first 29 articles, including the frontispiece. The
remaining embellishments contain portraits of eminent or singular characters of
various classes and degrees. The volume is of most extreme rarity '—to borrow
the late Mr. Brand's favourite mode of expression. Acopy of it, ' preserved 150
years in the Delabere Family, and cited by the Revd. Mr. Granger,' was (miserabile dictu ! ) cut up,' and sold in detached lots by Mr. Christie, on March 29th,
1811. That volume I had cursorily seen, some fifteen years ago, quietly reposing
VOL. I. T
282 THIRD DAY.
But of indigenous authors, if I may so speak, I cannot at
this moment recollect any thing, of an early period, which
upon the shelves within the venerable mansion of the DELABERES situate
and being ' about half way up the bosky eminence called Cleeve Hill,' in Gloucestershire : a link of no mean magnitude in the chain of the Cotswold Hills.
The mansion is one of the few now existing containing architectural specimens
of the early part of the xvith century-preserving much of its characteristic
peculiarity, and overlooking a gloriously-spreading landscape, where the eye may revel or repose as gayer or as more tranquil objects delight it. But for the
Basilioologia
I subjoin merely the number, the price, and the name of the purchaser of
each lot for the comfort and satisfaction of those who possess copies of the
catalogue without such pleasant appendages.
Number. Price. Purchaser. Number. Purchaser.
L. s. d.
Price.
L. s. d.
1 1 11 6 Manson 30 4 00 Colnaghi
2 1 17 O Lloyd 31 3 18 0 Scott
3 0 76 Manson 32 5 50 Graves
4 0 16 0 Manson 33 4 60 Woodburn
5 0 12 0 Manson 34 1 90 Woodburn
6
7
• 1 17 O Manson 35 0 13 0
0 15 0 Graves 36 550
8 0 16 0 Miller 37 1 11 6
9 0 16 0 Richardson 38 18 18 O
10 0 15 0 Lloyd 39 2 20
Buego
Woodburn
Lloyd
Lord Ossulston
Woodburn
11 0 18 0 Lloyd 40 4 10 Manson
12 0 19 0 Lloyd 41 8 80 Manson
13 1 20 Lloyd 42 3 15 0 Graves
14 0 10 6 Manson 43 6 10 0 Richardson
15 0 16 0 Manson 44 7 70 Richardson
16 0 19 0 Woodburn 45 7 00 Lloyd 17 0 10 6 Graves 46 8 18 6 Richardson
18 0 14 0 Manson 47 13 26 Richardson 19 1 0 0 Manson 48 5 0 0 Woodburn
20 0 19 0 Lloyd 49 9 0 0 Scott
21 1 13 0 Woodburn 50 550 Manson
22 4 13 0 Woodburn 51 3 12 0 Miller
23 3 30 Thane 52 2 10 0
24 0 15 0 Thane 53 14 0 0
25 400 Woodburn 54 30 9 0
26 3 17 0 Woodburn 55 2 20
Woodburn
Richardson
Manson
Woodburn
27 5 18 0 Woodburn
28 1 00 Thane 57
29 5 00 Woodburn 58ཆ་མ
56 8 18 6 Lloyd
1 12 0 Thane
230 Thane
THIRD DAY, 283
has stronger claims upon our admiration than the Novellino
ofMasuccio, of the date of 1492 : and which is the more
worthy of notice, inasmuch as it presents us with wood engravNumber. Price.
L. s. d.
Purchaser. Number. Price. Purchaser.
L. s. d.
659
11 06 Lloyd 97 070 Collins
60 5 50 Manson 98 0 56 Miller
61 3 10 0 Manson 99 0 10 6 Colnaghi
62 8 80 Manson 100 0 26 Manson
63 34 26 Richardson 101 0 12 6 Manson
64 32 11 0 Woodburn 102 1 00
65 1 15 O Richardson 103 3 15 0
Woodburn
Lloyd 66 3 00 Manson 104 1 10 Woodburn
67 1 11 6 Woodburn 105 9 90 Manson
68 2 20 Lloyd 106 17 17 O Woodburn
69 3 18 0 Thane 107 1 16 0 Manson
70 6 0 0 Graves 108 1 20 Thane
71 5 80 Graves 109 1 17 0 Woodburn
72 5 15 6 Woodburn 110 0 80
73 6 10 0 Lloyd 111 0 70
Buego
Buego
74 22 11 6 Lloyd 112 0 10 0 Bentham
75 2 30 Manson 113 0 14 0 Manson
76 2 10 0 Graves 114 0 15 0 Manson
77 0 18 0 Woodburn 115 1 20
78 5 10 0 Richardson 116 0 50
Whitaker
Manson
79 0 16 0 Woodburn 117 4 00 Lord Ossulston
80 1 70 Graves 118 5 10 0 Lord Ossulston
81 2 20 Manson 119 4 00
82 4 40 Manson 120 1 10
83 1 15 0 Lloyd 121 1 0 0
Graves
Graves
Woodburn
84 1 13 0 Manson 122 215 O Lloyd
85 1 11 6 Richardson 123 0 10 0 Buego
86 3 00 Manson 124 3 13 6 Collins
87 1 11 6 Manson 125 1 90 Graves
88 1 11 6 Manson 126 1 70 Lord Ossulston
89 0 14 0 Woodburn 127 0 17 0 Lord Ossulston
90 10 10 0 Manson 128 0 15 0
91 3 12 0 Scott 129 0 30
92 210 0 Miller 130 0.90
93 0 50 Manson 131 1 00
94 1 90 Manson 132 0 15 0
Colnaghi
Thane
Colnaghi
Manson
Col. Durrant
95 6 60 Manson 133 1 30 Woodburn
96 0 12 0 Buego 134 5 50 Scott
284 THIRD DAY.
ings of that style of art so particularly observable in the
Poliphilo of 1499.*
Number. Price. Purchaser. Number. Price. Purchaser.
L. s. d. L. s. d.
135 2 50 Graves 144 0 26 Manson
136 0 70 Graves 145 0 26 Woodburn
137 0 80 Scott 146 0 30 Scott
138 0 80 Woodburn 147 1 10 Scott
139 0 11 0 Woodburn 148 0 50 Scott
140 1 30 Colnaghi 149 9 90 Woodburn
141 0 30 Woodburn 150 11 06 Woodburn
142 0 16 0 Lord 151 1 14 O Graves
143 026 Graves 152 42 10 6 Richardson
,
"
Be it further known that no. 53 is Lord Munjoy Blunt, by Droeshout and
Jenner : no. 54, Henry Veere, Earle of Oxford, by Payne ; with another small,
in a border with figures ' by W. Pass and Jenner : (see Bibliomania, p. 684)
no. 59 is Lord Edmond Baron Sheffield by R. E : no, 63, General Cecyll son to
the Right Hon. ye Earle of Exceter, &c. by S. Pass : (Bibliomania, p. 684) no. 64:
Dominus Johannes Harrington, Baro de Exton by Balaani and Elstra ke : no. 74
Sir Julius Cæsar, by Elstracke ; ( Bibliomania, p. 678) and no. 152, is Mull'd
Sack, sold by Compton Holland ; and erroneously said to be unique ; as the
Bodleian library, which possesses a copy of the Basilioologia, has also this
⚫ fantastic and humourous Chimney Sweeper ' called ' Mull'd Sack.' See the
Bibliomania, p. 684 : Granger, vol. ii. p. 61. The Delabere copy, in the whole,
produced 601l. 12s. 6d. Manson purchased for the late Mr. John Towneley,
and Mr. Woodburn chiefly for the late Viscount Fitzwilliam. Upon the whole,
it was scarcity rather than beauty which caused the well-garnished purses of the
foregoing collectors to be opened upon this occasion. The reader may expect
me to finish this tremendous note by mentioning the heads of VERTUE and
HOUBRAKEN- but dixi. ' Nor shall the Illustrious Portraits ' now publishing
by Messrs. Lackington and Harding draw me an inch beyond the line here
rigidly laid down. May the latter work be prosperous ! Yet who does not
bewail the absence of the burin of Schiavonetti ?
* style of art so particularly observable in the Poliphilo of1499.] Of the Poliphilo,
not a word more shall be said in the present place. I can readily be supposed to
be almost wearied of this volume : see p. 194 ante. Philemon appears to be correct
in his criticism upon the Novellino of Masuccio, printed by Joanni and Gregorio
de Gregorii at Venice in 1492 folio ; but both the cuts and the figures themselves
are smaller than those in the Poliphilo. The style of art is, I think, very much
similar. The same may be almost said of the Boccaccio printed by the same printers, of the date of 1492 folio. The choice library of Mr. R. Wilbraham supplies
me with the notice of this edition of Masuccio ; of which a copy, wanting the
table, was sold for 361. at the sale of Colonel's Stanley's library : see Bibl. Stanl.
THIRD DAY. 285
I know not whether I can mention editions of the great
Italian authors, published in the fifteenth century, which
exhibit ornaments of a particularly commendable style of
execution ; but in the very dawn, as it were, of the sixteenth
century—and just before the rival presses of the Giunti,
the Sessa, and of Giolito, began to be put in motion—we have
evidence of a tolerable degree of merit in editions of that
period. Of my beloved ARIOSTO (the first edition of whose
immortal poem is yet a bone to be picked among bibliographers *) I apprehend the impression of 1540 to be the first
no. 500. The outline manner of decoration is observable in a prodigious number
of miscellaneous authors of about the termination of the xvth century. Thus we
see a very elegant specimen of it ( not unlike, in composition and arrangement of
light and shade, to what is seen at pages 140-2 ante) in the ‹ Libri di Giuoch, di
Scacchi intitolato de costumi deglhuomini et degli offitii de nobili ' printed by Miscomino at Florence, in 1493, 4to. -containing outlines with shaded backgrounds :
in the possession of Mr. S.W. Singer. And early in the xvith century a trifling
specimen of this style is seen in the frontispiece of that prodigiously rare volume
entitled : Opera de Andrea Stagi Anconitano Intitolata Amazonida La Qual
Tracta Le gra Bataglie e Triumphi che Fece Queste Done Amazone,' printed at
Venice in 1503, 8vo. - containing Q v in eights. At the end ofit is a tournament,
with a shaded background ; which is uncommon. Mr. Wilbraham possesses a
copy ofthis very rare gem.
Amore complete, and extremely fine , specimen of it (and almost equal to the
best ornaments in the Poliphilo) is seen in the frontispiece of the Settanta Nouelle
of Sabadino, of the date of 1510, folio ; while the decorations which accompany
the text are of a different and much inferior character, and are moreover not
always remarkable for delicacy of conception. Again, we observe these outline
embellishments in the frontispieces of the Triumphi honori e feste chebbe Julio
Cesaro nela citta di Roma, of 1510, 4to. printed by Simo de Luere at Veniceand of the Inamoramento de Re Carlo, printed at Venice in 1514, 4to.: but
perhaps the most satisfactory exemplification of the style of art, prevailing in the
Poliphilo, may be seen in the Venetian edition of the Metamorphoses of Ovid,
of the date of 1509 -of which Mr. Douce possesses an imperfect copy ; and
upon which my friend Mr. Ottley has expatiated in a very interesting manner
in his Enquiry, &c. vol. ii. p. 576, note t . A work in the same character of
design, and by the same supposed artist (John Andrea) is noticed at p . 87, ante.
In short, there would be no end to the specification of similar specimens of art.
The shaded wood-cut ornaments are rarely seen before the year 1540.
* Ariosto : (the first edition of whose immortal poem is yet a bone to be picked
286 THIRD DAY.
ornamented one ; that is, the first which contains wood-cut
embellishments-and which embellishments were repeated in
among bibliographers. ] With the submission of Philemon, I think there is no
longer anypicking to be found. Controversy itself may be said to be weary of this
discussion. I well remember the very pleasant bibliographical chase which took
place about three years ago, under the glow of a range of Argand lamps, in the
Althorp library ,towards midnight-in ascertaining this knotty point : howmyLord
Spencer, Mr. Ochéda, ( his Lordship's librarian) and myself, darted along from
Haymto Quadrio, from Quadrio to Fontanini, from Fontanini to Crescimbeni, and
from this latter to Mazzuchelli and Orlandi : and after an anxious beating after a
supposed impression of 1515, we were quite certain of the cover in which the animal was to be found. In other words, the first edition of Ariosto's immortal poem ' is of the date of 1516 ; and is only to be found, in this country,
upon the shelves of the ALTHORP COLLECTION. It is a small quarto, and has
the following title : Orlando Furioso da Ludovico Ariosto de Ferrara.' This is
above the printer's device, (a crown, with the initials I M beneath) having, below,
Con gratia e priuilegio.' It should however be observed that the title - page, in
the copy under description, is a fac- simile manuscript : yet it is certain that the
volume was published in 1516, for on the recto of the following leaf we read the
privilege, thus :
LEO PAPA DECIMUS.
Dilecte fili salutem et apostolicam benedictionem, Singularis tua et peruetus
erga nos familiaq; nostram obseruatia, egregiaq; bonarum artium et litterariu
doctrina, atq; in studiis mitioribus, præsertimq; poetices elegans ac preclarū
ingeniu, iure prope suo a nobis exposcere uidetur, ut quæ tibi usui futura sunt,
iusta presertim et honesta petenti, ea tibi liberaliter et gratiose cocedamus.
Quãobrem cum libros uernaculo sermone et carmine quos Orladi furiosi titulo
inscripsisti, ludicro more, logo tamen studio et cogitatione, multisq; uigiliis
cofeceris, eosq; conductis abs te impressoribus ac librariis edere cupias. Cū ut
cura diligentiaq; tua emendatiores exeant, tum ut si quis fructus ea de causa
percipi pōt. Is ad te potius, qui cõficiendi poematis laborem pertulisti quod
ad alienos deferatur. Volumus et mandamus ne quis te uiuente eos tuos libros
imprimere aut imprimi facere, aut impressos uenundare, uendēdosue tradere
ullis in locis audeat, sine tuo iussu et cocessione.' [Then follows the punishment :
the forfeiture of the entire impression and 100 ducats] Dat. Romæ apud sanctum
Petrum sub annulo piscatoris die. xxvII . Martii. M.D.XVI. pontificatus nostri.
Anno Quarto. Iacobus Sadoletus.
a tergo
Dilecto filio Ludouico de Ariostis Ferrariensi .
Upon the very face of this privilege (which is followed by an intimation of a
similar privilege from the King of France and the Doge of Venice) there seems
abundant proof of the present being the earliest impression ; as no previous one
THIRD DAY. 287
the edition of 1546.
justice rendered him
Petrarch has had no small share of
in the edition of 1545, by Gabriel
is mentioned, and as, in the privilege attached to the third edition of the date of
1532, (also in the Althorp library) the work is said to be diu editum, et
impressorum vitio mendorum.' On the recto of the following leaf, a 3, numbered 3, the text of the poem begins thus after a prefix of 4 lines in capital
letters, and a 5th line of CANTO PRIMO :
d
I DONNE E
CAVALLIER
LI ANTIQVI
AMORI
LE CORTESIE
LAVDACI IM
prese io canto
che furo al tempo che passaro i Mori
d Aphrica il mare, e in Fracia nocquer
tratti da lire e giouenil furori (tato
&c. &c. &c.
The XLth Canto concludes on the reverse of folio 262, at the bottom of the
second column, with this imprint :
Finisce Orlando furioso de Ludouico Ariosto da Ferrara.
On the recto of the following and last leaf (not numbered) is a list of the errors
to be corrected ; beneath which are two Latin hexameter, and one pentameter
verse, and the register. Then the colophon, thus :
Impresso in Ferrara per Maestro Giouāni
Mazocco dul Bondeno adi xxii.
de Aprile. M.D.XVI.
The reverse is blank. The copy under description is bound in dark green
morocco, and presents us with one of the most beautiful specimens of the skill of
Mr. Mackinlay. Mr. Wilbraham, (whose choice collection of Italian books has
been before noticed, and who possesses, as well as Earl Spencer, copies of
Ariosto of the dates of 1535 and 1542) has made the following memorandum
respecting the first edition, in his copy of the one of 1542-which contains the
device of the two serpents. This emblem of the two serpents is found for the
first time in the edition of Ariosto, of 1521 , which proves that there was only
one edition anterior to that year, and consequently that the editions of 1515 and
1516, are in fact only one and the same edition. The emblem first described by
Dolce (Dialogo di Colori de Lud. Dolce, in 8vo. 1565, p. 50) is repeated in this
edition ; which, together with its not being mentioned by Haym, Quadrio,
Fontanini, Apostolo Zeno, Crescimbeni, Mazzuchelli, nor even by Orlandi (the
editor ofthe Orlando Furioso in 2 vol. folio) makes this edition (1542) peculiarly
288 THIRD DAY.
Giolito ; and Boiardo shines pre-eminent in the impression
of Orlando Inamorato of 1553, by Comin da Trino. + The
inimitable Boccaccio cannot fail to delight you in the edition
valuable. ' Orlandi correctly observes that mention is made of a privilege ofthe
25th of October, 1515 (granted by the duke of Ferrara), in the impression of
1532 ; but this privilege is only alluded to in a privilege of the date of 1527,
reprinted on the reverse of the last leaf but one of the impression of 1532 : and
I think the inference is, that Ariosto applied first for the privilege of theduke, and
afterwards for that of the pope, before he published his work. Let me enquire of
the curious whether the portrait of the poet, introduced within wood-cut borders,
and executed by Francisco de Nanto, at the end of the Ferrara edition of 1532,
4to. be not thefirst cut of the head of ARIOSTO ? It is well-known that Titian is
supposed to have made the drawing upon the block upon which this head
was cut. Mr. Heber and Mr. Singer possess copies of this precious impression.
* the edition of1545, by Gabriel Giolito. ] The title is thus : Il Petrarcha
con l'expositione d'Alessandro Velutello-di novo ristampato-Con le figure a i
Triomphi. In Vinegia Appresso Gabriel Giolito de Ferrari, 1545, 4to. Prefixed
to a sonnet upon the sacred ashes of Petrarch and Laura,' on the 3rd leaf,
sign. A iij , is the following very elegant decoration .
"
EM
THIRD DAY. 289
of 1553, from the Giolito press ; * while the folio Dante of
1577, where the Great Cat of Giovambatista de Sessa sits
like an eastern monarch upon his throne, has always
afforded me a fund of entertainment from the general
splendor of style in which that publication is got up.'
"
There is a pleasing wood-cut portrait of Laura, in profile, on the reverse of the
title of the Discorso sopra il principio di tutti Canti d'Orlando Furioso,' &c. of
the date of 1559, 8vo ; of which Mr. Singer has a very neat copy, and in which
we see again some of the decorations that grace the editions of Ariosto of the
dates of 1540 and 1546. Gabriel Giolito published a very elegant little edition,
in the italic type, in 1553, 12mo. , containing wood-cuts only to the Trionfi ;'
and executed apparently by the same artist who furnished the ornaments for the edition of Dante, of the same size, and of a date two years subsequent : but let
us not forget the very pretty outline decorations which accompany the French
version of the Trionfi, of the early date of 1509, 12mo. printed by Denis Janot.
While upon the subject of editions of Petrarch, let me not omit to press strongly
upon the reader's notice a very elaborate and highly-ornamented impression of
that author's work ' De Remediis utriusque Fortunæ, translated into the German
language, and published at Frankfort upon the Main, in 1584, folio. We have in
this volume all the spirit and diablerie of the German school of art in the middle
of the sixteenth century ; and many brilliant cuts, which adorned the German
version of the Offices of Cicero, noticed at page 212 ante, are again introduced
in the volume under description. I should say, at the first sight, our old friend
Hans Burgmair had a hand in many of these cuts. The freedom and power of
design, in the greater number of them, are perfectly surprising ; but a reference
may be somewhat puzzling, as the leaves are most carelessly numbered. Yet
pause a moment, graphic virtuoso, at the poignant satire levelled against the Romish church at folio 10, recto ; at the burlesque representation of Amphion,
on the reverse of fol. 20 ; at the surprising group which surrounds a rencontre
of wild beasts, on the reverse of folio 27 ; at the march ofwarriors on the reverse
offolio 32 ; at the school of art, on the recto of folio 38 ; at the admirable group
of figures which are seen on the recto of folio 48-and yet I am scarcely a fourth part through the volume!
+ Orlando Inamorato of 1553, 4to. ] Mr. Wilbraham has a beautiful copy of
this desirable impression ; in the frontispiece or title- page of which we observe
a most delicately-executed head, upon wood, ofBoiardo himself. The smaller cuts
in the volume are very spirited, but are common to the productions of the time
* the edition of1553 from the Golito press. ] Let not the reader omit to purchase, when he is able, the elegant little edition of the Decameron, put forth
under the editorial care of Antonio Bruccioli, in 1542, 12mo.; where, however,
a laureated portrait of a Roman Emperor is foisted in for that of the author-in
the frontispiece. The device of Gabriel Giolito is at the end of the volume.
290 THIRD DAY.
Look for one moment at the cut which represents the Demon
devouring his victims in the fiery lake of Avernus ! *
19
CAINA
ANTENORA
DTOLOMEA
GIVDECCAT
Demon devouring his victims in the fiery lake of Avernus.] This embellishment is of ancient date : see the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol . iv. p. 130. Mr. Singer's
copy of the above volume, from which the fac-simile was executed, is a very fine
one ; in ornamented old red-morocco binding. There are however two pretty
anterior editions of Dante :-one, with his head only, in the frontispiece, published by Tournes at Lyons, in 1547, 12mo: the other, by Gabriel Giolito, at
Venice in 1555, 12mo. The latter has numerous embellishments, in a very
THIRD DAY. 291
It
*
may be generally remarked that towards the middle of
the sixteenth century, not only the same style of art prevailed in the editions of the more popular authors of Italy,
but that the cuts used for one author were oftentimes appropriated to an impression of another : but, upon the whole,
every thing is in good taste- chastely designed and
delicately executed : and making the printers and publishers
ofour own country, at the same interesting period, blush for
the paucity and poverty of their engraved decorations. The
little book called Doni's Libreria, of the date of 1557, is
quite a gem in the way of tasteful engravings upon wood. †
But it is time to pause, as I begin to feel exhaustion.
elegant style : the text, throughout, is in the italic type. A copy of each is
in the Cracherode Library in the British Museum. The latter edition was no
doubt published by Gabriel Giolito as a companion to the Petrarch of 1553 ;
noticed at p. 289 ante.
"
* every thing is in good taste. ] Philemon would have qualified this assertion if
he had happened to have remembered the Guerino Il Meschino of 1560, 4to.
printed by Giovambatista and Melchior Sessa, Fratelli ;' with the device of the
flying Pegasus. Let us suppose that no fair reader of that work ever deigned
to cast even a momentary glance upon some of the revolting decorations which
disgrace this impression.
+ Doni's Libreria of 1557 -quite a gem in the way of tasteful engravings upon
wood. ] The portraits of BEMBO and ARIOSTO are among the more beautiful
decorations of this volume ; but of the latter portrait there seems to have been
no end—in the manual publications of the sixteenth century. They are all in
profile, and appear to have been executed from the same block. I have not forgotten the tough contest I had with Mr. Singer, at a late sale in Pall Mall, to
obtain a clean vellum-bound copy of this edition of the Libreria of Doni ; which
copy had been in the Pinelli collection, and was sold, at the sale of that library,
(see Sale Catalogue, no. 4672) for the enormous sum of one shilling ! At the sale
first mentioned, the combatants hacked and hewed ' each other till the fair
object ' oftheir contention had reached the trifling sum of two guineas-when I
yielded ; but my adversary suffered severely for his conquest. Another such victory,' said Pyrrhus !-Soberly speaking, I consider this contest to have been one
of the most glorious ones upon record for the cause of bibliography. Seven and
twenty years ago, the lovely work under description (in his very choice copy
of which Mr. Wilbraham may justly rejoice) produced only the sum of one
shilling ! --- " Where were ye, O ye Muses in that hour? Information, taste, *
utility, and elegance are all combined in it.
292 THIRD DAY.
Re-consider, my dear friends, at a future day, the rough
outline which has this morning been submitted to you.
Correct its disproportions ; and, what will strike you as more
essentially necessary, supply its obvious deficiencies. He,
who in taking up a well written, well printed, and well
ornamented book, * does not immediately partake of the
three-fold advantages to be gained from such a treasuredoes not find his taste gratified, his mind improved, and his
(
* a well written, well printed, and well ornamented book. ] La gravure a prêté
son secours à l'imprimerie. Ces deux professions réunies ne laissent rien à
imaginer pour l'oruement des livres. Elles fournissent sans cesse de nouveaux
sujets de tentation à la délicatesse de nos Bibliophiles.' De La Bibliomanie ;
p. 73 : edit. 1761, 8vo. Not however that Philemon could wish every book in
his library to be distinguished (as the author of the foregoing rare treatise
observes) par-tout des frontispices allégoriques, des portraits de chaque auteur,
des vignettes, des lettres grises, des cu- de-lampes, des attributs, des cartouches, des
bordures symboliques.' p. 74. The charm, or ' miraculous' appearance, of a newly
printed book, together with a lively description of the mechanical process by
which it is produced, is not inaptly expressed in the verses of Tilenus :
Sunt, humentem queîs cura papyrum
Sternere, & adversis habilem protendere signis ,
Ne quis apex obsit. Tum ferrea clauditur alvus
Itque reditque viam sub prælo at concipit intus
Charta nitens simulacra modis nigrantia miris.
Jamque palam exertat spatiis æqualibus ora,
Ostentans specimen ; subit acris censor, et omnes
Explorat latebrasque situsque, & squalida si qua est,
Si qua minus lucet nota, vel latet obsita nube,
E medio movet, & turbam execratur inertem ;
Succedunt aliæ in numerum, & data munia præstant.
Emeritis maculas ferventi flumine tollunt,
Mutuaque in teneris indulgent ocia nidis.
Tum demum membris perfectum et fronte serena
Exit opus, perque ora virum volat impete læto ;
Blanditiis Musæ excipiunt, anus ipsa virenti
Fama sinu fovet, et seros defendit in annos
Ornans vivaci genio, ac Parnasside lauru.
Salve, magna parens librorum, ars Dædala salve !
The worthy schoolmaster, Elias Major, has recreated himself with a long
Sapphic ode in commendation of this book miracle ; ' from which the following
are excerpts :
THIRD DAY. 293
heart mended--has but slender pretensions to the distinction
of an accomplished character-shall I add, to be admitted
within the circle which now surrounds me ? Away with false
Ille labentis moderator ævi
Phoebus, hinc atque hinc sola firma cœli
Permeans, longo duo jam peregit
Sæcula cursu.
Cum Camenarum studiosus orbis
Aere conflatis modulis typorum
Optimos prælis didicit premendo Scribere libros.
Mille vix scriptum hi dare, quod diurni
Vel decem possint specie typorum.
Scilicet pennam subigi repentem,
Vincere prælum.
O characterum peramica virtus !
Utile o cunctis studiis repertum!
Perpetim o fama celebrandus, istam
Qui colit artem !
Christophorus Colerus thus carols in prase of this divine art, ' and ' golden
discovery . '
Diva supremi Soboles Tonantis,
Cælitus porrecta manus lyceis,
Prisca servandi monumenta & orbis
Mustea nostri :
Aureum inventum sequioris ævi ,
Artis humanæ genus invidendum,
Ala Musarum, monitrix Minervæ,
Vitaque Phobi.
Aloysius Babinus, in his Palinodia ad Germaniam Typographiæ Inventricem,' is
vehement in his eulogy of the puncheon and matrix :—
O felix Typus ! in nigro repertæ
Tandem flumine, prodeunt, & atrum
Velut sepiolæ vomunt liquorem.
O si nunc gelida resurgat urna
Siren Attica Isocrates, et ore
Divino celebrata vis Platonis,
Et quæ sceptra tulit scientiarum
Felix Græcia lucubrationum !
&c. &c. &c.
And if we want demonstration, in prose, of the charms of a book, let us read
the testimony of Lucas de Penna, as extracted by Salmuth in his notes upon the
294 THIRD DAY.
shame and false delicacy : and acknowledge that the union
of Lysander with Belinda, and of Lisardo with Almansa,
would never have taken place had there not been a perfect
sympathy in taste, head, and heart, between them. These
things beget a felicity which few other terrestrial gratifications
are capable of producing : a felicity, which
' Grows with our growth, and strengthens with our strength ; '
and of which death, or disasters equally sudden and severe,
can only dispossess us. I envy not that man, dear Lorenzo,
who generally moves along in pomp, with a retinue, and
with a velocity which sufficiently bespeak the littleness or
étourderie of the intellect that guides such motion ; but I
do, from my heart, think that man an object of venial envy,
who, in his walks, or rides, or movements, holds converse as
it were with
Nature's volume wide displayed,
And to peruse therein his sole delight. '
who, beneath every sky, whether clear or cloudy-whether
in hazel copses, upon boldly swelling hills, or on widely
extended plains ; whether by the river's side, musing along
the daisy-sprinkled meadow-or in the umbrageous recesses
of the interminable forest-whether in some one, or the
whole of these situations- at the rising, or setting sun-at
noon day, or by moon-light-constantly finds subject of
xX1d title ( De Librariis sive Bibliothecis ' ) of the work of Pancirollus, De
Rebus Memorabilibus et Deperditis. Herein we find it called—' vas plenum sapientiæ hortus plenus fructibus, pratum fluens floribus, mare sine fluctibushostis oblivionis, amicus recordationis,' &c. pt. i . p. 67, 4to. edit.
But➡jam satis. ' Consult the Monumenta Typographica of Wolfius, vol. i.
p. 936 to 1014 ; where there are poetical bouquets of all colours and qualities for
the court dress of a Bibliographer, to be worn at the approaching TYPOGRAPHICAL JUBILEE : being THE FOURTH from the era of the discovery of the art
ofprinting.
THIRD DAY. 295
meditation, of admiration, and of gratitude : finds himself
harmonising with every thing about him ; finds the author
of his own being, and of the world which is surrounding
him, an object of
6
- wonder, love, and praise.'
I might here make bolder allusions, and touch a chord which
might vibrate to more delightful harmonies. I might mention, what many worthy souls feel in such conjunctures, those
sweet and secret intimations—those longings after immortality'-those deep, strong, and heart-consoling assurances
of another and a better world'—but the theme is fitted for
a ' higher strain '... and I desist. Yet not to be wholly
irrelevant in the foregoing musings,' let me add, as the
truly rational and accomplished character finds delight in the
situations just described, so, THE MAN OF BOOKS finds equal
gratification in the furniture of his library ; in which size
and splendor are made subordinate to elegance and utility.
He views, in them, treasures at once attractive and inexhaustible, be they in manuscript or in print ; be they
decorated by the pencil of Veronesi, or by the burin of
Durer or Bernard. Whether they display the earliest or
the latest efforts of the Art of Printing, whether from the
press of Fust or of Bulmer, he searches alike for amusement
and instruction : whether the margin be narrow or ample, the
page clean or soiled, the binding of oak or of leather, he is
content in the possession of such treasures—yet that man
would approximate to a dolt, in my conception, who should
say, if the volumes happen to be large, and clean, and well
bound, therefore it is that the owner of them never looketh
therein.'
A well-printed book, whether ornamented or plain, may
be called a species of miracle ; when we come to consider the
296 THIRD DAY.
results which often follow its perusal, the process by which
it is produced, and the length of time which elapsed before
such process was discovered. We also create a world ofour
own when in the possession of such a treasure ; and, what is
more delightful to think upon, our dearest friends and
relatives, whether distant or near, whether beneath African
suns, or amidst Lapland snows, may sympathise in the
enjoyments which we derive from the perusal of it : may mix
with us in the battles of Homer, or wander with us in the
Elysium of Milton ; may sigh with us over the sorrows of
Petrarch, or be transported with us into the world of
Shakspeare's exclusive creation. You see I am becoming at
least grandiloquent-in the cause of printed books ! But it
is now really time to say farewell...When you open an
instructive volume, with appropriate and well executed
embellishments, think upon the exertions of PHILEMON to
render such object worthy even of an enthusiastic attachment ..... I now resign the sceptre of command into hands
more capable of wielding it with effect,
So saying, Philemon left his seat, and invested Lysander
with the insignia of office ; to be borne by the latter on the
following day. The discussion terminated too late to enjoy
the garden-promenade' before dinner ; and the parties, in
retiring to prepare themselves for that repast, expressed
their thanks again and again, in the warmest manner, for
the rich and varied entertainment afforded them by the
conversation of Philemon. Lorenzo's viands (said Lisardo,
evidently affected, and pausing ere he made the remark)
will have now lost half their relish. The entertainment of
THIRD DAY. 297
Philemon should have lasted till midnight. Who would
fear repletion at such a banquet ?'
The day passed tranquilly and happily. An evening
stroll in the garden, by moon-light, supplied the inconvenience of previous abstinence from exercise ; and while
making the circuit of a grove of lauristinus, intermingled
with the arbutus and woodbine, Lisardo and Almansa
expressed to each other, in terms not to be heard by profane
ears, the peculiar gratification they had that day experienced
from the discourse of Philemon : - but I think, dear
Lisardo,' said the latter, (while the moon shone full upon a
countenance which might have blunted the point of every
nail in the iron-bound belt of Giovanni Gualberto* ) ' that
our orator should have dilated somewhat upon books containingPortraits ofEminent Men-At any rate let us rejoice
that we possess so charming a copy of Queen Elizabeth's
Prayer Book. We shall now duly appreciate its worth. I
trust however that you will persevere in obtaining the pieces
ofBernard Salomon : remembering what faulty impressions
you possess : —and do, dear Lisardo, extend your collection
of Emblems! For my part,' exclaimed Lisardo, (drily,
and somewhat peevishly) I shall be more anxious to secure
copies of Translations of the Ancient Classics into the
German language; the wood-cut embellishments in them
have quite transported me.' Belinda now approached ; and
on enquiry for Lysander, he was described as sitting upon a
bench, beside a grove of pine and birch, preparing, in imagi
nation, his materials for the morrow's discussion. The
evening was indeed unusually tranquil and warm : well
suiting the meditations of a thoughtful mind. But it is time
to drop the curtain upon such scenery-
"
* Vide p. 80 ante.
298 THIRD DAY.
Night wanes-the vapours round the mountains curl'd
Melt into morn, and Light awakes the world.'
Lara ; Canto II.
Lysander is in his chair of presidency. He has thrice
waved his wand of office ; and the Decameronic circle, now
collected within the Library, are listening with delight as he
fulfils the duties of his station.
Hans bald chamstulp.
ISB
H.Bakfor
FOURTH DAY.
VOL. I. U
ARGUMENT.
Origin and Early Progress ofPrinting.
ISP
Fourth Day.
Hookfor
Eachse
HATa task has been consigned
to me! After the delightful
topics selected by Philemon, after
wandering 'midst what may be
called the faery-land of bibliography, and culling flowers of
every hue and fragrance, I am to
discourse upon the ORIGIN AND
EARLY PROGRESS OF PRINTING ! I am to lead this joyous
circle through the dark and difficult mazes which involve
the question respecting the first use of the Puncheon and
Matrix ! .... Yet I shall purposely forbear from all indirect and secondary subjects of consideration : from conducting you into the fruitless and wearisome labyrinths of controversy, or into those obscure and interminable ' passages,
walks, and alleys ' which appear as cheerless as they are
void. On the contrary, it is my wish simply to convey you
to an eminence from which you may have a distinct view of
the leading features of the landscape before you : from
302 FOURTH DAY
which you may see the chateau (if metaphorical expression
be allowable) where the first great typographical triumvirate-Gutenberg, Fust, and Schoiffher-fixed their distinguished residence ; and, a little to the right, the turrets of
the monastery wherein Sweynheym and Pannartz worked
their infant press ; while, looking proudly in the blue
expanse of distance, the ancient residences of Zel, Mentelin,
and Ulric Han, rear their venerable fronts , and claim your
notice and admiration. Nor shall the humbler abode of
Pfister, in his old mansion at Bamberg, be concealed from
view. So that you see, my friends, here is a tolerably inviting panorama for the exercise of your bibliographical
observation !
LORENZO, You omit to point out the residence of my
well-beloved Laurence Coster, of Harlem ?
LYSANDER. I know that Seiz has published a view of that
worthy old gentleman's mansion ; and I feel the force of
your correction. I will take care that due attention be paid
to Coster. First however, my friends, survey the treasures
that surround you in this well-selected library ! They are
speaking evidences of the importance of the art, whose origin
is about to be discussed ; and where would Philemon have
gathered those beautiful flowers, with which, for the last
two days, he has entwined so fragrant a chaplet, if such
treasures had not been in existence ? Do not let us spurn
the fountain-head, because the waters that have issued
from it have taken a bolder course, and fructified capacious
domains : and when I tell you that nearly as many cities
have contended for the honour of having given birth to
Printing, as did for that of being the birth-place of Homer,
you will necessarily admit the subject to assume an important and interesting shape. At the same time, I feel the
FOURTH DAY. 803
force of Daunou's remark; * namely, that we are too remote
from the period in which the art, here alluded to, actually
began to be exercised, to be exactly ascertained of its earliest
fruits : and we live too near the same period to form an
accurate estimate of the immense results of which it is likely
to be productive. Some again, you know, gravely make a
quære, whether printing, upon the whole, have not done
greater harm than good ?+-and the same has been said of
knowledge of all kinds : but this is assuredly the ne plus
ultra of conceit and absurdity ...To the point.
Leaving the more curious or learned part of my auditory
to examine, at leisure, the pages of Fischer-how far the art
of printing appears to have been known to the ancients
·
theforce of Daunou's remark. ] See the first sentence of his Analyse des
Opinions diverses sur L'Origine de L'Imprimerie. It had also been said, probably
before the birth of Monsieur Daunou's grandfather : L'Imprimerie, qui nous
apprend des nouvelles de tant de choses, ne nous parle presque point de son
origine. Vous diriez, qu'elle se plaist à passer cela sous silence. C'est un secret,
qu'elle tient caché, pour donner lieu à nostre curiosité, d'en faire une plus exacte
recherche, et pour couronner nos travaux par quelque heureuse découverte.'
Extraordinaire du Mercure Galant ; Octobre 1679 : vol . viii . p. 216 : from the
Mon. Typog. of Wolfius : vol . ii . p. 1117.
↑ printing-done greater harm than good ?] That a cold and calculating philosopher should consume even a whole winter's season in endeavouring to settle
this momentous question, is possibly very conceivable : but that a lively French
author (ycleped Mons. Bollioud- Mermet-see Barbier's Dict. des Oeuvr. Anon, et
Pseud. vol. i. p. 64, edit. 1806) should , in his treatise De La Bibliomanie,' be
guilty of the following indiscreet remark, is almost inconceivable. C'est une
question encore indécise, que de savoir si l'invention de l'imprimerie a plus contribué aux progrès des lettres et à la perfection de la morale, qu'elle ne leur a nui.
Ce n'est pas ici (continues this saucy declaimer) le lieu de l'examiner ni de la
resoudre tout ce qu'on peut dire est que le nombre des livres est immense, et
que celui des bons livres est très-petit,' p. 52.
how far the art of Printing appears to have been known to the ancients. ] The
words of Cicero, as thrown into the mouth of Balbus the Stoic, in the second
book of the Nature of the Gods,' is familiar to most typographical antiquaries.
Those, however, who are not antiquaries, but mere lovers of researches of this
kind, may be pleased to read what it is that master Balbus, of a meruaylous
304 FOURTH DAY.
I shall proceed to inform you that, towards the beginning of
the fifteenth century, there lived, in the city of Mentz, one
JOHN GAENSEFLEISCH OF GENSFLEISCH of SORGENLOCH,
cunninge, ' is made to say : ' I should not be surprised (observes he) if some
human being were found, who could persuade himself that certain solid and
separate bodies, propelled by their force and gravity, had, in their course, been
so consolidated and arranged, that this beautiful and well- furnished world were
the result of such union ! He however who should reason thus, might, in my
opinion, just as well say that innumerable forms or pieces, whether of gold or
otherwise, of the one and twenty letters of the alphabet, may be so cast upon
the ground that the Annals of Ennius should be the result of such an action !'
Quintilian also, in his Institutes of Oratory, (book 1st) mentions ' pieces of
ivory, in the shape of letters, to be used as a game by children, in order to
make them learn. ' Boetius is thought to have had a prophetic glimpse of the
mechanism of the press, in the following lines from the 6th book of his Consolatio
Philosophiæ :
Quondam Porticus attulitObscuros nimium Senes,
Qui sensus et imagines
E corporibus extimis.
Credant mentibus imprimi ;
Ut quondam, celeri stylo,
Mos est æquore paginæ
Quæ nullas habet notas ;
quæ modo
Impressas patitur notas ;
and St. Jerom, in an epistle to his fair correspondent, Læta, shrewdly remarks :
' Let letters be made for her, (the young Paulina) of box, or of ivory, and let
them have specific denominations. Let her play with these letters, and thus the
game itself becomes productive of erudition.' I frankly own there appears to
me to be little or nothing in these passages, as connected with the mechanism of
printing, beyond what might have been collected from the knowledge which has
reached us of the ancient hypogrammatic tablets or dipticha, and stigmata, upon
which Pitiscus, Schwarz, Derling, Groebelius, and Rhodiginus may be advantageously consulted. John Toland --whose conjectures, both in Latin and in
English, upon the probable origin of printing, are known to most curious readers—
makes a great outcry ( as I read him in Wolfii Monumenta Typographica, vol. ii.
p. 905) upon the first passage, from Cicero ; suspecting the expression formæ
litterarum ' to have first suggested to John Gutenberg of Strasbourg, or to John
Fust of Mentz, or to Laurence Coster of Harlem, or to any other sagacious and
not incurious citizen or artisan -the idea of printing ?' Multo pressius et clarius
(adds he) ad rem Typographicam faciunt " innumerabiles " illæ omnium Alpha-
"
FOURTH DAY. 305
called Zum Gutenberg ; of an illustrious family, but who, on
a revolution at Mentz, in the time of Conrad III. retired to
Strasburg ; where it is thought, about the year 1420, or
1423, he made his first experiments connected with the art of
printing. An authentic document, corroborative of his
being at Strasbourg in 1424, * has been discovered in the
archives of the city of Mentz ; to which city Gutenberg was
invited to return by the aforesaid Conrad--but in which it is
supposed he never made his re-appearance till about the year
1434. It is certain that misfortunes had then reduced this
•
beti " literarum formæ " metallicæ , quales "" aureæ sunt, vel adhuc cum
Cicerone nostro " quales libet " (quasi ligneas insuper innueret) quam locus ullus,
qui ex antiquioribus citari possit, alius.' I differ ' toto cœlo ' from John Toland.
Schoepflin however has very sensibly remarked : Typographiam manibus fere
tenuerunt Romani. Equidem sigilla eorum, literis prominentibus sculpta, et
quidem sculpta retrorsus , quibus vasa signarunt, quoties in supellectile mea
antiquaria contemplor, toties omnem fere typographicam formam in illis reperio,
cui nihil defuerat, nisi literarum mobilitas ; quam artifex si addidisset Romanus,
id est, literas, quod facile factu, si formasset solutiles ; Roma vetus typographiæ
jam fuisset inventrix : quæ præcipuas ejus partes, prominentiam et inversionem
typorum jam noverat ; mobilitatem, quæ addenda, non vidit.' Vindicia Typographicæ, p. 4-5. See Würdtwein's Bibl. Mogunt. p. 39 ; upon the contention
for the birth-place of Homer, and of the art of printing.
An authentic document corroborative ofhis being at Strasbourg in 1424.] This
document was discovered by Bodmann, and is published by Fischer ( Essai sur les
Mon. Typog. de Gutenberg) p. 24. There is nothing upon the face of this ' document' which justifies Fischer in observing that, when it was written, Gutenberg
was occupied with his project ' of perfecting his discovery of the art of printing.
See post. I forgot before to observe that Würdtwein is most learned ' upon
Gutenberg's sirname SORGENLOCH : see the Bibl. Mogunt. p. 37.
(
+ re-appearance till about the year 1434.] This is faintly affirmed by Fischer,
p. 25, on the authority of Köhler's Ehrenkettung, p. 82. We are to suppose he
revisited Mentz pour quelques arrangemens d'intérêts avec ses frères.' I own
there is some little difficulty in settling this point : for Mons. Née de la Rochelle
says (and Monsieur Née de la Rochelle is a very eloquent, and peradventure
honorable ' man) ' on le trouve en 1424, et mieux encore en 1434 à Strasbourg,
où, mécontent de ce que les officiers municipaux de Mayence ne lui faisaient pas
payer une portion de rente et de cens, montant alors à 310 florins du Rhin qu'ils
lui devaient, il se permit de faire mettre en prison un nommé Nicolas, scribe ou
secrétaire de cette ville, jusqu'à ce que cette somme lui eût été comptée.' A little
306 FOURTH DAY.
enterprising genius to poverty ; for he seems to have had
pretty distinct notions of the mechanism of a printing-press,
without the means of carrying his views into effect. Somewhere about this time he appears to have attached himself
to a young lady called ISERNEN THURE, of the christian
name of Anne, and whom, there is every reason to think, he
6
6
onward, the compassionate feelings of Monsieur Née de la Rochelle induce that
writer to call Nicholas le pauvre Nicolas Eloge Historique de Guttenberg ;
1811, 8vo. p. 23. My friend Mr. Singer, who has advocated the cause of
Gutenberg and of Mentz with all the zeal of a partisan, and all the skill of an
ingenious practitioner, observes hereupon : we have further evidence that he
[Gutenberg] was at Strasburg in 1434, for at the instance of the senate of Mentz,
he releases Nicolas the Greffier, whom he had caused to be arrested for 310
florins, due to him by that city.' Schoepflin is quoted in support of this position.
The authority of Schoepflin is most respectable : but I own I do not see my
way clearly ' through the labyrinth of this law-suit. Schoepflin observes—' We
gather, from a public document preserved at Strasbourg, (which document, no. 1,
is given by this writer himself, in his Appendix, p. 3-4) that Gutenberg, in the
year 1434, had resided several years at Strasbourg : he preferred some heavy
complaints against the city of Mentz, to the Strasbourg senate, that the former
had withheld from him certain annual sums then long due ; (the instrument, from
which the debt arose, is technically called Ettwie vil vergessener zinsse von der
obgenantem Statt Menze ussestat') and in order to compel the people of Mentz to
discharge their debts, he moved the court to throw Nicholas, the head clerk,
( Archigrammateus ') then conducting business in some parts of Alsace, into
prison ; and that he should continue imprisoned until he had sworn to pay 310
Rhenish florins, the amount of the sum then due.' What, gentle reader, dost
thou anticipate to be the result? That le pauvre Nicolas ' found bail -or was
' cast into prison? Neither. The good people of Mentz, knowing the humane
feelings of the senate of Strasbourg, or of John Gutenberg, write at once to the
former that the miserable Nicholas may be unconditionally dismissed from all
obligation whatever ;' and to this, Gutenberg immediately assents ! Was there
ever a legal demand so compromised ? --and on the part of one, too, who wanted
money to complete the important experiments he was then making! How the
senate of Strasbourg could control that of Mentz-or why Guteuberg should
not go to Mentz, to prosecute his claims arising out of that city, appears certainly
extraordinary.
Schoepflin adds we know that, on the death of his father in 1430, Gutenberg
quitted Mentz for Strasbourg.' p. 16. We know also, from Bodmann, that he had
been before at Strasbourg in 1424. Thus difficulties arrest us at the very
threshold of our enquiries !
FOURTH DAY. 307
eventually married. Whether she brought him any property, or whether the sweets of love gave a more fortunate
as well as more ardent turn to his genius, may possibly be
questioned ; but on returning to Strasbourg, and about the
year 1439, it seems clear that Gutenberg established a sort
of partnership, which is known to have existed under the
firm of himself, Riffe, Heilman, and Dritzehen ; and that
in this year something like a printing-press was probably
established. Who made the drawing, or whether Master
Finiguera ever produced an engraving of it, must, alas, I
fear, remain in eternal obscurity ! Who first primed the
balls, who first wetted the sheet, who first laid it upon the
frisketBELINDA. What strange terms are these ?—
LYSANDER. Purely technical ones — and perhaps untunable to ladies' ears. Who first, Lisardo (for let me
finish my picture) seized upon the handle-pressed-and
threw off the frisket-and then held up the typographical
miracle-waving in the wind, and glittering in the sunbeam ? ....
LISARDO. You distract me ! Talk not of copies of the
Original Play-Bills, in which Shakspeare was announced to
act-in plays which he himself had writtenPHILEMON. Order ! We have nothing to do with William
Shakspeare but with John Gensfleisch of Sorgenloch,
commonly called John Gutenberg....
LORENZO. Philemon is right. Pursue your narrative, my
brave Lysander.
LYSANDER. I can forgive our convert. Indeed, I addressed myself more particularly to him, knowing he would
have parted with one of the wings of his mansion for a
genuine copy of the first sheet ever pulled in a printing-
308 FOURTH DAY.
office ! But we must not lose sight of Gutenberg ; who is
supposed by Laguille, in his Histoire d'Alsace, pt. i. p. 333,
(according to Fischer) to have first tried his press in the
house of Dritzehen. * It is thought, however, that these
earliest efforts were not with fusile types, but either with
pieces, or from blocks, of wood. Be this as it may; it seems
certain that, about the year 1443, Gutenberg returned to
Mentz, and there hired a house called Zum Jungen,†
* First tried his press in the house of Dritzchen. ] Gutenberg himself lived in
the faubourg of St. Arbogast. Née De La Rochelle, p. 37, note.
ん
† there hired an house called Zum Jungen. ] For the satisfaction of those (says
(Fischer) who are acquainted with Mentz, and who interest themselves in the
changes which time and circumstance ' have made in a city, that may be
called the cradle of the art of printing, I shall here offer a few remarks upon the
house formerly known by the name of Zum Jungen. This house was in ancient times a large hotel, with a considerable court, near that called Lorscherof, opposite the Recollets . On one side of it there was a house called Hanauerhof, and
on the other there was a street ; so that it comprehended the residence named
Färberof, and all the other houses as far as the ancient street of Marktstrasse.
See Gudenus's Codex Diplom. vol . ii . p . 513, 532. It took the title of Zum
Jungen from an ancient family of that name ; who, after the insurrection of
1420, retired to Frankfort. See Joan. de Patr. Mogun. Comment. in the Script.
Rer. Mogunt. vol. iii . p. 460. That family however still kept possession of the
house ; and, in the year 1443, let it to Gutenberg, who established his printing
office there. In 1462, the Elector Adolphus II . confiscated the whole of the
premises, because they had belonged to a partisan of Diether ; and gave them
in fee to Brömbser ofRudesheim. On the death of that family, it was disposed of
to Mr. de Greiffeclau zu Vollarts, who lately occupied a part of it ; namely, that
which my colleague, the Professor Weidman, possesses. It does not appear
improbable to M. Schunk, the Vicar of Mentz, and a learned antiquary in the
history of his country, that the very house, now occupied by M. CRASS, a printer,
was formerly the principal part of the hotel in which FUST and GUTENBERG
carried on their business as printers .' Let not the reader dispel the charm of
such a belief, by a too scrupulous and severe dissection of the evidence by which
it is supported. See, however, the Bibl. Mogunt. p. 46-7 .
Fischer continues his pleasant note thus : Schöpflin is wrong in supposing
the house called Zum Jungen to be the one in which Gutenberg resided. See the
Mém. de L'Acad. d'Inscript. &c. vol. xvii. p. 765. That house, on the contrary,
which was in the same place where they afterward built the coffee-house
Schroeder, belonged certainly to Gutenberg the inventor of printing-and not to
FOURTH DAY. 309
where he probably put in practice his newly-discovered art ;
not however, as Fischer seems to intimate, without renewing
his practice of printing with wooden blocks.
At Mentz, towards the year 1450, Gutenberg formed his
celebrated connection with JOHN FUST, a goldsmith, and man
of property. Whether this partnership arose from the
poverty of the former, or from the pure wish of the latter
to improve the discovery, and to reap more extensive benefits
therefrom, remains a matter of uncertainty ; nor do I know
why, in the establishment of this firm or partnership, the
views of Fust should be considered in a more unfavourable
point ofview than those of Gutenberg. Where no authentic
documents exist, upon which to form a correct judgment,
Gutenberg the treasurer and dynastic-(a family wholly different from Gutenberg
of Sorgenloch) but was never used as a printing office. It was also confiscated by
Adolphus in 1462. In 1656 it was in ruins ; but when Jean Philippe, the
Elector, declared himself proprietor of all such places as were not repaired
within a certain time, it was given by him to Mehl, Chancellor of Wurtzburg.
Mehl made a present of it to the faculty of law of the University of Mentz, in
1666, and the latter fixed there their library and establishment in 1713. It was
in this same house that WITTIG erected a monument to Gutenberg with the
following inscription :
IO. GVTENBERGENSI MOGVTINO, QVI PRIMVS OMNIVM
LITTERAS AERE IMPRIMENDAS INVENIT, HAC ARTE
DE ORBE TOTO BENE MERENTI IVO WITIGISIS HOC SAXVM
PRO MONVMENTO POSVIT. MDVIII.
Serrarius saw it, (Rer. Mogunt. lib . 1. cap. 38) but it was afterwards destroyed.
Yet, on the authority of Gudenus, it should seem that Serrarius was in error
respecting the date-as Juo Wittig died in 1507. We must consequently
correct the principal contents of a letter written to Heineken, by Professor
Dürr, respecting these two houses. ' Mon. Typog. de Gutenberg, p. 33-5, note.
Consult also Meerman's Orig. Typog. vol. i . p. 165, note bb. Notwithstanding
however that Gutenberg lived at Mentz in 1434, his name appears onthe city rolls
of Strasbourg in 1444 : Schoepflin, Appdx. p. 40. From this it should seem that
he meditated a return to the latter place. Fischer adds - Ce qui prouve encore
que Gutenberg n'avait pas, à Strasbourg, l'idée des caractères mobiles, c'est qu'il
est constant qu'à son retour à Mayence, il imprima d'abord avec des planches
fixes en bois. ' p. 35.
310 FOURTH DAY.
the wiser as well as more discreet way will be, to suspend a
positive opinion ; or, at least, not to form a decided one to
the prejudice of either party. I make this observation
(perhaps unnecessary before an audience of such candor as
the one I am addressing) because Fischer, somewhat too precipitately, appears to attach sinister views to Fust in the
formation of this partnership with Gutenberg. * Let us
however pursue the narrative.
Sometime after this alliance, PETER SCHOIFFHER attracted the attention of these discerning geniuses. When he was
born, who were his parents, and what were his circumstances
and employments, are points wholly unknown, and perhaps
likely to continue so. But this much is certain. Schoiffher
was a young man of no mean talents ; and appeared, in the
sinister views to Fust in the formation of his partnership with Gutenberg. ]
' JEAN FUST, qui moins par ses conseils que par son argent, contribua au developpement de l'art. ' Fischer, p . 40. Upon what authority does Monsieur Fischer
make this assertion ? Would Fust have lent his money upon the mere ipse-dixit
of Gutenberg? On the contrary, as the goldsmiths of that day (and Fust is
supposed to have been one) were among the most ingenious as well as wealthy of
merchants, it is more probable that Fust not fully comprehended the nature ofthe
art of printing, but suggested ideas of improvement : as it is barely possible he
would have lent money upon the prospective advantages to be derived from the
mere use of wooden blocks. See post.
"
* points wholly unknown, and perhaps likely to continue so .] Yet the lively fancy
of a French bibliographer has undertaken to supply such desiderata : as thusCe PIERRE SCHÖFFER né à Gernsheim (petite ville, quoiqu'enclavée dans le
pays de Darmstadt, appartenant à l'électorat de Mayence) était un jeune étudiant
qui, ayant déjà acquis beaucoup de connaissances, voyageait et copiait des manuscrits . Soit qu'il en eut préparé pour la presse de GUTENBERG, soit parcequ'il
donnait des leçons à la fille de Fust, ces imprimeurs l'invitèrent à leur art. Doué
lui-même de beaucoup de génie, il netarda pas à pressentir tous les devellopemens
que l'on pouvait donner à cette découverte. ' Fischer, p. 41. Pierre Schoeffer,
Schoyffer, Schoiff her, qui signifie berger en Allemand, Petrus Opilio en Latin,
Pierre de Gernszheim, lieu de sa naissance-étoit un familier ou un ouvrier de
Fust, comme il le dit lui-même ; clerc, c'est- à- dire, scribe, copiste, enlumineur.'
Lambinet, vol. i. p. 114. The preceding passage from Fischer is then quoted by
Lambinet. Thus, Fischer makes Schoiffher a sort of private tutor to Fust's
"
FOURTH DAY. 311
estimation of Fust, of so much importance to the complete
success ofthe discovery of printing, that, as an inducement
to incorporate him in the concern with himself and Gutenberg, he offered him the hand of his daughter in marriage :
daughter-who proved, in turn, a sort of Eloisa-pupil ! He allows him, however,
to have been doué de beaucoup de genie.'
Lambinet, of himself, is pretty safe in his deductions ; but Monsier Née de la
Rochelle, for what reason seems equally unknown and inexplicable, appears to
have entertained a very loathing and hate' against poor Peter Schoiffher ! He
considers (as I have before observed, Bibl. Spencer. vol. iii . p . 36) the passage—
' quique numero sæpe parvulis revelat quod sapientibus celat' ' as a trait justly
lanced against Peter Schoyffer, a young writer ; who, without having studied for
any length of time the mechanism of the art of printing, was quick enough in
conceiving a readier process-upon which Gutenberg had been previously and for
a long while meditating without success,' p. 81. And a little further (p. 83) he
says that among the things which prevented Gutenberg from affixing his own
name to his productions, was, the notorious ambition of John Schoyffer !'
(Can the son of Peter Schoiffher be here meant ?) I shall have occasion presently
to shew (and to prove, I trust) that PETER SCHOIFFHER is entitled to a little
more respectful mention--
Parcius ista viris tamen objicienda memento !
The safer and the more sensible conclusion is, I submit, to speak of Schoiffher
as he himself warrants us in speaking : for, previous to his partnership with Fust,
we really and truly know nothing about him-except that, from a fac-simile of ·
his hand writing, in an original document, of the date of 1449, as given in the
viith plate of Schoepflin, it should seem that he had formerly lived at Paris, and
was a calligraphist ; or ' one who taught the art of writing in public schools. ' See
Schoepflin, p. 30-1 . The plate has this prefix : Notitia Libri manu Petri de
Gernsheim scripti Lutetiæ Parisior. A.1449. Ex Cod. MS. Bibl. Universit. Argent:'
and the writing is of that square, bold, gothic cast, or character, with frequent
contractions, which is peculiar to the specimens of the age. The date runs thus :
'Anno. m°.cccc . xlix. In gloriosissima vniversitate : parisiensi .' I had thoughts of
copying a line or two, by way of fac-simile, but Schoepflin's book is of sufficiently
common occurrence : and I am not sure whether the appearance of such stiff and
stately penmanship may not detract somewhat, in the estimation of the fastidious,
from the received calligraphic reputation of the writer. At any rate, all
Schoiffher's fame, however great, and once generally acknowledged, as a
Calligraphist, becomes merged (to borrow a law phrase) in that of a Printer,
On commencing the business of the latter, Schoiffher tells us, in the colophon
ofthe Psalter of 1457, simply, that he was ofGernszheim :' in the colophonof the
Durandus, 1459, the surname of Schoiffher is omitted (apparently by mistake)
and he describes himself a Clerk of the Diocese of Mentz :' in the Constitutions
of Clement V. of 1460, he styles himself precisely as in the Psalter of 1457 ;
6
312 FOURTH DAY.
an offer, which seems to have been readily accepted. Of the
age, person, and dowry of CHRISTINA FUST (for that
was the lady's christian name) I fear it were now in vain to
make enquiries. We will however suppose that the husband
obtained the consent of the lady, nothing loth ;' and that,
on the day of their union, all'happy constellations
Shed their selectest influence. "
It seems conclusive, I think, that the plans of Gutenberg
and Fust, whatever they may have been, were fast advancing
to maturity on the extension of their partnership ; and the
Bible of 1455, and the Psalters of 1457 and 1459, are
proud and imperishable monuments of the first fruits of
the EARLIEST MENTZ PRESS.
Meanwhile, however, and perhaps before the completion
of the Bible, Fust and Gutenberg quarrelled and separated.
Alaw-suit was instituted by the former, on the non-payment
of a sum of money advanced by the latter towards carrying
on the expenses of their business ; and in the answer, ' put
in' by Gutenberg, there seems to me to be an appearance of
shuffling or evasion. The result was, the withdrawing of
Gutenberg; and the entire surrender of all his right and
while in the colophon of the Bible of 1462, he resumes the distinction of ' Clerk
of the Diocese ofMentz.' See Schoepflin's sensible note upon the word ' Clerk.'
Vind. Typog. p. 30. Below this, it is unnecessary to pursue the enquiry ; yet
we may observe that Schoiffher spells his name variously : as ' Schoffer,' (Psalter,
1457) Schoiffher,' (Bible, 1462, Constitutions of Clement V. 1467, Thomas
Aquinas, 1467, 1469) Schoyffer,' (Justinian, 1468, Valerius Maximus, 1471)
and Schoiffer' (Bible, 1472).
•
"
*
•
* The result was, the withdrawing of Gutenberg. ] Let us say a few words about
the premises which led to such a conclusion. Ulric Zell told the author of the
Cologne Chronicle, (printed in 1499) that ' in the Jubilee year, 1450, they began
to print a Bible, in a large letter, like the type used for Missals. ' Peter
Schoiffher told Trithemius, about the year 1485, that before the third quaternion
(a quaternion is four sheets) or before twelve sheets were printed of this very
Bible, they had expended not less than 400 [golden] florins. ' Meerman thinks
that this sum was consumed in the usual expenses of the office between 1450 and
FOURTH DAY. 313
property, in the materials of the printing office, into the hands
of Fust. After this, Fust and Schoiffher appear to have
managed their business very cleverly and successfully.
Gutenberg is said to have printed works by himself, to
which however he was afraid or ashamed to affix his name ;
and after the year 1460, withdrawing himself totally from
business, he was admitted, with a pension, as one of the
equeries of Alphonsus II. Elector of Mentz ; and is supposed to have died in that city about the year 1468. The
materials of his press were purchased of Conrad Humery,
one of the Mentz Syndics, by Bechtermuntze ; * and the
1455 -and that it was no unconscionable sum for procuring matrices and
puncheons, and other necessary materials.' He also supposes, but apparently
without authority, that this Bible was committed to press before the partnership
commenced. See his luminous note in the Orig Typog. vol. i. p. 151 , &c. Now
for the ' result '-as stated on the united authorities of Seckenberg and Köhlers ;
and of which Fournier has given a translation and Oberlin an analysis. See
Fischer, p. 43. Mr. Singer, who is a very champion for Gutenberg, has thus
fairly stated this result. The sums advanced by Fust to Gutenburg, under whose
superintendance the establishment was carried into effect, having become very
considerable, the result was a litigation between them : Fust instituting a process
against Gutenburg for the recovery of 2020 gold florins, which he had furnished,
and the interest accruing thereon. Gutenburg, in his reply, states, that the first
800 florins had not been paid him at once, according to the contract, and that
they had been employed in preparations for the work ; that in regard to the
other sums, he offered to render an account ; and he thought he was not liable to
pay the interest. The judges, having taken the depositions of each party,
Gutenberg was sentenced to pay the interest, as well as that part of the capital
which his accounts proved to have been employed for his particular use. Fust
obtained the record of this sentence from Helmasperger, the notary, on the 6th
of November, 1455.' Enquiry into the Origin of Playing Cards, &c. p. 156.
The consequence was, a dissolution of partnership. Gutenberg was unable to
discharge his debt, and was obliged to cede to Fust all the moulds, types,
presses, and utensils, which were previously engaged to him as surety for the
payment of the sums he had advanced.' The same.
" materials of his press purchased-by Bechtermuntze.] Bechtermuntze, the
printer, purchased these types of Conrad Humery, a syndic of Mentz, to whom
the printing materials of Gutenberg had descended as a species of heir- loom,
since he had defrayed almost all the expenses attending the second establishment
of the press of Gutenberg.' (Fischer, p. 51.) Bibl. Spencer vol. iii . p. 129.
Ε
2
314 FOURTH DAY.
Vocabulary Ex-quo* (as it is technically called) of the dates
1467 and 1469, were the fruits of this purchase : fruits,
however, almost equally destitute of flavour and beauty.
PHILEMON. Notwithstanding the correctness of your observation respecting the backwardness of pronouncing judgment when the facts of a case appear few or vague, you
seem to me, nearly throughout the whole of this narrative,
to have delivered your sentiments with rather a strong prepossession or bias against the pretensions of Gutenberg.
What will Monsieur Née De La Rochelle say to this treatment of his beloved typographical hero ?
LYSANDER. Monsieur Née De La Rochelle may say what
he pleases ; and I choose to say what appears to me to be
the more probable or reasonable inference. No doubt I am
open to animadversion, and perhaps deserve correction for
an error :† but if such a bias, as the one you describe, seems
to have given a colouring to the foregoing statement, let me
add, in justice to my love of truth, that it is only from facts
as they appear upon the record,' that I entertain the opinion
attributed to me. Observe now, I entreat you. Here is, in
* The Vocabulary Ex-quo. '] It is a very brief abridgment of parts of the
Catholicon ; and, as Meerman has observed, is known by the technical title of
the Ex-Que Vocabulary-gathered from the first two words of the commencement of it, as follows :
"
[E]x quo vocabularij varij autētici videlicz.'
Adolphus, the Elector of Mentz, forbade by a decree the selling of this
Vocabulary without the walls of Mentz. Ibid. It must be admitted that it
did not carry, upon its ownface, very strong letters of recommendation !
open to animadversion, and perhaps deserve correction for an error. ] I beg
leave to think and speak with Lysander ; particularly as, in the Classical Journal,
no. VIII . and Typog. Antiquities, vol. i . p . lxxxvii . , I may appear to have entertained very different sentiments. The truth is, that an ingenious advocate may
argue either side of the case-with almost equal appearance of correctness and
chance of success ! Besides, we oftentimes see clearer at forty, than we do at
thirty two, years of age!
FOURTH DAY. 315
the first place, (and you must forgive a little recapitulation)
a very restless and rather litigious gentleman. I put his
birth, high or low, quite out of the question ; and the consideration of the treatment, whether good or bad, which he
received at the hands of Conrad III. , weighs not a feather
with me. But, somewhere about 1420, Gutenberg leaves
Mentz, the place of his birth, and goes to Strasbourg. In
the year 1424 he writes to his sister, * upon the non-payment of her rents and profits ' (bequeathed to her by their
brother Conrad) to apply to her own uses 20 golden florins
of his (John Gutenberg's) property, situate and being at
Mentz and other places.' The only use of this letter (first
discovered by Bodmann in the archives of Mentz) is, in the
estimation of Fischer and Née de la Rochelle, to shew that
Gutenberg was not then a pauper, but had the means, of
erecting a press if it pleased him. We must consider the
(
* In the year 1424, he writes to his sister. ] As this is the first authenticated
document of the composition of Gutenberg, the reader may be pleased with a
translation of Oberlin's French version of the original German. It alludes to a
previous letter received by Gutenberg from his sister.
Tothe Worthy Religious Bertha, of the Convent of St. Clair, at Mentz : health,
and friendly and brotherly wishes:
Dear Sister,
In respect to your observation of the rents and money,
(bequeathed to you by our deceased brother, Conrad) not being regularly paid—
and that at present very considerable arrears are due-I beg leave to inform
you that you may apply to your own uses, and as in part-payment of such
arrears, the sum of twenty florins (of gold), arising from my rents and profits,
deposited, as you know, at Mentz and other places, with John Dringelter the
wax-chandler, at Seilhoven with Veronica Meysteren, as Pedirmann will inform
you ; also at Lorzwiller, at Bodenheim, and at Muminheym. I propose, God
willing, as I hope to see you in a short time, to arrange this matter with
Pedirmann, in order that your property may be quickly and legally made over
to you. Let me first have your answer to this proposition.
Signed,
Strasbourg, Mar. 24, 1424.
HENNE GENSFLEISCH, surnamed
SORGENLOCH.
316 FOURTH DAY.
latter as a purely gratuitous remark. What follows ? About
the year 1430, Gutenberg still continues at Strasbourg,
notwithstanding Conrad had recalled many noble families to
Mentz...And what does he do in that city ? Nothing. I beg
pardon about the year 1437, he commences lover, and
becomes a husband-yet he cannot even marry without a
law-suit ! * He now perhaps bethinks him seriously of the
art of printing, and engages in some kind of business with
Andreas Dritzehen and others ; but upon the death of this
latter, about the year 1439-40, he gets involved in another
law-suit, with the remaining partners, and is again worsted !
The recorded depositions of Riffe, Heilman, and Dritzehen,
respecting this law suit, are most material and interesting
evidence. Yet, in these depositions, the word ' press' is so
cannot even marry without a law- suit. ] I suspect there was something in the
nature of a breach of promise of marriage in this affair. At any rate, there was
a quarrel ; and Gutenberg was brought before a judge, who probably told him
that he must conduct himself like a man of ho our, and keep his word. The
sequel however of the litigation with Miss Iserin Thüre, or Ennelin zu der Iserin
Thüre, is not exactly ascertained-' cujus exitum (says Schoepflin) charta non
docet. ' Idem Gutenbergius a 1437. coram Judice Ecclesiastico litem habuit
cum Anna, nobili virgine, cive Argentinensi, promissi, ut videtur, matrimonii
causa ;' &c. Vindic. Typog. p. 17. Yet a little further Schoepflin adds—
' Gutenbergii conjugem eam devenisse conjicimus !' Of course, the conclusions of
Oberlin, and of other bibliographical writers-that a marriage did actually take
place --can depend upon no other data than the foregoing. It is ascertained, as
Schoepflin has remarked, that the name of Ennel or Ann Gutenberg appears upon
the rolls of contribution in the city of Strasbourg.
the depositions of Riffe, Heilman, and Dritzehen —interesting evidence.]
These depositions were first published by Schoepflin, from the original documents
existing in the archives of Strasbourg. They have been since reprinted by
Oberlin and Fischer, with a French translation ; and recently by Mr. Singer,
with an English translation having the German subjoined. A portion of them
was published, six years ago, in my edition of the Typographical Antiquities ;
vol. i . p. lxxxvii. Before I introduce them, for the fifth time, to the reader's
acquaintance, it must be remarked that Gutenberg had associated himself with
John Riffe, Andreas Heilman and Andreas Dritzehen. The deed of partnership
between them is, I believe, no longer in existence ; but the circumstances which
FOURTH DAY. 317
indefinitely mentioned, and the four pieces,' of which the
press is composed, are so inexplicably introduced, that no
kind of safe or solid conclusion can be drawn from such
premises.
led to it are summarily narrated by Schoepflin : upon which I choose to make a
few observations, in the order in which that narrative is given.
While Gutenberg was occupied with his new business at Strasbourg, Andreas
Dritzehen importuned him, for the sake of the intimacy which had subsisted
between them, to impart to him some of the secrets of the craft ' in which he
was then occupied. The family of Dritzehen, for the thirty preceding years, is
proved by Schoepflin to have been highly respectable ; and latterly to have been
advanced to the senatorial dignity. Gutenberg (continues Schoepflin) moved by
the entreaties of his friend, taught him the art of polishing stones ; from which
he (Dritzehen) might derive no small profit.' Riffe, at that time a judge, living
beyond the Rhine, is also induced to become a partner in this concern— ' from
which he might return from the next fairs, at Aix La Chapelle, loaded with
wealth.' Antony Heilman, a friend of Gutenberg, pleads hard for the admission
of his brother, Andrew Heilman, into the partnership. Gutenberg agrees ; and
a bargain is struck between them that Gutenberg should receive 160 golden
florins as a valuable consideration. Note well, curious reader ; that all this transaction is supposed to relate to the art, or business only, of polishing stones.
Shortly afterwards, Dritzehen and Heilman keep a sharp look-out upon Gutenberg, whom they observe to be constantly occupied in other pursuits ; and to be
making experiments of a nature very different from those in which they themselves
had been taught. They claim a participation of the profits of these new experiments ; and the good Gutenberg,' consents ; but not without receiving another
bonus, of 250 golden florins, of which 100 are paid down as ready money, and
the remaining 150 are promised to be paid by future instalments. The whole is
paid up within 85 florins ; when Andreas Dritzehen dies, and his brother George,
being desirous of standing in the situation of the deceased, and being refused by
the remaining partners, summonses Gutenberg, the principal, before the Strasbourg
senate.
The result is, the judges determine that, as Andrew Dritzehen, from his
premature death, had not received the full advantages of his contract, his heirs
should be put in possession of 100 florins as a compensation for such loss ; but
on Gutenberg's making it appear that 85 florins were yet due to him, according
to the original contract, the court decrees that 15 florins only should be paid as
the arrears due. There were 24 witnesses in favour of Dritzehen against
Gutenberg, and 14 only in favour of Gutenberg against the plaintiff. The names
of the whole are given by Schoepflin. Their depositions are, indeed, ( as Mr.
Singer well observes) too curious and interesting to be omitted ; but before the
substance ofthem is submitted , I must take the liberty of making an observation or
VOL. I. X
318 FOURTH DAY.
In the second place, what is the amount of such evidence?
Truly, nothing. Were the materials of this press of wood
or of metal ? If of wood, whether with moveable pieces,
·
two upon this partnership concern ;' and upon the degree of mala fides '
attachable to either party. In the first place, it is quite clear that money and not
friendship was the substratum of the union-in both transactions. When
Schoepflin talks of Gutenberg being ‹ amici precibus commotus,' we may, just as
correctly, say, lucri odore commotus ' -nor is this, of itself, discreditable to
either party. Gutenberg had all the talent, without the pecuniary means of
bringing it into play. He tells Dritzehen this polishing of stones ' would be
a lucrative thing, if it could be brought fairly into practice.' Dritzehen, and
Riffe, and Heilman, join, and give him 160 florins as a douceur-for if Gutenberg
could have successfully carried his experiments into effect, it is but fair to suppose
he would have derived those profits from them which he pointed out to his partners as the chief stimulus for them to engage in the concern-and, in that case,
he would not have stood in need of 160 florins. However, a contract is madeand what is the result? How many mules, laden with bags of gold, return from
the fairs of Aix La Chapelle ? In other words, what are the fruits of these
lapidarian experiments? Not only do they appear to have been wholly unproductive, but, shortly after Gutenberg's striking the bargain, he neglects his business
and work-shop, and is detected in carrying on some different and mysterious' experiments. His lively genius, forsooth, cannot brook the control of one solitary
pursuit-he must be omnigenus :' and here again he is lucky enough to find
credulous, or unusually liberal-minded, supporters of his novel schemes. A new
firm, under the same names, is established. Rescissa ergo societas vetus, &
contracta est nova ' -says Schoepflin. Another 250 florins of gold are offered to
be given to the needy projector-and Riffe, Heilman, and Dritzehen suffer
themselves to be again duped-and to let their imaginations, for a second time,
revel in dreams of incalculable and inexhaustible wealth ! Can it be possible,
in the deposition of the witnesses presently to be adduced, that one man, of the
name of Hans Dune, a goldsmith, should gain, through the means of Gutenberg, 300 florins merely for what concerned printing '-when the discoverer of
this art, and the head partner in the concern, should become a bankrupt in consequence of unsuccessful experiments in the same!' This is surely very questionable. Let me however add that I consider the story of Gutenberg's journey to
Harlem, and robbery of the materials of Coster's press, as utterly unworthy of
credit.
"
Secondly, as to the law-suit. It has been before observed that the deed of
partnership no longer exists. It is also remarkable, that no provision should have
been made in it to meet the contingency of death. But if the judges awarded
any sum to be due to the heirs of Dritzehen, it is rather strange that that sum
should not have been equally paid by the surviving partners, and not by Guten-
FOURTH DAY. 319
or in solid blocks ? Nothing is known with certainty. But
was any thing actually printed ? It is quite undiscovered.
The best bibliographers agree, however, that the experiberg exclusively. The exact date of the death of Dritzehen is not known ; but
the court issued their decree on the 12th of December, 1439. In the prompt
and total exclusion of the brother of a partner, so shortly dying after the establishment of the concern-and who, during his life, does not appear to have
received the least profit from either the first or the second establishment-there
does seem to me, on the part of Gutenberg, to be a decisive demonstration of a
selfish and impetuous spirit ! —especially as the deceased had become surety for
the payment of quantities of lead purchased by the defendant ! I speak of
Gutenberg as being the head partner ; and of having his associates in subserviency to himself. It is Gutenberg too, only, who is cited before the court. Let
us now, inthe third place, extract the pith and marrow' of the depositions of the
witnesses—as translated by Mr. Singer, p. 152, apparently from the French
version of Oberlin : premising that these witnesses appear to have been actually
concerned in the breaking up of the mechanism or component parts of what has
been deemed Gutenberg's press. Suppose we call it a recapitulation of evidence.
Anne Scultheiss mention component parts, or four pieces lying in a press :' ' to
be taken out and separated '-in order to prevent any one from understanding their
character and application . The husband of Scultheiss deposes to the same effect—
adding, that these four pieces are to be taken out and separated upon the press :'
in order to escape similar knowledge. Conrad Sahspach declares that Conrad
Dritzehen made the presses ' -that the pieces of which they were made were to
be taken out and decomposed '-for the same object. Laurence Beildeck
deposes that Gutenberg advised Nicolas Dritzehen ‘ not to shew any one the press
that he had' also, to open two screws which kept the press together, and theu
the pieces, ofwhich it was composed , would separate of themselves ; and that these
pieces, being laid within or upon the press, would prevent discovery of the nature
of the piece of mechanism. Beildeck further deposes that Gutenberg sent for
forms' to be recast' -under his eye : afterwards, witness, at the express
injunction of Gutenberg, sends his own servant to decompose the press.'
Thus the press is made to consist of four pieces, held together by two screws.
Beildeck only deposes to the screws. Anne Scultheiss says, these pieces ' lie in
the press her husband adds, that after being separated they were to be placed
' upon the press.' Sahspach describes Conrad Dritzehen as the maker of the
presses.' Beildeck talks of the pieces being laid within or upon the press'—and
is the first to mention forms ' as well as screws. ' From this obscure, and
somewhat contradictory evidence, it seems to me that no safe or perspicuous
charge could be made to a jury of typographical antiquaries ; and that a motion
for a new trial, upon a misdirection of the judge, could not fail to take place.
And here I must indulge myself in the impassioned eloquence of Monsieur Née
De La Rochelle, and declare - Je suis l'ami de la vérité, et fort peu susceptible
320 FOURTH DAY.
ments were not made with metal or fusile types : and it is
most material to keep this fact constantly in view. Fischer
thinks they were purely xylographical efforts ; or confined
to blocks of wood.
The unhappy Gutenberg again becomes involved in difficulties ; is again compelled to pay a sum of money ; and
de préjugé sur des choses qui se sont passées depuis si long tems ; c'est pourquoi
j'avoue de bonne foi que je ne vois pas clairement dans les dépositions de ces
témoins, des caractères mobiles, soit de bois, soit de métal ; mais j'y trouve des
formes ou pages, des vis, des écrous, par conséquent un châssis quelconque, et
enfin la presse, ce qui est déjà beaucoup. ' Eloge de Gutenberg, p. 33. There
appears in truth more of eloquence than of logic in this observation ; for ofwhat
could the forms or pages be composed, but of materials of wood or of metal ? To
say that certain square pieces, divided into compartments of four or eight, could,
of themselves, give any man a notion of a printing press, is, to my humble apprehension, quite absurd : for it is the application of the component parts of those very
pages which constitute the mystery or miracle of the discovery. Again : when,
according to Fischer, (p. 35, note 40) Andreas Dritzehen is said to have looked
carefully after the lead, and other things thereunto appertaining,' we are not
from hence to infer that this had an exclusive reference to the materials of a
press ; for it might have been connected with Gutenberg's occupations in preparing glass. Schoepflin, on the contrary, thinks that this lead' was applicable
exclusively to Gutenberg's press : among the expenses (observes he) necessary
for carrying on the typographical art, mention is made of lead ; hence we must
believe that engraved characters of metal were first used at Strasbourg, and
afterwards converted into fusile-metal types by Schoeffer at Mentz.' Vind.
Typog. p. 23. Thus doubtfully do their researches terminate !
"
again becomes involved in difficulties.] On ignore même quel tems dura
cette société après le jugement du procès dont nous venons de parler, si elle eut
une ou deux années d'existence ou cinq, ce qui nous conduirait jusqu'au départ
de J. Guttenberg pour Mayence. Mais soit qu'elle ait pris fin avant cette
époque, soit qu'il fallût de nouveaux fonds pour suivre les travaux typographiques
entrepris avec Jean Riffe et André Heilmann, il est certain que notre Guttenberg
reparaît dans un acte du mois de Janvier, 1441, comme débiteur d'une somme de
cent livres, argent de Strasbourg, envers le chapitre de Saint-Thomas de cette
ville ; et qu'au mois de Décembre 1442, il vendit au même chapitre ses revenus
sur la ville de Mayence, déduction faite de l'argent qu'il avait reçu du même
chapitre dans l'année précédente .' Eloge, &c. p. 37-8. Schoepflin, p. 24.
Monsieur Née De La Rochelle adds ( at page 53) very justly in all the
abovementioned acts, one does not exactly comprehend what Gutenberg was
doing from the year 1439 to 1450.' The conclusion that he never lost sight of
FOURTH DAY. 321
retires a second time to Mentz -a ruined and a desperate
man ; without having established the success, or proved the
utility, ofhis newly-invented art : for if it had been matured,
or likely to be productive, he would not have wandered to
Mentz, leaving Riffe and Heilman to keep their carriages
and country-houses (as they probably would have done)
from the lucrative trade of a printer ! At this juncture, and
in this dilemma, he meets with JOHN FUST -not a bookseller,
nor a conjuror, but a goldsmith* —and a man of talent and
his favourite project of printing, ' is purely gratuitous. There is little doubt
therefore (observes Bowyer) that all Gutenberg's labours at Strasburgh amounted
to no more than a fruitless attempt, which he was at last under a necessity of
relinquishing : and there is no certain proof of a single book having been printed
in that city till after the dispersion of the printers in 1462,' &c. Origin of
Printing, 1776, 8vo. p. 96. Mallinkrot is cautious in deciding absolutely for
Gutenberg : Hæc de Gutenbergio mea opinio est, cui tamen non ita velim
pertinaciter inhærere, vt cum quopiam desuper controuertere opus habeam, ' &c.
De Ortu, &c. Art. Typog. p. 79, edit. 1640.
* John Fust —not a bookseller, nor a conjuror, but a goldsmith. ] Naudé is the
only one, I believe, who ever called Fust a bookseller ; for which Marchand has
properly corrected him. Hist. de l'Imp. pt. ii . p. 84. The latter writer, in his
very interesting and truly curious Diction. Historique, &c. has justly shewn the
absurdity of confounding Fust, the printer, with Faust of Kundling, or Knitling,
the supposed magician :-vol. i. p. 249, note A. The letter of Dürrius (first
published in the Aman. Literar. of Schelhorn, vol. v. p. 50-80) and the Collectanea of Sulcerus (first published in 1562, again in 1582, 8vo. ) upon the subject
of this typographical magician, are whimsical and diverting enough ; and have
been gravely relied upon, by some writers upon the art of printing, as containing
matters of fact. See Palmer, p. 88 ; but the curious reader must be aware of
various publications in the German, French, and English languages, relating to
the damnable Dr. Faustus. ' See Marchand, note D. Not, however, that a
certain Dr. Faustus, a reputed magician, is altogether a non entity ; for the Rev.
Dr. Marsh, the present Lady Margaret Professor of Divinity at Cambridge, observed
to me that, during his residence in Germany, he had seen the cellar from which
Faust is supposed to have been propelled, or carried upwards, while sitting across
a barrel ; and that there is a representation of this subject, cut in stone, over the
entrance into the cellar. Schoepflin has devoted a pithy note to the refutation of
Fust's being a magician ; laughing at the absurdity of La Caille (p. 12) upon this
subject. There was indeed a conjuror of the name of Faustus, who practised his
necromantic tricks throughout the whole of the Dutchy of Wirtemberg in the xvth
322 FOURTH DAY.
property. It seems (but it is a gratuitous observation) that
on Gutenberg's establishment at Mentz, he continued his
trials of printing in wood ; and a lucky incident perhaps
having obtained Fust a sight of these experiments, that
generous and active man devoted his time and his wealth to
give the discovery every possible degree of perfection and
extension He lent Gutenberg money ; but, before this, he
had most probably associated himself with Schoiffher ; and
on a discovery of the superior talents of the latter, threw
before him the temptation of the hand of his own daughter
century ; as Bierling, in Pyrrhonism. Histor. has clearly shewn. This man, (to
whom Dr. Marsh alludes ) whose real name was Sabellicus, was once extremely
troublesome to the good Trithemius, (of whom in the next note) when he was
returning from the Marquisate of Brandenberg towards Gelnhausen, and whom
he calls Faustus iunior, fons necromanticorum, astrologus, magus secundus,
chiromanticus, agromanticus, pyromanticus, in hydra arte secundus.' Trithem.
Epist. Fam. 1536, 4to. fol . 312. The Abbé St. Leger calls him un impudent
frippon.' Supplément au Marchand, p. 11 , edit. 1775.
·
<
· Paullò majora canamus.' Salmuth , according to Daunou, says that Fust was
the real inventor of the art of printing. ' As for Gutenberg, he was only an
opulent and avaricious man, who, in the hope of gain, associated himself with
Fust, and was afterwards faithless to his engagements.' Analise : see Lambinet,
vol. i. p. 378. This is carrying matters rather too far ; but our Palmer (a slippery
writer !) is yet more unceremonious in his treatment of Gutenberg. General
History ofPrinting, p. 87. Melchior Adam is undoubtedly very pointed both in
his encomiums upon Fust, and in his attributing to him the honour ofthe invention
of the art of printing. Vit. Germ. Philos. 1706, folio, p. 1. Erasmus, in the
preface of the Livy published at Mentz in 1519, folio, speaks exclusively of Fust
being the inventor ; but Erasmus was of too excursive a spirit, was too merry a
soul' to allow us to receive his testimony, in these matters, as the result of diligent
and careful research. Molinettus, in his Historia de Fatis Literarum,' (as alluded
to by Morhof, Polyhist. Literar. vol. i. p. 730, edit. 1747) is pleased to quote the
authority ofthe Bishop of Aleria in his preface to St. Jerom's Epistles, of the date
of 1468, as corroborative of Germany being the cradle of the art of typography;
but a glance of that interesting preface, in the Pauli II. Pont. Max. Vita, Rome,
1740, 4to. , p. 135, will prove this inference to be as applicable to Fust as to
Gutenberg. The authority of Naudé, however, may be adduced in support of
those who think that, without Fust, the experiments of Gutenberg would have availed nothing.
"
FOURTH DAY. 323
in marriage. Hence the great works of the Bible the
Psalters, and the Durandus.
I shrewdly suspect that the father-in-law and the son in
superior talents of Schoiffher, and his marriage with Fust's daughter.] The amusing Marchand has thus expatiated upon this subject : Mais Schoiffer,
homme adroit, et d'un esprit subtil et inventif, aïant profondément médité sur ce
sujet en son particulier, le tourna et retourna de tant de façons, qu'enfin il s'avisa
de tailler des poinçons, de frapper des matrices, de fabriquer et justifier des
moules, et de fondre ainsi des lettres mobiles et séparées, dont il pût à son gré
composer les mots, les lignes, et les pages entières, dont il auroit besoin ; en un
mot, de dresser tout l'attirail nécessaire pour former des caractères tels que ceux
que nous avons toujours vûs depuis : et il se rendit ainsi l'INVENTEUR ET LE
PERE DE LA VERITABLE ET REELLE IMPRIMERIE. Il decouvrit aussitôt à ses
maitres cette nouvelle et ingénieuse manier de tailler, frapper, fondre, arranger,
et imprimer des caractères : et Fust fut si charmé d'un alphabet complet que
Schoiffer leur en présenta, que, pour l'en récompenser, il lui donna sa fille en
mariage, et l'associa avec lui. Hist. de l'Imprimerie, p. 19, 20.
Let us now see upon what basis these lively inferences are built. The first
authority, both in point of weight and of antiquity, is that of TRITHEMIUS ; a
Benedictine monk of unquestionable talents and integrity , and to whom Fabricius
(in his Bibl. Med. et Inf. Ætat. vol . iv. p. 154, edit. 1754 , (takes off his hat with
all the devotion of a pupil, and all the enthusiasm of an antiquary. Brower and
Possevin (see Jugemens des Savans, 1725, 8vo. vol. ii . pt. i . , p. 70-3. ) affect to
weaken his testimony, but Baillet defends him with considerable adroitness. His
evidence has been in part before adduced : see p. 322, ante. Trithemius died in
1516, having nearly attained his 55th year ; and having completed his Annales
Monasterii Hirsaugiensis (or Annals of the Hirsaw monastery) in 1514. The
same monastery (in the diocese of Spire) had furnished a chronicle, also
incorporated by Trithemius, from the year 830 to 1370, which, with the continuation by Trithemius, was first printed at Basil in 1559 folio. This chronicle,
after supplying the materials for various publications, noticed by Fabricius,
(Ibid. ) came forth, a second time, in print, under the editorial care of Mabillon,
at St. Gall, in 1690, folio . It is so scarce in this country, that I believe not
three copies of it are known here. The lover of bibliographical gossipping will
do well to consult the viith volume of Schelhorn's Amanitat. Literar. p. 123-5.
for a pleasing notice of it : wherein we find our Francis Junius to have played
rather a slippery trick with some short- hand scribbling of Trithemius. Nor must
the same reader omit to ramble somewhat in the Historia Biblioth. August. Hist. of
Burckhard, 1746, 4to. pt. i. p. 68-72 . where there is an interesting account
of Trithemius. To return to the Annales, &c. In this valuable work, the worthy
monk relates a piece of intelligence which he had received from Schoiffher
himself, about the year 1484-5-which has been in part before narrated : and to
324 FOURTH DAY.
law, apart, voted Gutenberg to be rather a puzzle-headed
man ; and probably not of a very placable or kind-hearted
disposition ; for in the law-suit instituted by Fust against
which Trithemius adds : This Peter Schoiffher, before mentioned, first the
workman or servant, and afterwards the son-in-law, of Fust, an ingenious and
judicious man, discovered a more easy method of founding or casting types, and
thus perfected the art in the state in which we now practise it. ' I wish it were
in my power to bring forward any notice of Schoiff her's conversation, from the
letters of Trithemius ; but a copy of an early edition ( 1556, 4to. ) of these interesting epistles, carefully perused, has not enabled me to throw additional light
upon the subject. However, to the preceding well- known evidence, is added that
of the colophons of the Compendium de Orig. Regum, et Gestis Francorum, 1515,
folio, (a sorry work ! see Bibl. Hist. de la France, vol. ii . no. 15363) andBreviarium
Ecclesia Mindensis, 1516 , 8vo. 2 vols. -each compiled by Trithemius, and
printed by John Schoiffher, son of Peter. These authorities, especially that of
the Annales, &c. , have been mentioned again and again, by bibliographical
writers, from the time of Chevillier (p. 4) to that of Fischer (p. 37). Chevillier
would necessarily be among the first to notice them. But Bergellanus, in poetry,
and Salmuth, in prose, (as quoted by Marchand in his Hist. de l'Imprim. p. 19) ,
are also not less decisive in their testimonies of the talents of Peter Schoiffher :
as indeed are numerous other writers of a later period. Among these, I choose
to notice only Monsieur ' Gotthelf-Fischer, Professeur et Bibliothécaire à Mayence,'
in his ‹ Essai sur les Monuments Typographiques de Jean Gutenberg ; so often
before quoted. At page 40, he thus observes : Schöffer perfectionna, il est vrai,
la fonte des caractères ; mais ceux qui ont une idée de cet art et de celui de la
gravure se convaincront facilement que ces deux arts, encore à leur naissance,
purent recevoir plusieurs améliorations dont le mérite est infiniment subordonné
à celui de l'invention.' This double-faced attestation merits severe censure ; and
the conclusion seems to be, or rather, the author wishes the reader to conclude,
that although Schoiffher invented the matrices, (which he admits a little before)
yet, that invention was only, as it were, an improvement of a previous discovery ;
and as he who comes after must follow,' so the claims of Schoiffher must be
considered as subordinate to those of Gutenberg ! This is as false in point of
fact, as it is inconclusive in regard to reasoning. Does Monsieur Fischer forget
THE PSALTER OF 1457 ?- une production miraculeuse ' —as Mons. Née De La
Rochelle (p. 75) rightly calls it. If he does, let him read Fournier's animated
eulogy upon it, in his Dissertation &c. 1758, p. 45-7—and De L'Origine, &c.
1759, p. 231-4-confirmed by Meerman, vol. i. p. 11-12. Will be call this ' miraculous production ' an amelioration ' only of the invention of Gutenberg? ! ....
Nor, as I hope by and by to prove, can I consent to his claiming for Gutenberg
the honour of having either designed , or cut upon metal, the capital letters with
which that glorious volume is so luxuriantly adorned.
·
325 FOURTH
DAY.
Gutenberg, which terminated in the defeat of the latter,
Gutenberg has the meanness to allege, against a charge of
the first 800 florins advanced by Fust, in the furtherance of
·
In the second place, respecting the marriage of our typographical hero with
the daughter of his Master. The earliest evidence of this union is to be found in
the colophons of the Compendium and Breviarium, &c. above mentioned : the
latter colophon being a reprint of the former. The first of these colophons has been
noticed by numerous bibliographers ; and, among various others, will be found
in the works of Maichelins ( De Bibl. Paris. p. 69. ) Schwarz (Prim. Doc. De
Orig. Typ. pt. i. p. 22.) Struvius (Introd. in Notit. Rei Lit. Edit. Fischer, 1754,
p. 952) ; Marchand ( pt. ii . p. 9) ; Meerman (vol. ii . p. 146) ; and Panzer
(vol. vii. p. 409) ; it being extraordinary that Maittaire (vol. ii. p. 266, 279,)
should here appear to have been unacquainted with their importance. The
material part of these colophons, connected with our present enquiry, is, that ' the
work of printing was effected or completed at Mentz, chiefly by the labour and
numerous inventions (or experiments) of Peter Schöffer of Gernsheim ; a servant,
and afterwards an adopted son, of John Fust ; who, as a reward for his numerous
labours and experiments, gave the former his daughter, CHRISTINA FUST,
in marriage.' Bowyer, in his ingenious essay on the Origin of Printing, p. 91,
says that Schoiffher privately cut matrices for the whole alphabet ; and, when
he shewed his master the letters cast fromthese matrices, Fust was so pleased with
the contrivance, that he promised to give him his only daughter CHRISTINA, in
marriage ; a promise which he soon after performed. ' Mallinkrot, one hundred
and thirty years before, had judiciously observed : Certè matrices, quæ fundendis typis seruiunt, Schoefferus excogitauit, quod comentum vti præcipuum
totius artis mysterium continet, et in tuto demum post multos et varios exantlatos labores et expensas factas illam collocauit, ita ab exultante Fausto herilis
filiæ matrimonio remuneratum est.' De Ort. et Prog. Art. Typ. p. 80 ; and Mr.
Willet sensibly remarks : if Schoeffher's happy genius had not discovered the
art of casting matrices, and cutting punches, the art must have remained imperfect and barbarous.' Archaeologia, vol. xi. p . 309. Meerman, vol . i. p. 183, is
quoted by Bowyer ; but the better authority is, the Latin translation, by
L. Klefekerus, of the German original, Relation of the Origin of Printing taken
from the Documents belonging to thefamily ofthe Fusts ofAschaffenburg -as given
by Wolfius in the Monument. Typog, vol. i. p. 452-485 . Wolfius is not quite
certain of the author of this narrative, which appears to have been drawn up
about the year 1600 ; but he rather thinks ' it was the son of John Frederick Fust :
because the author declares that he collected everything which his late father,
either traditionally, or by personal knowledge-either from oral or written evidence- had been able to bring together.' See Wolfius's copious and interesting
note at p. 452-4.
"
"
The result is, there can be no doubt of Schoiffher's having fairly earned the
326 FOURTH DAY.
(
their mutual plans, that they were not advanced all at a
time ! ' The court thought Fust an injured man, and awarded
restitution of money or of property. A dissolution of
partnership immediately took place. * The locomotive
splendid reward which he received at the hands of his master ; and I would
willingly hope that both the parent and the daughter shewed equal demonstrations of satisfaction-on the auspicious day of their union ! As Desdemona
forgot the sooty complexion of her brave Othello, in the tales which he told of
encountered dangers, and hair-breadth escapes,' so, I ween, Christina Fust was
wholly unconscious of the raven-tinted skin of Peter Schoiffher (for a workmanprinter must be wholly divested of a lily tint ) in the contemplation of the beautiful and trulymarvellous works which his mechanical talents produced. In truth,
I cannot conceive any thing more likely to win the heart of an ingenious young
lady, than the manifestation of such extraordinary talent. Oh, for the assurance
of the very copy of the first Psalter, which the impassioned printer laid , upon
a velvet cushion, at the feet of his admiring mistress ! Were the couple, however,
married before, or after, the year 1457 ? It is uncertain : but it is well conjectured, in the Journal des Savans, 1741 , p. 72, that, as in the colophon of the
Bible of 1462 Schoiffher is only called Clericus,' and in that of the Offices of
Cicero of 1465 , he is called Puer ,' so it should seem that the marriage did not
take place till in the intervening period of these dates. See the Abbé de
St. Leger's Supplément au Marchand ; p. 5-6, 1775, 4to. This much however is
quite certain and indisputable : that, on this very day, and within a few hours of
the writing of this note, PRINCE LEOPOLD of SAXE COBURG, led to the Hymenëal
altar ' (to borrow the felicitous phraseology of the ' Morning Post ' ) the PRINCESS
CHARLOTTE OF WALES- and that is, (in case all other depositions should be
burnt ! ) on the second day of May, in the year of our Lord, 1816.
"
dissolution of partnership immediately took place. ] The law-suit has been
before mentioned ; see p. 324 : but on this dissolution of partnership,' the
feelings of Messieurs Fischer and Née De La Rochelle are wrought up to the
most painful pitch. Encore (says the former) un procès qu'eut a soutenir
l'inventeur de l'imprimerie et cette fois-ci ce fut l'ingratitude la plus noire qui le
lui suscita. A quelles réflexions désolantes ne se livre-t-on pas, lorsqu'on réflechit
que presque tous ceux qui ont éclairé les hommes ont été en butte (these two
words- en butte -were the first of those used in the epistle of Napoleon
Buonaparte to the Prince Regent, when the Emperor sued in formâ pauperis')
à leurs persécutions. ' p. 42. Several years ago, I had written in pencil, upon
the margin of my copy of Fischer's book-opposite the passage just extracted—
• Flourish of Trumpets ;' and I see no reason why this flourish of trumpets '
should now be expunged. . . . But for Monsieur Née De La Rochelle→→→ Le
pauvre Guttenberg joue le rôle du navigateur malheureux, qui enfin touche au
327 FOURTH
DAY.
genius (or roving character,' as Mr. Willet calls it) of
Gutenberg again disposes him to travel, and to mend his
fortune ; and the press of Fust and Schoiffher becomes distinguished through Europe by the magnificent publications
before In thenoticed third. place, my good friends, what absolute proofs
have we that Gutenberg ever printed a book? Where does
"
port après divers naufrages consécutifs, p. 81-and this dissolution ' was one of
these shipwrecks ! Again I say Flourish of trumpets !' ... I am well aware
that Arnoldus Bergellanus, in his metrical panegyric upon Chalcography, gives rather a direct decision in favour of Gutenberg-respecting this quarrel and
breaking up of partnership— Non tulit iniustas mens Guttenbergica rixas ;
Testatur superos fœdera rupta deos.
but this testimony did not appear till the year 1541, and poetry is not the most unexceptionable vehicle of truth. Consult Struvii Introd . in Rei. Lit. Not. Edit.
Fischer, 1754, p. 954 : borrowed however from Mallinkrot, p. 77. Yet we must remember that the same Arnoldus Bergellanus (of whose work see also Spoerlius,
Notit. Insig. Typog. p. 41) had thus chanted the praises of Schoiffher :
Sed quia non poterat propriâ de classe character
Tolli, nec uariis usibus aptus erat, Illis succurrit PETRUS Cognomine SCHAEFFER
Quo vix cælando promptior alter erat. Ille, sagax animi, præclara Toreumata finxit,
Quæ sanxit Matris nomine posteritas.
&c. &c. &c.
The curious poem of Bergellanus is printed entire in Wolf's Mon. Typ. vol . i.
p. 13-40 ; but in a more recommendatory form, and with preliminary pieces, by Marchand, in his Hist. de l'Imprim. pt. ii. p. 18-33. It was after this dissolution of partnership, that the pretended journey of Gutenberg to Harlem is sup- posed to have taken place-a circumstance wholly divested of truth, and treated
with proper ridicule by Mercier, Supplément, &c. p. 15. I trust and hope that I
am among the last of human beings to put my foot upon the neck of a falling creature or to indulge in asperities for the mere sake of opposition ; but, after
this picture of Gutenberg, which a love of truth only has compelled me to draw,
I really and conscientiously believe that all our pity and admiration should be
reserved for Fust, and not for his capricious and puzzle -headed associate.
proofs that Gutenberg ever printed a book ?] I quote with satisfaction the
328 FOURTH DAY.
his name appear ? In what colophon ? In what public act ?
Yes; I know full well that in a deposition, or rather agreement, between Gutenberg, his brother Friede Gensfleisch,
:
' sober words ' of Monsieur Née De La Rochelle. Je ne dirai pas ici d'une
manière tranchante quels ont été les premiers livres qu'il fabriqua, puisqu'aucun
ne porte son nom, l'indication du lieu, ou de l'année de leur exécution,' p. 55-6.
Let us therefore tread cautiously upon ground which presents so treacherous a
surface but let us not withhold from Gutenberg any evidence which may tend
to substantiate the fact so strongly doubted by Lysander. In the year 1801,
Fischer published a curious document, discovered by Bodmann, relating to the
books which Gutenberg is actually supposed to have printed. This document
concerns his sister, in the convent of St. Clair, and his brothers, and is dated
1459. It was reprinted by Oberlin with a French version ; which French
version Fischer again published in his Monumens Typographiques de Gutenberg,
1803, 4to. p. 46. The material passage is as follows :
Vnd vmb die bucher, die ich Henne
obgen. gegeben han zu der Liberey
des vorgen. Closters, die szollen beliben
bystendig vnd ewiclichen by derselben
liberey, vnd sal vnd will ich Henne
obgen. deme selben Closter in ire
liberey auchfurters geben vnd reichen
die bucher, die sie vnd ire Nachkommen gebruchent zu geistlichen frommen
werken vnd zu irme Godesdinst, es sy
zum lesen zum singen, oder wie sie
daz gebruchent nach den Regelen irs
ordens, die ich Henne vorgen. HAN
TUN TRUCKEN, nu, ODER FURTERS
TRUCKEN MAG, als ferre sie der
gebruchens, ane geuerde, &c.
Et quant aux livres que moi, Henne
susdit ai donnés à la Bibliothèque
du couvent, ils doivent y rester
toujours et à perpetuité, et je me
propose, moi, Henne susdit, de
donner aussi sans fraude à l'avenir
au dit Couuent pour sa Bibliothèque
à l'usage des religieuses présentes et
futures, pour leur religion et culte;
soit pour la lecture ou le chant, ou
de quelle manière elles voudront s'en
servir d'après les règles de leur ordre,
les livres que moi, Henne susdit, AI
DEJA IMPRIMES à cette heure, ou
que je pourrai imprimer à l'avenir,
en tant qu'elles voudront s'en servir.
It must be admitted that this is very strong and positive evidence of the
printing of books by Gutenberg ; but I own myself to be at a loss to connect it
with any previous work of which Gutenberg is the reputed author : unless, indeed,
we conclude the Bible of 1450-5, to be that previous work. But this is unquestionably a production of metal and fusile types ; and Gutenberg, by his most
strenuous supporters, is allowed to have, himself, only worked with blocks of wood.
It follows, therefore, that Gutenberg could not have alluded to this Bible. And
the same conclusion must be drawn in regard to the Psalter of 1457. However,
Melchior de Stamhain, the XLth Abbot of the monastery of Udalricus and Afra,
FOURTH DAY. $29
and their sister (a nun of the convent of St. Clair) , of the
date of 1459-the former agrees to give to the library ofthe
said convent, all such books as he had already printed, or
might in future print'-but was this a bella mensogna?
Was it a mere flourish ? For why not specify the books
printed ? They could not have been numerous ! It is undoubtedly a very strange and unprecedented circumstance,
that a man, by whose genius and enterprise the art of
printing with metal types is supposed to have been discovered and exercised, should, in the very fruits of such
' genius and enterprise,' studiously have withdrawn his
name : and further-should, quietly and without any remonstrance whatever, suffer the names of his partners
exclusively to come before the public !? There is something,
to say the least, most strange and unaccountable in all this.
I am aware that no printer's name appears to the Bible of
the supposed date of 1455 ; and that the types, with which
that work is executed, are rarely seen again till towards the
year 1480 : * but the suppression of the name of Fust does
is reported to have enlarged the library, and increased the number both of
printed books and MSS.: and that the monks might feel an additional stimulus
towards literary pursuits, and thus shun the mischievous ennui of a monastic life,
he (Melchior de Stamhain) introduced the art of printing into the said monastery,
which had been lately discovered by Gutenberg.' This is mentioned by Struvius
(Not. Hist. Lit. p. 950, edit. Fischer) on the authority of Bernard Hertfelder, in
his description of the same monastery, p. 181. Of the chronological weight of
this evidence, I am unable to say any thing ; as neither Gesner, Morhof, nor
Fabricius, vouchsafes to notice the labours of Hertfelder. We have a Bernard,
'Abbot ofthe Cold Fountain, ' and another Bernard, Abbot of the Hot Fountain,'
in Fabricius ; but nothing of Bernardus Hertfelder.'
types, with which that work is executed, are rarely seen again, &c. ] That the
reader, in the first place, may have something like a correct notion of what these
types really are, let him throw his eye upon the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. i. p. 4;
vol. iv. p. 39. Schwarz, who was among the first to describe the Bible to which
they are attached, calls them Missal Types ; or types with which Missals are
330 FOURTH DAY.
not so much affect that ancient printer, as his name appears
decidedly in the year 1457, and twice in the year 1459 :
whereas the name of Gutenberg is no where discoverable in
ancient colophons-or, rather, the only manner of allusion to
him, in such a document, is in the colophon of the Institutes
of Justinian, of the date of 1468, * by Peter Schoiffher ;
"
·
wont to be printed. Primaria Quædam, &c. pt. ii. p. 4, &c. The expression, no
doubt, is too general ; as Missals are executed in various founts of letter : but
when Schwarz, afterwards, explicitly declared that these types appear to him
as large as those of the Psalter of 1457,' Fournier is abundantly justified in
observing that, if that were the case, the Bible which Schwarz saw would have
extended to 12, rather than to 2, volumes. ' De l'Origine, &c. 1759, p. 199. The
Abbé Rive, therefore, is wholly unjustified in his attack upon Fournier-in
defending the remark of ' missal types,' by observing-' comme si le caractère de
ces Bibles avoit besoin, pour porter le nom de caractère de Missel, d'en avoir la
grandeur, et s'il ne lui suffisoit pas simplement d'en avoir la forme.' Chasse aux
Bibliographes, p. 108. It has been shewn that Schwarz particularised, or
qualified, his first observation ; and the question of ' size ' or ' form ' no longer
obtains. The AGENDA ECCLESIÆ MOGUNTINE ' of 1480 (see Bibl. Spenceriana,
vol. iii. p. 146) is , I apprehend, the work particularly alluded to by Lysander, as
containing a late specimen of the types now under discussion.
colophon ofthe Institutes ofJustinian, of the date of1468.] The verse, in the
colophon of this impression is as follows :
Quosgenuit ambos vrbs magūtina iohe's.
The two Jolins ' are usually thought to be JoHN GUTENBERG and JOHN
FUST. Consult the authorities referred to in the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. iii.
p. 402, &c. But there is another John ' - an associate of Gutenberg or
Fust-who possibly might have been here alluded to . Sebastian Munster,
(Cosmog. lib. iii . c. 180) says that Gutenberg associated himself with two
other citizens of Mentz, namely, John Fust and JOHN MEDIMBACH.' See
Wolfii Monument. Typog. vol. i. p. 460 : and the authority of Mentelius, in
vol. ii. p. 296, note x . Melchior Adam, in his Vitæ Germanor. Philosophor. p. 1 ,
admits that this conclusion has been drawn. Marchand says the same thing ; but
allows that we have no book to which the name of John Meydenbach appears. '
Hist. de l'Imprim. p. 49, &c. The Abbé St. Leger, in his Supplement to Marchand,
edit. 1775, p. 30, has committed an error in substituting the name of John, for
that of James, Meydenbach-as the printer of certain works ; and the omission
of the name of John, in Panzer's list, vol. v. p. 518, seems to confirm the
conclusion of Marchand : yet James, who was related to the former, unquestionably executed two works. See Panzer, vol. v. p. 514 ; and Marchand and
FOURTH DAY. 331
who, on the death of his old partner, may be supposed to
have shewn this charitable feeling towards his memory. It
is certain that no good disposition was manifested towards
him, while alive, by either of his associates : possibly from
a conviction that he had not demeaned himself like a wise
or a worthy character.
In the fourth and last place (for I told you I should be
somewhat tautologous) consider what is the typographical
appearance of those books which Gutenberg is really supposed to have executed. It is quite unique. A little
barbarous, and certainly wholly dissimilar from any thing
we observe in other contemporaneous productions of the
Mentz press. You will please to understand that I think
very doubtfully of the Donatuses, which are considered to
have been printed by him; as well as of the Speculum
Leichius, as referred to by Mercier. Schelhorn is quite determined upon the
' two Johns ' denoting Gutenberg and Fust. Per duos hos Johannes Fustum
& Gutenbergium indigitari, quilibet facile, me non monente, videt.' Amænit.
Literar. vol. iv. p. 303, note (a) Meerman had a whimsical notion : he thought
that there was a senior and a junior Gutenberg--the former a workman ofCoster,
the latter the hero under discussion. Orig. Typog. vol. i. p. 176, &c. Monsieur
Née De La Rochelle properly corrects this error. Eloge, &c. p. 84.
* doubtfully ofthe Donatuses considered to have been printed by him. ] A nameless
and dateless DONATUS is a favourite subject of bibliographical controversy. But
what does the reader think of an edition of Donatus, printed in the character of
the Bible of 1455, in the colophon of which the name of Schoiffher is expressly mentioned?-thus :
Explicit donatus. Arte noua imprimendi. seu caracterizandi. per Petrum de gernszheym. in vrbe Moguntina
cù suis capitalibus absque calami exaratione effigiatus.
This precious fragment (for such only it is) was found in Germany, in the cover
of an old book (as was the edition of the Distichs of Cato described in the Bibl.
Spenceriana. vol. iv. p. 474) and is deposited in the Royal library at Paris in
1803 ; after Fischer had published his Eloge, &c. The discovery is due to the
accurate, the zealous, and indefatigable Mons, Van Praet. A fac-simile of the
above colophon, together with a description of the entire fragment, is given
by Lambinet, in his first volume, p. 104-5 . This is equally important and conclusive.
332 FOURTH DAY.
Sacerdotum, and Celebratio Missarum : concluding the
Catholicon of 1460, and the Vocabularies of 1467 and 1469,
to be the more genuine productions of his press, or of the
w
In the first place, it may go to prove that Schoiffher was really the printer of
the Bible of 1455. In the second place, if the language of the above colophon
be compared with that of the Psalter of 1457, it shews clearly, I submit, that
this Donatus was a very early effort of the art of printing - with metal types—
perhaps the first effort ? —as Sweynheym and Pannartz chose the same work for
the first trial of their own press. In the third place, it shews that a fac- simile
of the same characters, belonging to an edition of Donatus, gratuitously given by
Fischer to Gutenberg-may as well be a fac-simile of this very edition by
Schoiffher— since the name of the printer is not found in the edition selected
by Fischer !? In the fourth place, Lambinet has proved that it is this very edition
by Schoiffer. Away, then, with one of the stoutest props which support the
hypothesis of Gutenberg's having printed various editions of the Donatus ! In
the fifth place, Mons. Van Praet's discovery, published by Lambinet, teaches us
a very useful lesson. Mons. Née De La Rochelle, in his account of the Gutenbergëan Donatuses, begins first by admitting that it is difficult to demonstrate,
satisfactorily, the four editions of Donatus, published by his typographical hero.
Afterwards, when he comes to grapple with these very editions-in speaking of
Schoiffher he admits that it appears certain, nevertheless, that P. Schoyffer
published a Donatus and how, mathematics-or logic-loving reader, dost thou
think this certainty ' appears? Because, forsooth, Freytag in his jejune, but
not useless work, entitled Analecta Literaria, vol. i. p. 295, has chosen to devote
eight lines and a quarter to a description of an old Donatus printed by IOHN
SCHÖFFER at Mentz ! Eloge, &c. p. 115-6.
-
·
Again ; in speaking of the supposed second edition of Donatus by Gutenberg,
which Boni and Gamba choose to call l'originale, ed il vero primo tentativo
dell'arte fatto dal Gutenberg in Argentina tra l' Anno 1436, e 1439.' (Bibl.
Portatile, vol. ii. p. 270. )-M. Née De La Rochelle adds, ' ces conjectures n'ont
aucun appui solide ; et il n'est pas à croire qu'on ait exécuté d'abord en petits
caractères ce qu'on fit ensuite en plus gros,' p. 116. But why did not Monsieur
Née De La Rochelle charge his memory with having read Lambinet's work, and
with having seen the forementioned fac- simile -wherein the name of Schoiffher
stands FIXED and INDUBITABLE ? Why was he resolved to carry his hero
⚫ through thick and thin, ' at the expense of every charitable feeling towards his
worthy coadjutors ? As to the authority of Messieurs Boni and Gamba, in the
matter of Donatus, ' let it be known that they affirm the fac- simile of the Donatus
described in the Cat. de la Valliere, vol . ii. p . 8-9, to resemble the types of the
Mentz bible of 1455 ! Their optic nerves were surely much impaired at the time
of making the comparison ; or, if they had actually seen both, would the
observation have been hazarded ?
FOURTH DAY. 333
types used by him. Is it not surprising, I ask, that these
works are executed in types quite different from any thing
we observe in the Mentz productions ? -and this, from a
man, who is considered as the parent of printing in that
city ! No wonder, if they be the actual productions of
Gutenberg, that Fust and Schoiffher thought so meanly
of his talents ; and that, on a dissolution of partnership,
they adopted a different and a very superior character. I
know there are many who will start at all this apparent
abuse of Gutenberg, and studied eulogy of his associates ;
but I have spoken my genuine sentiments, and shall at all
times be disposed to retract them if they are found contrary
to truth .
The union of Fust and his Son-in-law was of short duration. Within ten years from the period of their first dated
book, (1457) the plague is supposed to have carried off the
former, at Paris ; how long, or how soon, after the supposed
sale of this Bible, in that city, * is perhaps of no particular
"
I have yet another bone to pick with a French bibliographer. It is well,
perhaps, for the author of the Dictionnaire Bibliographique choisi du XVme. Siecle,
that life's fitful fever' is over -or the spirit of Peter Schoiffher must have
haunted his bed- chamber, at the middle of night by the castle clock,' in every
shape but that of an angel ! Monsieur De La Serna Santander noticed this
Donatus printed by Schoiffher, before the description of it by Lambinet-but
what is his inference ? Mais cette découverte ne porte aucune atteinte à l'opinion de Mr. Fischer, car si ce Donat est imprimé par Schoiffer, les caractères
appartiennent à Gutenberg,' vol, ii. p. 380. ... An inference, to speak the least
unmercifully, most lame and impotent !'
sale ofhis Bible, in that city. ] This is a favourite subject among bibliographers ;
but it will not be necessary to retail all the gossipping which minor writers have
propagated concerning it. The lively Naudé is among the earliest authors to
notice it. Naudé ( says the coxcomical and waspish Rive) avoit de grandes
connoissances en beaucoup d'autres genres, mais il n'entendoit rien à l'histoire
des premiers siecles de l'Imprimerie, et le peu qu'il en sçavoit étoit très-erroné.'
Chasse aux Bibliographes, p. 110, note. Even the gentle Marchand seems inclined
to throw-not a stone -but a pebble-at the unoffending head of Gabriel Naudé,
VOL. I. Y
334 FOURTH DAY.
importance : but we are pretty certain that he died the very
year in which his second edition of the Offices ofTully was
printed ; namely, in 1466. His age is involved in obscurity ;
" Quelque grand connoisseur (says he) que fût Naudé, la plus ancienne édition
qu'il connût, étoit la Bible de Maïence de 1462.' Hist. de l'Imprim. pt. ii . p. 72,
note ( 9) . Mark well, sensible reader : the authors of these criticisms lived and
wrote one hundred and odd years after Naudé-who is rightly called ' bibliographe
habile ' by Mercier-and who has assured us, in the work presently to be quoted,
that he himself saw more than fifteen thousand old books in twenty-five or thirty
libraries at Paris. ' See the bright cloud of testimonies, in favour of Naudé, which
sheds a pleasing lustre upon one of the pages (p. 50) of that bizarre but frightfullyhigh- priced tome ycleped Bibliomania, a Bibliographical Romance, edit. 1811 :
to which, however, might have been added the ' testimony ' of Jacob, a contemporary
and acquaintance, who expatiateth thus : M. Gabriel Naudé, Chanoine de Verdun
en Lorraine, et Prieur d'Artige, lequel possède vne parfaite cognoissance des
liures : ce qui fait que tous ceux qui ont l'honneur de le cognoistre, l'estiment
pour vn autre Demetrius Phalæreus.' Traicté des Bibliothèques, 1644, p. 490.
The aforesaid Naudé, then speaks as follows respecting the sale of the Latin
Bible of 1462, at Paris, by Fust, The character or type of this Bible (which
I have seen and carefully examined at Paris, in the library of St. Croix de la
Bretonnerie, where it is printed upon vellum, and bound in two volumes in folio)
was so like the hand writing ofthe times in which it was published, that the said
John Fust, having taken a considerable number of copies of it to Paris, for the
sake of distribution there, the greater part of which were also upon vellum, and
ornamented with capital initials and vignettes, in gold--he sold them at first as
MANUSCRIPTS ; and would not part with a single copy under sixty crowns.
Afterwards, however, he reduced his price to thirty or twenty--and the purchasers
of the first copies, perceiving that they were too numerous, and too much like each
other, to be the result of hand-writing, called in the aid of the law, and pursued
Fust so sharply that he quitted Paris,' &c. The foregoing is taken from Naudé's
Additions à l'Histoire de Louis XIth. (the virth chapter of which, exclusively
applicable to the history of printing, is reprinted in the supplement to the
Mémoires de Phillipes de Commines, 1713, 8vo. and in Marchand, Histoire de
l'Imprim. —and latinized by Stegerus in Wolf's Mon. Typog. vol. i . p. 486, 536)
which was first printed in 1630, 8vo. Naudé relies upon Besoldus ; whose
"Pentade Dissertationum Philologicarum ' was first printed at Tubingen in 1620,
4to. That part of it (the third ) relating to Typography, is reprinted in the Mon.
Typog. vol. i. p. 171 , 208, of Wolfius. Besoldus, in turn, takes the story from
J. Walchius (in his Decad. Fabular. Argent. 1609, 4to. fol. 181)- vir omni fide
dignus :' and Besoldus did right, I think, to number it amongthe fables of Walchius.'
But the latter has his authority. One Henry Schor, a Dutchman, and Provost
of Soubourg, a man equally distinguished for his general talents and probity, while
"
335 FOURTH
DAY.
but it is most probable
that his decease could not have been
considered very premature
. His son-in-law and successor is
said to have had an associate or partner, of the name of
he was living at Strasbourg in the house of Michael Theurer, had, many years
ago, a great deal of conversation with Walchius upon this very subject—and he,
in turn, had heard the story from many of his countrymen, whose veracity was above question. ' Walchius adds, from the same authority, that Fust sold one of these Bibles for four or five hundred crowns :' but see the references in
Marchand's Hist. de l'Imprim. pt. i . p. 27, note (Q) upon this latter sum. From these authorities, collectively, it should follow that the tale would be found in
most of the chronicles and bibliographical writers of the eighteenth century— where it accordingly appears : in which number may be reckoned Struvius,
Hoffman, and Jungendres : the latter of whom quotes Naudé with a sort ofjoyous
triumph So much . Disq for.thein Not fact.-Charact or rather . Libror the story . p. 32-,ofnote vendition 38. . Let us now see what
was the thing sold. Marchand, in opposition to the previously-received opinion that it was the BIBLE of 1462, conceives it must have been that of 1450-5 : but
Mercier, in his Supplément, p. 8, 9, edit. 1775, has satisfactorily proved, in my
judgment, the greater probability of the sale of the Bible of 1462 -if either
I have no belief in the sale of either-in the manner before
were so sold.
narrated. That a respectable merchant should travel with his wares, or consign them to a populous city, as objects of commerce, is both probable and praise- worthy ; but that a character like Fust should have played the part of a petty hucksterer, or impostor, (as the foregoing narrative almost implies) is quite
beyond my comprehension, and can therefore never receive my assent.
sale of printed books for manuscripts is the ground of the supposed prosecution against Fust as a magician ; but the reader has, I trust, long discarded that idle
tale from his creed : see p. 321 ante. An hundred other similar stories are grafted upon the same fertile stock ; but the whole vanish into thin air ' at the
touch of sober investigation.
The
As to the period of Fust's decease, I submit it has been fairly proved (Bibl.
Spenceriana, vol. i. p. 307, ) that that event took place at Paris in 1466. Indeed,
on a further investigation of the same subject, I find all the respectable authorities so clear and uniform, that it would be a sort of insane incredulity to endeavour
to stem the current of them. The Constitutiones Papa Clementis V., 1467, and the
Secunda Secunda Thomæ Aquinatis, 1467, were the first books which issued from
the press of Schoiffher after the decease of his father-in-law ; but, in the colophons of these ample volumes, the kind-hearted reader will in vain look for any testimony of affectionate remembrance of the FATHER OF THE MENTZ PRESS !
For the love I bear towards the memory of Peter Schoiffher, I wish it had been
otherwise. Yet this alone is hardly ground for direct censure.
336 FOURTH DAY.
CONRAD HENLIF, * and to have carried on business with
wonderful spirit and perseverance. This partnership however is of a very questionable nature. As to Schoiffher, he
must have reached rather an extraordinary age ; as we
observe his name in a colophon of the date of 1502.† This
associate or partner of the name of Conrad Henlif. ] The name of Conrad
Henlif was discovered by La Caille, in the annals of the abbey of St. Victor, at
Paris. Whether he was a printer, in partnership with Schoiffher, is however
very doubtful : as he is only mentioned in the foregoing annals, as presenting, in
conjunction with Schoiffher, a copy of an edition of the Epistles of St. Jerom, of
the date of 1470, UPON VELLUM, to the said abbey-in order, on the anniversary
of the gift, that the souls of John Fust, of themselves, and of their respective
families, might be prayed for. ' This is noticed by Palmer, p. 89, 96, and by
Bowyer, p. 93 ; and both Palmer and Meerman (vol . i. p. 7) refer exclusively to
La Caille, p. 14, p. 20. Marchand had erroneously stated that Fust had joined
in this gift ; but the Abbé Mercier St. Leger (Supplément, p. 27-8) has clearly
proved otherwise. Mercier had himself examined the annals of the abbey of
St. Victor ; which gave him also an opportunity of correcting Meerman,
Marchand, and Mentelius-who had supposed that the Fust ' mentioned in the
foregoing extract, was a son ' or a parent ' of Fust ; it being clear that Fust
the printer only could have been alluded to at so early a period. The name of
Conrad Henlif is not introduced into any colophon which I have had the good
fortune to examine.
As we have buried Fust, let us say a few words about the spot where his
PRINTING office was erected-having dilated somewhat on the same subject
when discoursing of Gutenberg : see p. 308 ante. The work-shop of Fust and
Schöffer (says Fischer) was established at a house called Zum Heimbrecht, or
Heimerhof, in Cordwainer's Street, opposite the college of the Cordeliers, and
lately ofthe Jesuits. That very house was even recently called Drei Königshof,
from the name of a small chapel-where, according to an ancient tradition, the
skulls of three magicians were deposited-having been carried in solemn procession from Milan to Cologne. The house behind it was called Zum Heimbrecht,
and belonged to Fust ; and even lately it was called Druckhof, Druckhaus, or the
House of Printing. Schöffer enlarged the house in 1477, by adding to it the
adjoining premises called Zum Korbe.' Monuments Typographiques, &c. p. 45,
note.
* his name in a colophon of the date of1502.] Schwarz, in his Primaria Quædam,
pt. 11. p. 43, had never been able to discover the name of Peter Schoiffher in any
colophon after the date of 1492 ; and Marchand was for killing our Schoiffher
in the selfsame year. Hist. de l'Imprim. p. 47 : but the Abbé St. Leger affirms
that clarum et venerabile nomen' to be in a Mentz Missal of the date of 1493 :
FOURTH DAY. S37
is a brief but tolerably correct outline of the establishment
of the first press at Mentz ; upon which we may make a few
summary and concluding remarks.
First, as to the character of the type used by the early
Mentz printers. This appears to have been uniformly what
is called Gothic : and if we except the varieties of the larger
type (from three-eighths to two-eighths, or to a quarter of
an inch) which appear in the Psalters of 1457, 1459, and
1490-(the type, common to most works executed about the
same period) we shall observe three distinct sets, or forms of
letters, used in the printing office of Fust and Schoiffher. Of
these three typographical characters, two only (ifwe except the
one with which the Bible of 1455 was executed) are visible
in the publications which appear to have been printed in
the life-time of Fust ; that is to say, the larger Gothic used
in the Bible of 1462, and the smaller Gothic in the Offices of
Cicero ofthe dates of 1465 and 1466. These appeared united,
the former for the first time, in the Constitutions ofPope
Clement V.ofthe date of 1460. * Schoiffher introduced a type
of an intermediate size, which may be seen, among other
works, in the Rudiments of Grammar of 1468, and in the
Decretals ofPope Gregory the Ninth of the date of 1479. †
This intermediate type is of a narrower form, and prints very
·
Supplément, p. 28 ; and Würdtwein affords us the joyous evidence of P.
Schöffher of Gernzheim having executed a Psalter (a reprint of those of 1457,
1459, and 1490) in the year 1502. See his Bibl. Mogunt. p. 137 ; from thence
copied by Panzer, vol. vii. p. 406. The exact period of the decease of this
extraordinary character is not yet perhaps satisfactorily ascertained . He left
behind him three sons ; ofthe names of JOHN, PETER, and Ivo. See Marchand's
amusing genealogico- bibliographical note from p . 48 to 53 ; to which add the
castigatory supplement of Mercier, p. 29.
ofthe date of 1460. ] See this magnificent volume particularly described in
the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol . iii. p. 287.
The two works, last above mentioned, will be found fully described in the
Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. iii. p. 343 ; vol . iv. p. 500.
338 FOURTH DAY.
closely. Ofthe three types, here mentioned, the largest is
undoubtedly of the handsomest dimensions ; but they all
partake of the Secretary Gothic, and may be said to be the
model of that peculiar character which was adopted by the
early Leipsic printers, Thanner and Boettiger, and was more
especially used by John Schoiffher and the other German
printers for nearly the whole of the sixteenth century. Shew
me, Lisardo, one book- nay, one leaf only -printed in the
Roman type, in the colophon of which the name of Fust or of
Peter Schoiffher appears-and you shall immediately have
the amount of the balance in my favour, at my banker's—
be it great or small—be it 2007. or 20%.—for such a precious
and unheard of curiosity!
We shall now, in the second place, say a few words as to
the character of the printing, or of the mechanical skill, of
the early Mentz press. There can be but one opinion upon
this point. Everything is perfect of the kind : the paper,
the ink, and the register, or regularity of setting up the
page. The Bible of the supposed date of 1455 is quite a
miracle in this way; but the Psalters are not less miraculous,
nor is less praise due to the Constitutions ofPope Clement
the Vth, of the date of 1460, and the Bible of 1462 :
while the Durandus, of the earlier date of 1459, exhibiting
the first specimen of the smallest letter, strikes one as among
the most marvellous monuments extant of the perfection of
*
quite a miracle in its way. ] This is even sober praise. The mechanism of
the press-work, and appearance of the ink, beautiful , regular, and glossy as the
whole appears, does not strike one with more astonishment than the manufacture
of the paper. Charta (says Jungendres) ejusdem est crassitudinis, qualem illo
tempore libris imprimendis consumere mos fuit.' And again Charta ob ejus
densitatem atque spissitudinem haut ingratam ubique se maximè commendat. ”
Disq. de Not. Charact. Libror. p . 27, p. 46. And see Meerman's testimony in
favour of the paper of the Soubiaco press. Orig. Typog. vol. i . p. 9, note.
-
FOURTH DAY. 339
early typography. Almost all the known works, before the
year 1462, are printed UPON VELLUM : * doubtless, because
they ventured upon limited impressions ; and even of the
Bible of 1462, more copies have been described upon vellum
than upon paper. Upon the whole, the vellum used by
* works, before the year 1462, printed upon vellum. ] Let us first read Meerman
upon this point : Membranæ originem antiquissimam esse nemo nescit. Ea vero
primi quoque typographi usi sunt, tum ut libros suos solidiores hoc pacto
redderent, tum quoque, ut optimos codices manuscriptos imitarentur.' Orig. Typog.
vol. i. p. 7. He then goes on to specify two editions of a supposed Donatus, at
Harlem, by Coster, of this kind ; who, however (says he) executed his other
works, containing cuts, upon paper.' He next speaks of copies of the MAZARINE
BIBLE (of 1450-5) in the Royal library at Berlin, and in the Benedictine
library in the suburbs of Mentz, upon vellum. To these may be added a third
copyin the Royal library at Paris, a fourth in that of the late Count Macarthy, (formerly Gaignat's ; see Cat. de Mc. Carthy, vol. i . no. 61) and a fifth in the possession
of Messrs. G. and W. Nicol, booksellers to his Majesty ; recently consigned to
them by Mr. Horn : the latter of a size and condition equally ample and beautiful.
Indeed, I should pronounce this latter copy to be the chef-d'œuvre of the Mentz
press —when the rarity of the article is considered. The illuminations, about
the time of the printing, are in a quiet and very pleasing style of composition
and colouring. The volumes are absolutely cased in mail, by a binding of at least
300 years standing ; upon the exterior of which, are knobs and projections, in
brass, of a durability, and bullet-defying power, which may vie with the coat of
a rhinoceros. Upon the whole, then, there are five known copies of the
MAZARINE BIBLE UPON VELLUM ; and upon consulting the Bibl. Spenceriana,
vol. i. p. 6, there will be found to be nine upon paper. I suspect the number of
each is capable of being increased.
-
Pursuing the Vellum Theme,' let us proceed to the PSALTERS of 1457 and
1459. All the known copies of these grand volumes are UPON VELLUM ; but
Lord Spencer possesses a copy of the third edition , of 1490, upon paper-and
the extreme rarity of this latter impression may have proceeded from the nature
of the material upon which it appears to have been executed. I have lately seen
a third copy of the first Psalter, but imperfect towards the end. It was consigned to Messrs. Nicol by Mr. Horn. Our country has reason to boast of these
treasures ; as the Royal library at Paris, the largest and richest in the world,
does not possess it. This third copy (His Majesty and Earl Spencer possessing
the other two) bears ample evidence of its former use. It is thumbed throughout, and is of a frightfully tawny and sombre colour. Can we suppose that the
ensuing embellishment, executed upon wood-after an original design, found (as
fame reports, but fame is a slippery jade) in a crumpled state, within a buffet,
once the property of Schoiffher's grandson-is intended to represent two monks
340 FOURTH DAY.
Fust and Schoiffher, although inferior to the Venetian, is
exceedingly good : being, generally, both white and substantial.
chanting out of this very first Psalter, by lamp-light ? I think we may receive it
as such--without offering any extraordinary violence to our feelings or tastes, as
antiquaries. Yet it must not be dissembled that the pencil of a friend, a very
ALEXANDER the Great ' in these matters, has materially contributed to give it
expression and effect .
FOURTH DAY. 341
In the third place, let us notice the nature or character
of the works which have issued from the press of Fust and
Schoiffher. Whatever may be our partiality towards that
establishment from which the public were first gratified with
the sight of a printed book, candour obliges us to confess
that the FATHERS of PRINTING were not fortunate, upon
the whole, in the choice ofthe books which issued from their
press. This observation however must be made with some
' grains of allowance.' Reference must be had to the place
where these printers resided, and to the taste which prevailed
there ; and therefore when the foregoing criticism is past
upon the efforts of Fust and Schoiffher, it must be understood to be regulated by a consideration of the superior taste
which prevailed at Rome, Venice, and other Italian cities : -
where the ANCIENT CLASSICS first began to arrest the public
attentioninthe commodious and delightful form ofa PRINTED
BOOK. If, therefore, the first Mentz printers executed chiefly
the Fathers, Scholastic Divinity, and Civil Law, the cause of
Next, for the DURANDUS of 1459. This is also uniformly found upon vellum ;
except the copy noticed by Meerman and Wurdtwein upon the authority of
Gudenus ; and a second copy seen by the former in England—in both of which
there were some sheets of paper. The reasons for this capricious variety, adduced
by Meerman, (Orig. Typog. vol. i. p . 8 , note) do not strike me as being very
conclusive. Of the CATHOLICON of 1460, all the known copies, with the exception of those in the Royal Library at Paris, and in the Macarthy Collection (Cat.
de Mc. Carthy, vol. i. no. 2183) are however upon paper ; while the CONSTITUTIONS OF CLEMENT V., of 1460, are as uniformly upon vellum. The vellum and
paper copies of the BIBLE of 1462, have been already (Bibl. Spencer. vol. i.
p. 15, 18 ) sufficiently noticed ; and beyond this latter date it is not material to
pursue the enquiry ; as vellum copies became proportionally much rarer than
paper ones. Meerman well observes upon this point : ' At rerum haud diu post
inversus est ordo, quando charta plerisque, membrana paucis exemplaribus, hisque
ad ornatum maximè comparatis, et semper fere illuminatis, inservire cœpit, qualia
Sweynheimii ac Pannartzii, Vendel. Spirensis, Nicol. Jensonis, aliorumque principum Italiae typographorum in variis curiosorum bibliothecis contemplatus
admiratusque sum. ' Orig. Typog. vol. i . p. 8, note.
342 FOURTH DAY.
such a choice lay probably in the prospect of a quicker
demand for, and a more abundant profit arising from the
immediate sale of, such articles of publication : not however,
as you may remember, that the Ancient Classics were
uniformly forbidden to shew their venerable fronts within
the precincts of the Mentz printing office : for the Offices of
Cicero, the History of Valerius Maximus, and the Plays of
Terence, each issuing from the same quarter, forbid the
imputation of a decidedly gothic or barbarous taste upon the
character of its earliest directors. And here we may dismiss
LISARDO. Do you mean to omit noticing the Devices of
Printers? There is something rather interesting in these
typographico-heraldic embellishments.
LYSANDER. Even so : and therefore let me briefly add
that the device of Fust and Schoiffher consisted of two
shields suspended to a bough of a shield, on one of which
were three stars. These shields are usually executed in red ;
and first appeared, I believe, in the Bible of 1462.† The
* Offices ofCicero, History of Valerius Maximus, and the Plays of Terence. ] The
reader will find these impressions accurately described in the Bibl. Spenceriana,
vol. i . p. 304, vol . ii . p. 450, and vol . iv. p. 557.
+ first appeared in the Bible of 1462. ] Spoerlius tells us expressly that this
Bible was the first book in which the device above described (and of which a facsimile is given in the Bibl. Spencer. vol. i. p. 11) appeared. He also adds that
this device was clearly intended for the Coat of Arms of Fust and Schoiffher, as
Schwarz had compared it with the latter preserved in the public library at
Frankfort upon the Maine. Introd. in Notit. Insign. Typographicor. 1730, p. 22.
Schwarz has been somewhat mis-represented by Spoerlius. In the Prim. Quæd.
Doc. de Typ. Orig. pt. ii. p. 21 , Schwarz notices an early edition of the ' De Vera
Vitæ Cognitione' of St. Austin, without date, which contains the device here
alluded to ; and which, if the impression were of the age attributed to it by
Spoerlius, on the alledged authority of Schwarz -namely, of 1459-would cause
this edition to contain the earliest specimen of the forementioned device : but
Schwarz only observes that this latter work is printed in the type of the
Durandus and Offices of Cicero ; and may be at least as old as either.' If so,
FOURTH DAY. 343
same ornament was used by Peter Schoiffher, but was varied
and enlarged by both his sons, Peter and John : with whomit
altogether ceased to appear. Where shall we now direct our
researches ? What other city shall we next notice as the
nurse of the infant art of printing?
LORENZO. Have you forgotten LAURENCE COSTER, and
the pretensions of Harlem ?
LISARDO. Heaven defend us ! My eyes are just now
fixed upon the picturesque turrets of the Soubiaco Monastery, and I wanted Lysander to introduce me to the printing office of that venerable abode -when our host purposes
to saunter along the canals and amidst the interminable flat
surfaces of Holland ! What a degradation.
PHILEMON. Lisardo is outrageously disorderly. Our host
has surely a right to have his request first attended to bythe
monarch of the day. Whether Lysander, in the exercise of
his royal capacity, may please to enter upon the controversy
which such a question involves, is another matter : —and,
for my part, I am quite free to confess that what are called
'the pretensions of Harlem ' appear to be at least as deservthe work might have been executed in 1465 ; and therefore there is nothing conclusive upon this subject from the authority of Schwarz.
Neither Marchand nor Wurdtwein notice any volume of an earlier date than
that of 1462, which contains this device or coat- armour. Fabricius, according to
the former, (Hist. de l'Imprimerie, p. 45) considered the white ornaments in the
first shield to be a Cross of St. Andrew, and the chevron in the second shield to
represent a Greek Lambda. Scholtz speaks of them as mere ornaments ; and
Orlandi, with his usual inaccuracy, assigns them only to the productions of Fust.
Marchand makes the first shield the arms of Fust, and the second those of
Schoiffher. Lackman is particular in assigning to John Schoiffher the arms
conferred upon him by Maximilian I. Annal. Typog. Select. Quæd. Capita. p. 21 ;
but Marchand is much more copious upon the same subject-which will be
renewed in the FOLLOWING DAY of this Decameron. Meanwhile we may
remark, that the shields, as used by Fust and Schoiffher, appeared, in black, as
late as the year 1525 ; —in the Collectanea Antiquitatum in Urbe atque agro
Moguntino, in folio . See Mercier's Supplément, p . 26.
344 FOURTH DAY.
ing of consideration as those which are connected with the
'picturesque turrets ' of the Soubiaco monastery-to borrow
Lisardo's phrase. ....
LISARDO. I bow to the decision of the chair ; —or rather
ofthe throne.
LYSANDER. There is justice in the remark of Philemon.
Let us therefore briefly discuss the leading points in the
case of LAURENCE COSTER, or Laurente Janszoon : and the
more so, as this subject, well nigh faded from recollection
since the writing of Meerman, has of late assumed rather an
important appearance from the conflicting arguments of
two living writers,* who have entered the arena of discussion with ponderous and well-tempered weapons--the one
resolved to protect, the other as bent upon carrying away,
the embalmed body of the FATHER of the Harlem Press.
conflicting arguments of two living writers. ] Mr. William Young Ottley, and
Mr. Samuel Weller Singer. The former first began to write upon the subject,
but the work of the latter was first published . They both appeared in 1816, in
quarto : the first, under the title of An Enquiry into the Origin and Progress of
the History of Engraving,' &c. 2 vol.; and the second, under that of Researches
into the History of Playing Cards, with Illustrations of the Origin of Printing and
Engraving on Wood. ' ( It will be observed in a note, at p. 551 of vol . iv. of the B.S.
that Mr. Ottley's work is dated 1815 ; that date was given, on authority, but prospectively. ) Although there can be no question of the superior importance of
the work of Mr. Ottley, both in variety and extent, yet the public are much
indebted to Mr. Singer for a volume of very curious and instructive research,
embellished in a style which reflects equal credit upon the author, printer, and
engraver. Mr. Ottley is the first among us who has treated of the early art of
engraving in a manner in which it deserved to be treated ; and the embellishments which he has introduced are equally distinguished for their felicity and
fidelity. It is very probable that, in the disquisition of the subject of BLOCK
BOOK PRINTING, to which both these writers have turned their attentions, I may
differ occasionally from each ; but this difference of opinion will, I trust, operate
to a re-consideration of the subject, and to a castigation of myself, if needful ;
although I cannot refrain from expressing my exultation at being deferred to by
such champions of typographical researches as the gentlemen just mentioned.
We have sworn by the sword' to protect each other-if unmercifully assailed by
the distance-loving critical Lancer!
FOURTH DAY. 345
LISARDO. A revival of the feats of Ajax and Hector over
the corpse of Patroclus !
LYSANDER. Away with similes. Lord Mansfield I believe
(so Burrowes reports him) used to say that nothing was more
apt to injure an argument than a simile ;' but if I am at all
influenced by the weight of Law Authorities, in the consideration of the present subject, it will be by that of Chief
Baron Gilbert, in his Law of Evidence : wherein, among
sundry wise and sagacious maxims, he beseeches us to obtain
' the best possible evidence that the nature of the case will
admit of."
I feel persuaded, my good friends, in the outset of my
remarks, that we want yet ' the best possible' evidence towards
the complete adjustment of the claims of Coster ; or rather,
of that artist, whoever he may be, to whom we are indebted
for the work commonly called, and known by the name of,
Speculum Humanæ Salvationis: for this is the work which
is supposed to be the foundation of the pretensions of
Harlem to the Discovery of the Art of Printing. In the
absence however of such a complete body of evidence, I
may, in the first place, be permitted to remark, that because
we have not the full weight of the kind of evidence just
mentioned, it does not follow that there may not be sufficient
6 upon the record ' to warrant the main inferences which
the writers in favour of Harlem have been disposed to draw.
If you have not all the evidence which you may want, you
must attend to the character and competency of such as you
possess. If you have not the same weight of the lex
scripta,' or written evidence,' which supports the claims of
Mentz, you must not from thence conclude that no such
weighty written evidence ' ever existed ; but only that
nothing of that character has as yet reached us. You must
346 FOURTH DAY.
thereforejudge of the nature ofthe thing, or the existing instrument itself—of probabilities, in a thousand shapes and
forms-and of the real character of such evidence as hath
actually come down to us. Of these, then, in their due
order.
And first of the nature of the existing document itself.
Here is a production, manifestly different from any thing of
a contemporaneous period of which we have any knowledge.
It is a printed text of one of the most popular manuals of
morality in the middle ages. It is also of a limited extent :
such as need not require any very elaborate or protracted
execution. It likewise contains ornaments or cuts, of the
subjects treated of in the text. All these things, together,
savour strongly of what would be most likely to engage the
attention, and fix the determination, of an experimental
genius in the particular art by which such a production could
be effected. The cuts, with brief descriptions of them
immediately beneath, are both executed upon the same
block. These are printed in a pale or umbre tint ; and the
explanatory or moralising part, forming what is called the
text of the work, is printed in black ink, beneath, in double
columns. The letter of this text is sharp, regular, and
undeviating ; and much smaller than the irregular and disproportionate letter which we observe immediately beneath
the wood cuts. The work itself is printed both in the Dutch
and Latin languages ; that is to say, there are impressions
of it entirely in the Dutch, and entirely in the Latin language.
The latter is of the earlier date.
Note further, that this work is executed only on one side
of each leaf: while the wood-cuts appear, from the glazed
surface of their reverses, to have been impressed by means
of friction of some kind or other. There is something in
FOURTH DAY. 347
this also, I submit, very indicative of a first attempt. But
as it is entirely without date, it may be asked, why affix the
country of Holland and the city of Harlem as the birthplace of this production in particular ? The answer is, that
Adrian Junius, a physician, scholar, and man of character, *
tells us explicitly(on authority presently to be examined) that
one Coster-or say a citizen of Harlem-was the author of
this performance -before the middle of the fifteenth century;
and Mr. Ottley has, I think, very satisfactorily proved that
the style of art, observable in the cuts, is clearly not of Italy
or ofGermany, but ofthe Low Countries. When, therefore,
could such a work have been executed ?
6
This brings us, in the second place, to discourse of the
probabilities, in a thousand shapes and forms,' which may
uphold the hypothesis of this being at least a very ancient,
if not the earliest, specimen of the art of printing. The type,
in which it is executed, is not wholly peculiar to the Speculum. It appears in a fragment of an edition of the
Distichs ofCato; † a mere elementary or school book, and
such as one might conceive to have been executed in the
a physician, scholar, and man of character . ] Although we may not accede to
the opinion of Bullart, in his Acad. des Sciences, lib. iii. p. 181-2, in calling
Junius the second luminary of Holland after Erasmus ;' yet we may assent to that
of Niceron in his Mémoires des Hommes Illustres, vol. vii. p. 401 , who observes
that Junius had naturally a vast memory, which he exercised with particular
success in the various departments of literature in which he excelled, exclusively
of his reputation as a physician. ' Like a thorough- bred bibliomaniac, his
happiness was concentrated in his library ; on the plunder of which, at the
capture of Harlem in 1573 , he broke his heart ; dying in his 63rd or 64th year.
appears in a fragment of an edition of the Distichs of Cato. ] See the Bibl.
Spenceriana, vol. iv. p. 476 : but more particularly Mr. Singer's work, p. 134 ;
where there is also a fac- simile of the letter used in the subscriptions immediately
beneath the cuts. Mr. Ottley however has given fac-similes of the complete
alphabets used in the respective editions of the Speculum : see vol. i. p. 238,
249.
348 FOURTH DAY.
very dawn of the discovery of the typographical art. It
appears in no bulky work ; and if any objection be urged
to its being an isolated sort of type, and unconnected with
any previous or subsequent specimen, (with the foregoing exception) the same may be urged against the most established
truths of bibliography—the foundations of which no one has
yet had the hardihood or temerity to invalidate : for, according to this mode of ratiocination, we are not to believe in the
dates of the books printed in the Sublacensian or Soubiaco
Monastery, because we are unacquainted with any other
specimens of the same type ! And where, I ask, do we see
again the types of the Mazarine Bible-before the year
1480 ?* and then, too, in a battered state ! Yet shall this militate against the received date of the Mazarine Bible ? In a
point of this moment I will not be discomfited by arguments
ofan apparently plausible, but in reality ofa merely negative,
or even contradictory, nature. Thus, because the first dated
book (namely, of the year 1473 ) printed in Flanders,
exhibits a totally different type from that of the Speculum,
we are told that the latter work cannot be a production of
the Low Countries : while, on the other hand, because
Ketelaer and De Leempt, (printers of the same country) who
are thought to have used a similar type, † have not affixed
types ofthe Mazarine Bible before the year 1480 ?] These types however are
seen in the Meditationes Ioannis de Turrecremata of 1479, printed by Numeister,
as the fac-simile in the B. S., vol. iv. p. 39, may satisfactorily prove. Yet these
latter, being the production of a Strasbourg printer, although a Mentz Clerk,'
seem of a new cast ; while the Agenda Moguntinensis Ecclesiæ, unquestionably
printed at Mentz, are comparatively very defective.
↑ thought to have used a similar type.] See the fac-simile in Mr. Singer's work,
p. 138. On comparing this type with the one used in the Speculum, I cannot
bring myselfto think there is a prima-facie resemblance, or ' family likeness '-as
Lord Spencer happily designates it. The types of Ketelaer and De Leempt are
feeble and battered compared with those of the supposed types of Coster.
FOURTH DAY. 349
"
any date earlier than that of 1474, to the works which are
considered to have issued from their press, therefore the performances of Lawrence Janszoon (as he is sometimes called)
cannot be of the early date so generally imagined ! What is
this but converging into one point, rays which strike off into
opposite directions ? For, first, we agree from dissimilarity,
and then from similarity, and yet draw the same conclusion !
Where positive and unequivocal data are wanting, we
must have recourse to probabilities and analogies ; and I am
clearly of opinion that the most unexceptionable evidence is
not exclusively to be obtained from the appearance of types.
Thus, who could think that the Augustinus De Arte
Prædicandi' and the Speculum Historiale' of Vincentius
Bellovacensis, were each printed at Strasbourg, byMentelin ?
Who would imagine Martin Flachen, in the very same
city, to have latterly used such a decidedly opposite cast of
type ?-that the Foligno press claimed Numeister as the
printer of Leonard Aretin in 1470, and of Joannes de
Turrecremata in 1479, each executed in the most opposite
forms of type ?-that the press of Spire should, in the productions of Peter Drach, have given birth to such very
different typographical characters ?—that Florence, in the
publications of Azzoguidi and Miscomini, should have
witnessed such varying specimens of her respective printers ?
Leaving Germany and Italy, what say you to the dissimilar
appearances of the Ulm press, in the productions of John
Zainer and Leonhard Hol ? and descending to the Low
Countries, and therefore making more for our present point,
why should Richard Paffroet, I beseech you, living at
Deventer, choose to disport himself in at least three varieties
oftype ?
The catalogue of such discrepancies or varieties would
VOL. I. Ꮓ
350 FOURTH DAY.
be endless. * All I contend , for is, that because the first
dated book, printed in the Low Countries, happens to be
executed in a type different from that which is supposed to
have been executed in the same parts at a much earlier
period, we are not from hence to infer that the antiquity ofthe
latter is necessarily shaken : and further, because the same
work which happens to display a somewhat similar type,
printed in the same country, be of the date of 1474, it does
not therefore follow that the previous work, to which this
dated one is supposed to have a typographical resemblance,
must of necessity have been executed at pretty nearly the
same period.
I come, in the third and last place-as connected with the
claims of Harlem or Holland -to touch upon the character
or competency of the evidence handed down to us : and this
I choose to do precisely in the chronological order in which
that evidence is to be collected . We have, first of all, the
attestation of Ulric Zel, as given in the text of the Cologne
Chronicle, printed in 1499 ; † and although the evidence of
catalogue of such varieties would be endless. ] The reader will be pleased to
understand that the above illustrations, by Lysander, are founded on the descriptions of works, by the several printers above specified, in the Bibl. Spenceriana ;
as an examination of the Index of Printers, ' and a consultation of the pages
there referred to, will sufficiently prove.
+ the Cologne Chronicle, printed in 1499.] I may fairly say that the most
accurate and minute description of this very rare chronicle, extant, will be found
in the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol . iii . p. 281. The passage, above alluded to, has
however been extracted by bibliographers without end ; and amongst other
works, will be found in those of Scriverius, Boxhorn, Freytag, Struvius, and
Würdtwein ; not to notice the more modern writers, including Mr. Ottley and
Mr. Singer. The German original may be seen, if needful, in the Laurea
Laurentii Costerii, p. 100 ; Theatrum Hollandiæ, 1632, 4to ; p. 409 ; Analecta
Literaria, vol. i. p. 115 ; Introd. in Not. Rei Literar. p. 944, edit. Fischer; Bibl.
Moguntina, p. 50, 1780, 4to. and in Mr. Singer's book. A faithful English
version of the German passage, extracted in the foregoing authorities, will be
found in the work first above mentioned. Mr. Willet, in his Memoir on the
FOURTH DAY. 351
6
that ancient printer may be thought to cut both ways,' yet
it seems to me that the main inference deducible from it is,
that in Holland they first began to print Donatuses, and
that the art of printing, practised in the manner in which it
was at the period of the publication of the Cologne Chronicle,
was discovered at Mentz .' Be it further known, that Ulric
Zel was a German, and printed at Cologne at least as early
as 1466. It has been before observed that his testimony
appears as honest as it is curious ; ' and what are we to
gather from it, but that the tentamina, the earliest and
rudest efforts, the bone and tendon, as it were—of the art
of printing, were first exhibited in the Low Countries ? —
while it was not indued with flesh and blood (if I must go
on with the simile, and thus run counter to my former
position respecting such a mode of argument) till it had been
exercised at Mentz ?! But what could Ulric Zel mean when
he talked of Holland and Donatuses ? Were these things
Origin of Printing, ' has been somewhat too hasty in adopting the sentiments of
Marchand, respecting the supposed invalidity of this chronicle, without consulting the authorities to which Marchand refers. Archæologia, vol. xi. p. 294, &c.
Holland and Donatuses ?] Mr. Singer — who is as formidable an antagonist
against, as Mr. Ottley is a strenuous champion for, the claims of Coster and
Harlem observes the Donatuses of Holland may have suggested ideas of the
typographic art, but this makes nothing for the cause of Coster and Harlem :
these Donatuses were most probably xylographic productions, and we think if
the passage in that [ the Cologne] Chronicle be attentively considered, it will
sanction this inference.' Researches, &c. p. 148. This is a more important concession than the writer of it was probably aware of. In the first place, if there
do exist Donatuses printed in Holland, however printed, before any typographical
attempts at Mentz, what is this but making every thing for the cause of Coster
and Harlem ' and giving the palm of THE DISCOVERY OF THE ART OF
PRINTING to Holland ? In the second place, as to the materials by means of
which these Donatuses were printed-it is quite uncertain, and merely conjectural, what these materials were : as no authenticated copy of a Donatus, of
this period, is known to exist. There is nothing, also , in my apprehension , in the
text of the Cologne Chronicle which warrants a conclusion in favour of wood
more than of metal.
"
352 FOURTH DAY.
non-entities ? There was then no Van Zuyren, no Coornhert,
no Junius, nor Scriverius, to give a bias or prejudice to his
deposition. Something, unquestionably, must have been
distinctly impressed upon his mind when he told the Chronicler these things ; and it is a little too saucy or severe to
allow only one part of his evidence and not another-to say,
that when he mentioned Gutenberg and Mentz, he was
awake ; but that, when he spoke of Holland and the
Donatuses, he slumbered ! ...
LISARDO. Where are these Donatuses ? They seem convenient things for a typographical hypothesis.
The elder Scaliger has given us rather an amusing story about a supposed
Donatus, printed at Venice in 1428, upon the authority of the Chronicle of Rabbi
Joseph ; adding that it had escaped the notice and researches of every other
person. That mode of printing, (continues he) namely with wooden blocks, was
discovered in our country at Harlem ; ' and he afterwards speaks of a vellum
copy of this kind, coming into the hands of the younger Aldus : having this
imprint in ms.: Impressus est hic Donatus & Confessionalia primum omnium
A. 1450. Either (adds Schelhorn) I am altogether deceived, or that Rabbi
Jew told a bouncing falsehood ; no copy of such a Donatus has yet been discovered
by me, or satisfactorily heard of:' Amænitat. Literar. vol. ii . p. 327-9. It should
however be noticed that Angelus Roccha, in his Bibliotheca Vaticana, p. 411,
says that the younger Aldus shewed him this very Donatus upon vellum ; in
which Mariangelus Accursius had written a brief account of the origin ofthe art
of printing, and had introduced the gratuitous colophon above noticed. Struvius
says these Donatuses were printed by means of blocks of wood ; but he relies
exclusively upon Schelhorn. Bibl. Hist. Liter. Select. Edit. Jugler. vol. iii.
p. 2090. Würdtwein has also noticed the subject ; Bibl. Mogunt. p. 81. In
short, the Donatuses of Holland, supposed to have been printed before the year
1450, are as yet purely typographical desiderata ; in spite of the descriptions of
Seiz and Meerman : indeed the latter, according to Mr. Ottley, p. 246-7,
' appears to have had no better authority for his chronological arrangement of
the different Donatuses, than he had for the different editions of the Speculum,
in his arrangement of which [ latter] it has been shewn he was egregiously
mistaken. ' Nor can I, on a second and careful examination of that very ancient
and singularly- printed copy of a Donatus, in Lord Spencer's library, (see Bibl.
Spenceriana, vol. iii. p. 63) bring myself to think it was executed by means of
wooden blocks : however, from my description of it, such an inference might be drawn.
FOURTH DAY. 353
LORENZO. Rather ask, where are the Donatuses of Gutenberg, and of Sweynheym and Pannartz ?
LYSANDER. Lorenzo is correct in his interrogative method
ofreply. No one has satisfactorily shewn, in spite of Fischer,
that there is any existing Donatus of Gutenberg ; * and
although Sweynheym and Pannartz expressly declare that
the Donatus was the first work which ever exercised their
press, yet shew me the bibliographer who has enriched his
pages by a description of such an inestimable treasure ?+ I
• Donatus ofGutenberg. ] See p. 331, ante. I incline strongly to think that
the first printer of a Donatus, at Mentz, was Peter Schoiffher and for the
reason given inthe page just referred to, that the Donatus of Gutenberg is purely ideal.
+ a description of such an inestimable treasure. ] At length however I have to
announce, what may be considered a most important fact, connected with the
Donatus of Sweynheym and Pannartz ; and which, had it reached the ears of
Lysander however it would have justified him concerning the uniform silence of
all bibliographical writers respecting that early and tremendously scarce morceau
of typography-might have enabled him to produce a sort of electrical effect
upon the nerves of his audience. THE DONATUS of SWEYNHEYM and PANNARTZ YET EXISTS !
Hear from thy grave, great AUDIFFREDI, hear,
It breathes a soul to animate thy clay.
Yes, the DONATUS OF SWEYNHEYM AND PANNARTZ YET EXISTS ! I well
remember, at this moment, the emotions of delight-not unmixed, however, with
a little dash of incredulity-with which I read a passage in one of Lord Spencer's
letters to me, during his visit at Mr. Coke's, at Holkham, in the autumn of 1815
-wherein he observed that he had been in company with a gentleman who had
lately seen the Donatus of Sweynheym and Pannartz, in a private collection
in Italy.' His lordship was too acute a bibliographer not to institute immediately,
what is called, a close cross-examination : ' but that gentleman, M. Binda, an
Italian, turned out to be cross-examination- proof. He was familiar with the
types of the Soubiaco Press ; and on refreshing his memory with a sight of the
lovely copies of the works from that press, in the Spencer library, he was confirmed in the accuracy of the information which he had imparted at Mr. Coke's.
The copy of the Donatus, however, was imperfect : but fragments even of such
a treasure-a leaf, a page, a sentence, a line-why fragments, I say, of such a
treasure, would out-balance, in my poor estimation (and poor enough it will be
thought by the disciples of John Bollandus) seven- eighths of the relics of threefourths of the Saints recorded in the Acta Sanctorum ! Why do I indulge the
pleasing dream of this very copy, with all its imperfections on its head, ' finding
354 -FOURTH DAY.
do not however by any means disbelieve the former existence
ofvery early impressions of this tract. It is a short, useful,
and merely elementary treatise for school-boys ; and considering who were to be the possessors of it, it is not very
likely that the earlier editions of such a work should survive
the destructive hands into which they fell. * The discovery.
of the Distichs of Cato, another school-boy treatise, and
printed in the types of the Speculum, makes it very probable that such Donatuses ' also existed ; and, if so, they
were most probably printed in the same type. I will now
collect the other links in the chain of evidence.
PHILEMON. You seem to have forgotten the uniform concurrence of almost all the Printed Chronicles in favour of the
claims of Mentz ?
LYSANDER. True ; but, with very few exceptions, I
would not (as Lord Thurlow used to say) give a pinch of
its ultimate resting place within the glass doors of the library of the Noble Earl
just mentioned? And why, too, do I indulge another pleasing dream of the
' Meditationes Joannis de Turrecremata,' printed by Udalricus Gallicus in 1467,
eventually shaking hands with the same Donatus within the same glass-doors ?
There may be bubbles of the imagination more likely to break than these.
* the destructive hands into which they fell.'] Schelhorn speaks feelingly of
the fate of what may be called these Incunabula Typographica.' Perierunt
pleraque ejus generis opuscula : absumsit ea rerum edax tempus, truces devorarunt blattæ, furtim admotis dentibus arrosere mures, invidiosa corrupit caries,
puerulis plorantibus ab illas ruditer tornatas, quibus superbiebant, figuras, discerpenda concesserunt nutrices male sedulæ : imo nec ipsa rabida canum vis illis
pepercit.' Amanit. Literar. vol. ii. p. 328. Schelhorn then proceeds to notice
a specimen of block- printing of the Hora Matutina, once in the possession of
I. C. Scaliger, and described by his son Joseph, which had been cruelly ' lacerated by the atrocious tooth of time.' He gets into a fit of passion, at such
vestiges of destruction : Irascor crudeli isti molosso ! -alluding to the said
Hora. Rest, rest, perturbed spirit '-Joseph Scaliger was a giant in literature,
but a conjurer in bibliography. No copy of the Hora Matutina, printed by
means of blocks of wood, was ever in existence ; notwithstanding the elder
Scaliger made much of the book - Eas horas matutinas (says the son) plurimi
faciebat pater meus, tum propter matrem, tum etiam quod ille primus typographiæ fœtus esset. '
•
FOURTH DAY, 355
snuff' for the collected worth of three score and ten' of
such documents : * and I will tell you wherefore. They are
chiefly the evidence of Germans and Italians ; but, further,
not give apinch ofsnufffor the collected worth of three score and ten ' ofsuch
documents. ] This may be thought good round scoffing on the part of Lysander ;
but there is some truth in the observation. What dost think, chronicle-loving
reader, of the evidence of a certain Chronicle of Normandy, in which one
Morinus is said to have first commenced printing at Rouen, in 1443 !? See the
Extraordinaire du Mercure Galant, 1679, tom. viii. p. 216-228 -as extracted in
the Monument. Typog. of Wolfius, vol. ii. p. 1117-1122 . Paulus Langius (who
flourished about the year 1500) says, in his Chronicon Citicensis, (see the Script.
Hist. Germ. vol. i . p. 865) that the art of printing was discovered about the
year 1454 at Mentz, by Peter Gutenberg, a Knight.' The Chronicon Pontificum,
&c. printed by I. P. de Lignamine, at Rome, in 1474, is undoubtedly a most
valuable piece of evidence respecting the earliest printing at Mentz and Rome.
Mr. Singer has not failed to avail himself of the weight of the extracts from this
very rare book, as those extracts appear in the Bibl. Spenceriana , vol. iii. p. 251-4 ;
but it must be remarked that De Lignamine says nothing about the discovery of
the art at either place : he only tells us what Gutenberg, Fust, Sweynheym and
Pannartz, and Ulric Han, did in these respective cities. About the same time,
namely in 1474, appeared the Fasciculus Temporum, by Wernerus Rolewinck de Laer; who copied Marianus Scotus for the greater part, and whose work, as
Meuselius justly observes, appears to have been very popular three centuries
ago, from the numerous impressions of it. ' Bibl. Hist. Struvii, edit. 1782,
vol. i. p. 91. But this Fasciculus Temporum ' is clearly one of the ' pinch
of snuff' authorities, alluded to by Lysander ; since it is a mere compendium
of events-a mere historical memorandum book--and, in regard to the origin
of printing, it says, in the true spirit of brevity, about this time ( 1455 ) the
craft of printing was first found at Mentz.' I suspect this chronicle to have
supplied materials for almost every subsequent flimsy notice of the important
fact under consideration ; and was hence copied by Caxton, and the printer of
the St. Alban's Chronicle ; see the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. iv. p. 372 : but neither
Caxton, nor the St. Alban's printer, ' good souls,' ever applied their attention, or
directed their researches, to the solution of this knotty point. They had other,
and no doubt more palateable, fish to fry.'
<
"
Mr. Singer thinks-because I had before said (Typog. Antiq. vol. i . p. 149)
that this chronicle was printed in Dutch, in the year 1480-(and that it was so
printed, is evident from Jansen's treatise De L'Invention de l'Imprimerie, 1809,
8vo. p. 256) that, if the passage before cited were copied by the translator, ' it
would be almost conclusive evidence in favour of Mentz, ' p. 162, note : but I
reply, that it affords no conclusive evidence ' whatever, on either side- it only
proves that the translatorfaithfully performed his office of translation . It was the
mere echo of the original sound.
356 FOURTH DAY.
they are mere transcripts of each other. Their mode, too,
of mentioning the discovery of printing, is quite in the
fashion of a news-paper paragraph-and you will not be
angry with me if I withhold an immediate assent to a
statement of this nature. Besides, the colophons of Fust
The Chronicle of Eusebius, and other authorities arranged in battle- array by
Mr. Singer, would present rather a feeble front to the broad sword charge of an
antiquarian Life- Guard's-Man ; nor shall the Colonel of the regiment so drawn
up, Polydore Vergil, impress me with very high notions of the bottom ofthe troops.
The first edition of that Colonel's famous work, De Inventoribus Rerum,' of the
date of 1499, is in my possession, and now before me. On the recto of signature f v. the invention of printing is distinctly given (as Mr. Singer properly
remarks) to one ' Peter ' a German ; which German, in a subsequent impression,
is converted to John Gutenberg. What, however, if this Peter were Peter
Schoiffher? Let it pass : stet Ioannes Gutenbergius. ' But beware of ' subsequent'
impressions of this Polydore Vergil, whom all the old bibliographers were so fond
of quoting ; and who, whatever were his talents, (for such I dare not question,
when my friend H. P. , ' in rebus historicis Toλuμadeolalog, ' is always prompt
to commend them) is certainly not worth a fair good pinch of rappce ' on this
occasion : for, in his first edition, properly enough, he quietly says, Conrad a
German first printed in Italy, at Rome ; ' but master Daniel Elzevir, in his
edition ofthe foregoing work, of the date of 1671 , 12mo. ( I quote from an uncut
copy-penes me-and for which two guineas were given who would not give
two guineas for an uncut Elzevir ?) the same Polydore Vergil will have it that
Conrad (Sweynheym) began his typographical career at Rome in 1458 !' see
p. 103. I ask, again, is Polydore worth any thing beyond a mere pinch ' of
Scotch snuff-quoad the origin of printing ? Note a droll circumstance respecting this Elzeverian impression. It contains, in the frontispiece, a whole length
figure, in a furred gown and cap, with the letter A upon a tablet in his left hand :
having, beneath his right hand, the words Typographiæ Inventor :' and what
should this figure be but the received whole length portrait of LAURENCE COSTER,
published by Moxon, in his Mechanick Exercises, 1683, by Sallengre in his
Mémories de Litterature, 1715, 8vo. vol. i . p. 393, by Seiz in his Annus Secularis,
&c. 1740, and lastly by Luckombe in his miserable volume upon printing !? Let
the reader, however, who wishes to see a chronological list of authorities, giving
evidence, more or less weighty, respecting the origin of the art of printing,
consult Jansen's book, referred to in the next note. These authorities are divided
by Jansen into THREE CLASSES. Mr. Willet's quotations from Aldridge (Anstis
on the Garter, vol. ii . p . 161 , ) Fabian and Caxton (Archaeologia, vol. xi. p. 310,)
are all referable to the news- paper paragraphs of such works as the Fasciculus
Temporum.'
"
FOURTH DAY. 357
and Schoiffher were the fountain-head of these flimsey
notices : not that I tax the first Mentz printers with the
consequences ofa perversion, of what, in them, was both
commendable and just. But to take up the links of this
typographical chain.
From the date of the Cologne Chronicle, a period of fifty
years elapses before we have any further mention made of
the claims of Holland. This silence may be called fatal by
some ; but I see no reason to join in such a conclusion.
Who had ever described the productions of the Bamberg
Press, of the dates of 1461 and 1462, till they were first
noticed towards the middle of the last century ? In regard
to the relative importance of Harlem and Mentz, the latter
was unquestionably considered the popular city as having
given birth to the art of printing. Her situation, her comparative consequence and superiority to Harlem, in the
scale of cities at that period, and the beauty and number of
the works which issued from her presses, must have united
in shedding a lustre about her pretensions, to which Harlem,
or the Low Countries, could have never aspired. What,
in short, are the legitimate and undisputed works which
have marked the progress of printing in the Low Countries*
"
·
progress ofprinting in the Low Countries. ] The best list of works printed in
the Low Countries will be found at the end of Jansen's reprint of Meerman's
Treatises, 1809, 8vo. by Visser ; who makes the earliest of these works, with a
date, of the year 1472, printed at Antwerp. Among these printers of the dixsept Provinces-Unies des Pays-Bas avant l'année 1501.' JOHN Veldener
appears to make a very conspicuous figure. His Historia Sanctæ Crucis' of the
date of 1483, occupies 30 pages of vol . iii. of the Bibl. Spenceriana- as it is a
most curious and uncommon production ; but I am very far from intimating, with
Mr. Singer, that this printer may have executed the Speculum' and Catonis
Disticha.' Indeed, there is no resemblance in his types to the types of either
ofthese works ; and if a comparison be instituted, those of the latter works (which
Mr. Singer thinks were abandoned for a better fount) are in fact superior to
the types of the History of the Cross : see Mr. Singer's book, p. 139.
"
358 FOURTH DAY.
during the fifteenth Century ? They are, comparatively, few
and unimportant. But be this as it may: between the
years 1550 and 1560, one John Van Zuyren, a sheriff and
The bibliographical antiquary will forgive an extension of this note, by a
description of three curious and uncommon books, evidently the production of
HOLLAND or the Low COUNTRIES. Of the first, there can be no doubt. The
name and date (Holland, 1485) are incorporated in the colophon ; and Mr.
Singer is the lucky possessor of this not uncovetable volume. It is a folio, printed
in double columns, with wood-cuts ; being a Dutch version of the RomanceHistory ofTroy. Neither Maittaire, Panzer, nor Visser appear to have seen it ;
and the two latter borrow from the former-who relies exclusively upon the Cat.
Segefrid, Litt. D. n. 167. The type is of that square, full character, of which the
text of the Speculum ' may be considered the original model : and the cuts are
decidedly of the same school of art as we observe in the Canticles, Biblia
Pauperum, and Speculum ; especially in the former : being executed with thin,
sharp, horizontal lines. There can be no question, I think, of the genealogy of
the type and wood-cuts ; if so, and if Mr. Singer himself be disposed to admit of
an interval of forty years between the execution of these works, (although I grant
that this admission should be considered rather gratuitous, than peremptorily
binding) it will follow that the three works just specified (the particular objects
of Mr. Ottley's investigation) are of a date previous to the year 1450. There is,
unquestionably, a very essential chronological difference between Mr. Singer's
book and the Speculum,' &c.
The second production of Holland or the Low Countries, of which I purpose
gratifying the reader with some account, is an octavo volume of Hours, in the
Dutch language, in the possession of Mr. Freeling ; to whom it had been consigned from abroad. It contains signatures to s i, in eights ; so that we caunot
assign a date to it earlier than that of 1472. Like the Pliny described in Bibl.
Spenceriana, vol. ii. p. 271-2, this has also a manifestly surreptitious date, in ms. ,
at the end, thus :
Geprēt toe harlem bi mi lauīz iazon colter. M.cccc.l.
It is executed in long lines, and a full page contains 21 of them. There are
spaces for the capital initials, and the title , or head-line, on signature a i, is as follows :
Hier beghinnen die ghetiden van onfer
lieuer urouten
The type is evidently of the family ' of that of the Speculum ; although it be
shorter and narrower, and in some instances of a more angular appearance. The
formation of the a is conclusive in my own mind that this book was most probably executed in Holland : see the fac- simile in Mr. Ottley's work, p. 238 : at
FOURTH DAY. 359
burgomaster of the city of Harlem, wrote a treatise expressly
upon the pretensions of that city ; in which, although the
name of Coster does not appear (a circumstance, whence a
the same time I admit a resemblance, in this type, to that of the Legende Dorée
printed at Lyons in 1476 : see the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. iv. p. 523-6.
The third book which I have to describe, and which in all probability is a
production of the Low Countries, is a typographical curiosity of no ordinary
occurrence or trifling moment. It is the very book, for a description of which
Panzer (vol. iv. p. 179, no. 996) is exclusively indebted to Maittaire, vol. i.
p. 761. Maittaire has given a summary of the titles, or leading contents, of the
work ; but, as I suspect, not from personal examination ; as he would hardly have
suffered a volume, printed in such extraordinary, and with two different, founts
of letter, to have been registered as a mere matter of course-without comment
or note. This singular book is the property of Lord Spencer ; having been
recently obtained from abroad, through the means of Mr. Horn ; which able
bibliographer had imagined it, incorrectly however, to have been a block-book,
and executed with the types of the Speculum. It is a folio, without numerals,
signatures, or catchwords ; a full page, as far as the recto of fol . 44, containing
26 long lines. The type is large, (nearly one quarter of an inch in height) bold,
and angular ; decidedly gothic-and of which Mr. Horn says he never saw
aninstance before.' The t , or rather the finishing of the transverse stroke of it,
is met by a perpendicular line of more than one half the length of the whole
letter, which is very uncommon ; and forbids the classing of the volume among
the works from the press of PFISTER — although there be a prima-facie
resemblance to the character used by that printer.
"
As far as the reverse of folio 38, inclusively, the volume is occupied by the
text of the Singularia In Causis Criminalibus,' of Ludovicus [ Pontanus] De
Roma of which work, the first edition, with a date, is that of 1471, by Vindelin
de Spira ; see Panzer, vol . iii. p. 73. It may be necessary to mention, in the
volume under description, that the first leaf contains the preface of Ludovicus ;
and that on the reverse of the 38th leaf, at bottom, we read
Expliciūt singlria ludo, de roma.
On the recto of the ensuing leaf, is the metrical epitaph of Æneas Sylvius upon
Ludovicus de Roma, a jurisconsulist.' On the reverse of the same, or 39th
leaf, begins the apologetica invectiva ' of the same Ludovicus. This terminates
at the bottom of the 5th ensuing leaf, or the 44th from the beginning of the volume, with the word Explicit.' Thus far there is no particular ground of
doubt, suspicion, or wonder. Every thing hitherto has the decided appearance
of the mechanism of a press, locking up moveable or fusile types of metal : and
the marks of pressure, or indentation round the four sides of the text, as well as
an occasional indenture from small pieces of wood, are nothing (speaking on the
authority of the conductors of the press from which this work issues) but account-
360 FOURTH DAY.
more favourable construction may be gathered-as affecting
the general claims of Harlem) yet there could be no doubt,
in the writer's mind, that Holland, and not Germany, was
to be considered as the cradle of the typographical art.
Zuyren's treatise is unluckily imperfect ; but we have yet
to learn why his account is to be treated as an impudent
able appearances in the usual process of printing. There is one peculiarity,
however, on the reverse of the 10th leaf, which may be deserving of some attention. The beginning of the sixth line has a transverse mark, in black, indented by
means of the press, across the words hetic9 ē & sicut.' The indentation is
rather deep ; and if the finger be carefully drawn across it, the marks of the
pressure of some substance-are distinctly recognised. The parts of the letters,
where this mark comes, are quite cut through ; and there is a whitish scratchy
appearance at the bottom of this mark. Mr. Ottley thinks this must have been
the accidental result of something in the shape of a feather, torn from a pen, with
a portion of the quill. Mr. Bulmer made the experiment with a piece of string,
but this produced only a mark at right angles across a given word ; without any
appearance of severe indentation. However, the accident of something substantial coming across the face of the type, may probably account for such an
appearance.
Now comes the cause of astonishment. On turning over the 44th leaf-on
the very reverse of it—we are instantly struck with the appearance of a different
and comparatively clumsy type ; and with a page of text considerably elongated
and narrower than the foregoing. The type however is of nearly the same height,
but narrower ; the strokes of the letters are disproportionably thick, and the whole
leans as it were to the right. At first glance, the types look prodigiously as if
they had been cut upon wood ; but their undeviating conformity with each other—
making only such allowance as more or less pressure, or more or less ink upon
the face of the letter, might produce-forbids such a conclusion. Two things are
remarkable : the capitals correspond precisely with those of the Speculum : and the
small a, in one of its formations, is precisely the small a of the Speculum : although
the fount of letter be considerably broader and ' fatter' (as printers term it) than that
in the work last mentioned. The water marks are also those of the Low Countries ;
and one ofthem-of which Mr. Ottley has given a fac-simile, at p. 222, uo. 11.—
is the peculiar water- mark of Holland . The paper is stout and well manufactured.
How, now, are we to account for this singular variety ? Was the author (as has
been suggested to me) resolved only to make a paginary reprint of his MS. —and
was the previous type too tall and square to admit of it ? It is perhaps impossible
to advance a satisfactory solution . It remains to add, that the latter pages of
this work, as far as folio 59, inclusively, contain a sort of mélange, of which all
the component parts need not be very particularly enumerated : namely, Pius
ecundus, De Mulieribus Pravis '--with excerpts from Lactantius, Prudentius,
FOURTH DAY. 361
falsehood. His portrait, as given by Goltzius, is exceedingly prepossessing in his favour ; and shews nothing of the
organ offorgery!
Next to that of Zuyren, comes the evidence of Coornhert ;
as given in the prefatory matter of a translation of Cicero's
Offices, printed in 1561 , and dedicated to the Senators of
Harlem. This, which is called a flourishing account ' by
Mr. Willet, is, however, confirmatory of the same position. †
The text of Guicciardini has been adduced as equally supporting the claims of Holland ; but I own there does not
appear to me to be much weight in the testimony of the
Italian historian. It is little more than the declaration of
Juvenal-the same ' De Laude atque Epitaphiis Virorum Illustrium ' -- concluding with a jocose and a serious epigram, and excerpts from the fathers. These
epigrams may be acceptable :
Epygramma iocosum.
Deuorat agricolam rex, regê tyro. sed illum
Vsurator edit. comedit sed presbiter istum
Presbiteru meretrix, meretrice leno remordet
Lenonem caupo. sed cauponem parasitus
Illum sempedes : symia sempedes.
Epygramma serium.
Iam satis ē lusum. potior michi transijt etas
Me scio delusum si non conexero methas. (Fol. 56, rev.)
At the bottom of the 59th and last leaf, is the word Explicit.' The reverse is
blank. This is probably the most desirable volume, on the score of typographical
singularity, which I ever beheld. It is in the finest possible state of preservation.
* his account not to be treated as an impudent falsehood. ] See Mr. Ottley's
work, p. 176-7 ; and Mr. Singer's observations, p. 145. When the latter author
calls him the earliest authority adduced ' we must presume that he excepts the
Cologne Chronicle. Mr. Singer speaks with due reverence of the captivating
physiognomy of Van Zuyren, engraved by Goltzius from Hemskirk.
+ confirmatory of the same position.] This testimony goes no further than to
establish the general and popular belief at Harlem : he (Coornhert) honestly
owns that he did not expect to overcome the prejudice in favour of Mentz. '
Mr. Willet. Archæologia, vol. xi. p. 292. This is an admission on the part of Mr.
Willet, which goes a great way in favour of the reception of the evidence of
Coornhert.
not much weight in the testimony of the Italian historian. ] Guicciardini
362 FOURTH DAY.
hear-say evidence. At length we reach the important document of Adrian Junius ; * a physician, and a man ofprobity
and talent. I am not about to subscribe to the whole of the
narrative of Junius. I throw out of the consideration his
account even of such a man as Coster, (for it is thefact, and
not the name ofthe doer, that is most material to the point
at issue) and of his walking in a grove of beech trees, and
cutting out letters and words upon the bark of the same, &c.
This may, or may not, be true.t I am better pleased when
the narrator comes to matters offact, within his own experience : namely, when he comes to inform us that his tutor
Nicholas Galius (an old gentleman of a very retentive memory) told him when a youth, that he, Galius, when he was
a boy, had often heard one Cornelius, a bookbinder, and in
refers, (says Mr. Ottley), although unfortunately without specifying them, to the
testimony of certain writers on the subject, and to other records then in existence :'
p. 180. Mr. Singer thinks the information of Coornhert, and the reports
alluded to by Guiccardini, may have had their origin in the assertions of Van
Zuyren,' p. 145-6. Upon the whole, the evidence of Guiccardini is scarcely
worth the trouble of collecting ; but the inference of Mr. Singer is, I think, exceedingly questionable : and rather savours of the ingenuity of an advocate, than
of the impartiality of a judge. Mr. Willet opposes the account of Ludovicus
Carbo, in an edition of Pliny's Epistles of the supposed date of 1471 , to that of
Guiccardini, if (says he) that ofthe latter can be tortured to give countenance to
the claim of Harlem. ' Archæologia, vol. xi. p. 294. Mr. W. is here un peu
trop fort.'
"
* the important document of Adrian Junius. ] Upon the character of Junius, as
a competent and credible witness, see page 347 ante : for more particular remarks
upon the weight of his evidence, as well as upon the observations of his opponents, consult the very shrewd and judicious summing up ' of Mr. Ottley ;
p. 181, &c.
6
+ This may or may not be true. ] For my own part, I disbelieve it altogether :
and further, I think it of no consequence whatever in bearing upon the principal point under discussion. Mr. Singer has, both in a lively and successful manner, shewn the probability, at least, of Junius having borrowed this ambulatory story from the frolicksome dialogue of Anton-Francesco Doni, in his Mondi,
of the date of 1552 : see the Researches, &c. p. 119, where the dialogue is given in a note.
FOURTH DAY. 363
his early years an assistant in the printing office of Coster,
describe, with equal earnestness and agitation, the trials and
experiments made by his master in the infancy of the invention ofprinting. He shed tears, also, when he disclosed the
circumstance of Coster's office having been robbed : but
even this is of a subordinate, if not of a questionable,
nature. The testimony of Quirinus Talesius, a burgomaster,
is then adduced by Junius as corroborative of his own: he,
Talesius, having heard the same story from the same old
book-binder.
We now approach the evidence of Meerman, the most
learned and the most weighty of the writers in favour of
Harlem. This author substitutes the name of Laurence
Janszoon for that of Laurence Coster : the latter word,
Coster, having been most absurdly corrupted from that of
' Custos ,' by Junius and Scriverius. Meerman finds such
a man Custos, or Keeper of the Church of St. Bavon, at
Harlem, in the years 1423, 1426, 1432, and 1433 ; and
the gist of his argument is, that this man, however called,
was the inventor of printing with moveable types of wood.
Whether Coster or Janszoon printed with metal or wooden
characters, appears to me to be but of secondary consequence. The great question is, the art ofprinting at all: *
the knowledge of a process of multiplying copies with
unvarying accuracy, and by such substantial methods as
might keep them fixed and unchangeable. When once this
secret was discovered -when a medium was hit upon—when
* the art of printing at all : ] See the note at page 331, respecting the
first Donatuses. Mr. Ottley observes : if there be any truth in the assertion of
Junius, that Coster printed the Speculum previous to the establishment of printing at Mentz, he was the Inventor of Typography properly so called ; not of
moveable characters of wood only, as Meerman satisfies himself with insisting
úpon, but also of cast metal types. ' p. 198.
364 FOURTH DAY.
a method of pressure with quickness and correctness, had
been ascertained -when ink, of a certain quality, was
known —perhaps the discovery of a material, by which a
permanent effect could be produced from the ink, was not
of a very slow growth.
LISARDO. I begin to be anxious for your conclusion : as
it appears to me that Gutenberg printed with wooden
blocks as early as Laurence Janszoon : and the more the
pretensions of Harlem and Mentz are discussed, the greater
seems to me to be the puzzle attending their respective
claims to the invention of the art of printing.
PHILEMON. I incline to the conclusion of Lisardo ; and
cannot divest myself of the force of the written evidence, of
an ancient date, in favour of the Mentz Claimants. I wish
the archives of Harlem had produced something like those
of Strasbourg and Mentz.
LORENZO. I own there is something which strikes me as
very conclusive respecting the early attainment ofthe art of
printing at Mentz. Yet I cannot divest myself of the singularity of those productions called Block Books ; and of
the probability of their being of an extremely early date of
execution. Nor do I think it necessary, in support of the
claims of the Low Countries, that an uninterrupted chain of
evidence should be adduced, up to the period of 1473, when
the first dated book appears at Alost in Flanders. Might
not the Mentz and Harlem experiments have been carried
on at the same time-without the knowledge of each other?
LYSANDER. The observations of our worthy host are, to
say the least, of sufficient latitude, and of a sufficiently
accommodating nature : and leave as much in favour of one
place as of another. Perhaps it is the safer mode of reasoning ; as it has been justly observed that the origin of that
FOURTH DAY. 365
art, which throws such light upon every other discovery, is
itself involved in obscurity.' Remember, I do not choose to
draw any severe or sweeping conclusions in predilection of
one place more than of another ; and, after all, I am
not sure whether Harlem and Mentz may not each, at the
same time, have been the parent of a distinct progeny.
And as I cannot connect those publications, called BlockBooks, with any other series or character of publications -
and as the style of art which prevails in them seems to me
very distinguishable from that of Germany and Italy—I am
compelled, on the authority of Mr. Ottley, to allow the Low
"
the authority of Mr. Ottley. ] As this may be the last time of noticing the
labours of Mr. Ottley, I am anxious to prevail upon the reader to ascend a
trifling eminence with me, and to take a bird's eye view ofthe leading features of
his able work, as connected with the Costerian Controversy. I shall think my
Cicerone task well paid if he only examine carefully the objects which such a
view embraces. In the first place, from pages 102 to 108, Mr. Ottley appears
to have successfully shewn that Germany had no artists, in the supposed period
of the execution of the Speculum, the Canticles, and Biblia Pauperum, capable
of the graphic productions therein contained. It is remarkable ( he observes)
that in that part of the continent of Europe which comprises Germany and the
Netherlands, we have no account even of the painters who flourished within this
vast tract of country, previous to the close of the fourteenth century, and that all
the earliest among them were natives of the Low Countries.' The authorities,
adduced by Mr. Ottley, bear him out triumphantly in this conclusion ; see
pages 104-5. It is the more necessary to keep this in view, as Heineken, aud a
troop of bibliographers after him, assign the execution of the above Block Books
to German Artists. ( Dulce et decorum est pro patriâ mori '—and ‘ Dulce et
decorum est pro patriâ scribere'— thought the worthy Baron Heineken) Mr.
Ottley has also satisfactorily proved, at pages 142, and 155, that the three works
above specified ' were engraved in great part by the same wood-engraver,
although from the designs of different artists :' see also pages 162-165.
In the second place the priority of the respective editions of the Speculum is
settled by him upon a new and firm ground-not to be easily shaken. The
order is thus :
FIRST EDITION : the one hitherto called The Second Latin.'
SECOND EDITION : the one hitherto called The Second Dutch Edition.'
THIRD EDITION : the one hitherto called ' The First Latin Edition .'
FOURTH EDITION : called by Meerman first Dutch Edition.'
VOL. I. A a
366 FOURTH DAY.
Countries to have the fairest claim to the production of
them. Nor should we any more withhold our belief from
the supposed antiquity of these block-books, on the ground
Mr. Ottley, from the inference of Daunou, has also no very superficial reason
to think that the first edition of the Speculum might have been executed in
1440. It is however, I admit, a conjectural, or à priori, inference on the part of
Mr. O. but we have incontrovertible proof that there exists an edition of the
Canticles, with the printed date of 1470 --see Lambinet, Daunou, and Heineken.
The above would overthrow the supposition which Mr. Singer seems disposed to
indulge, that all that Mr. Ottley contends for is , the existence of the preceding
works before the year 1472. On the contrary, admitting that the fact of this
date be irrefragable, you may push your enquiry as much higher up as you
please. Mr. Singer (p . 128) is pleased to designate the style of art, observable
in the Biblia Pauperum, &c. as puerile efforts ;' but he must have forgotten his
deference to the opinion of Mr. Ottley when he made this remark. For myself,
upon the evidence only of the two fac- similes given in the Bibl. Spenceriana,
vol. iv. p . 553-4, I should draw a very different conclusion from Mr. Singer.
Again ; supposing Mr. Horn (says Mr. S. ) to be correct —namely, that he had
possessed copies of the Biblia Pauperum, Ars Memorandi, and Apocalypse, in a
volume of which there was a date of 1430 upon the exterior of the binding, (see
the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol . i . p. v, note) there is no proof that the Speculum is a
contemporary performance.' p. 131. Mr. Singer allows Mr. Ottley to have
bestowed scrupulous and accurate attention ' upon the type of the Speculum.
The same attention has surely been bestowed by him upon the embellishments of
that volume ; and if Mr. O. says the style of design, ' and knack of execution'
in the embellishments of the Biblia Pauperum are similar to those in the
Speculum, we may incline to the conclusion of the latter. The word knack ' is
a very potent one.
6
"
In the third place, Mr. Ottley contends that the type of the Speculum is
composed of that peculiar metal which so easily accounts for the appearances
and little varieties we observe in it : see his fac-similes at p. 249, and his conclusions therefrom in the following pages. At page 252, he thus sums up the
case, and calls upon posterity to deliver in their verdict. Upon the whole, the
conclusions to be drawn from the examination and comparison of the four early
editions ofthe Speculum, appear incompatible with any system of typographical
history, except such as has for its basis the ancient traditions recorded by Van
Zuyren, Coornhert, Junius, and Guicciardini ; with which they perfectly accord.
And I therefore am constrained to give my assent to the testimony of these
writers ; corroborated, as it appears to be, by so many striking particulars of
circumstantial evidence, and especially confirmed by the internal evidence ofthe
Speculum itself, the monument to which Junius refers. ' ' But, (adds he, with
the courtesy of a preux bibliographical chevalier) although such be the conviction
of my own mind, I do not flatter myself that it will be admitted by others, that
FOURTH DAY. 367
ofour not having any chronological series of printed books
to connect them with the latter productions of Harlem in
the fifteenth century, than we should our assent to the
legitimacy of the date of the Engravings of the two Cunio,
in the thirteenth century -on the score of there not being
any further testimonies of the same art till the period of
Finiguerra, in the fifteenth century. It is one thing to have
a certain proof, and another to have the best possible proof,
of the existence of any fact. The paucity of the number of
copies of these block-books, should also seem to be an additional argument in favour of their remote antiquity. — But
I see the ladies are giving proofs of being wearied with this
Dutch and German controversy, and I cease.
BELINDA. Quite enough appears to have been said upon
it ; but I own I am rather a COSTERITE !
ALMANSA. And I as frankly confess myself to be a
supporter of the CLAIMS OF MEntz.
LYSANDER. This is just as I expected : so let us proceed
I have satisfactorily determined this long-disputed question . The ultimate
establishment of Coster's pretensions, I leave to those who have leisure for so
arduous a task ; and who, if those pretensions be well founded, may, at some
future period, armed perhaps with evidence the existence of which is at present
unknown, wrest back the long-usurped wreath, to place it once more on the brow
of its rightful owner. ' page 252-3. This is manly and honest. Does the spirit
of the learned and liberal Meerman yet exist ? His son, I believe, yet lives,
and inherits all the worth of his father. Let him move the corporation of
Harlem to vote the freedom of that city to my excellent neighbour and friend,
the author of the foregoing quotation : and let them present such freedom in a
box composed of a stump of one of the trees (for stumps live for ever ! ) upon
the bark of which Laurence Janszoon made his earliest typographical experiments. ' Let them do this-or present it in a box of massive virgin gold and
let the fairest of the fair, among the Burgomaster's daughters, transport hither
such ' virgin ' donation ! ... My friend has, at any rate, deserved well ' of
Dutch reminiscence and Dutch gratitude. If they give him golden spurs, ' he
will have fairly won them.
·
"
:
368 FOURTH DAY.
to more satisfactory results from the discussion of topics
which are not so much involved in obscurity.
you
LISARDO. Are we ever to enter the Soubiaco Monastery?
LYSANDER. Patience, dear Lisardo, is a virtue of which
have yet to learn the practice, however you may assent
to it in theory. There are a few more doubtful objects which
appear in the distance of the allegorical landscape you are
so intent upon contemplating ..
LISARDO. What mean you ? I see nothing between Fust's
chateau, Coster's lath and plaister house, and the turrets of
the aforesaid monastery.
LYSANDER. Look again ; does the council chamber ofthe
Papal Court present nothing to your curious eye ?
LISARDO. I understand you ; and begin to comprehend
your hints. You allude to the Letters ofIndulgence, and
other publications of a like temporary nature, such as
Almanacks ; * of which the dates are sceptically early. I
own I am much puzzled by them.
* Letters ofIndulgence, and other publications of a like temporary nature, such
as Almanacks ; ] I am not aware that it is in my power to add any thing to the
full and faithful account of those extraordinary typographical curiosities—LETTERS
of INDULGENCE which appears in the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. i . p. xliv. , li.—
wherein fac- similes are given both of the larger and smaller founts of letter contained in them. Mercier, in his Supplément, p . 17, has published Meerman's
letter to him upon the subject ; to which an allusion is made in the work just mentioned. All that can be observed is, the smaller letter is wholly different
from any thing we know of a contemporaneous period ; and the larger lower-case
letter has a close resemblance to the type of Pfister's supposed Bible ; while the
capitals in the same document are essentially different. It may as well be
added, that Lord Spencer's two copies of these precious typographical relics are
each of the date of mcccclv.: and therefore were never before described. They
will perhaps always remain cruces bibliographica —incapable of satisfactory
solution.
A word respecting Almanacks. The publication alluded to by Mr. Singer—
of a brochure put forth by Fischer, respecting the discovery of a Calendar of the
printed date of 1457—is now before me : a copy of it having been sent over to
FOURTH DAY. 369
LYSANDER. Yet I see no reason to doubt of their
authenticity. Whether executed by means of plates of
metal, or fusile types-at Rome, at Mentz, or at Bamberg—
Lord Spencer by Mr. Horn ; accompanied with a few ms. notes, by the same able
hand, not wanting in truth and pungency. Fischer observes that those bibliographers are mistaken who think that the earlier presses were employed only
upon works of greater interest ; ' and as an Almanack for 1457 , in order to be
effectual, must have been published quite at the opening of the same year, it
would follow that the present was executed before the Psalter of the same date—
which was not finished till the middle of that year.' It is a fragment only which
Fischer publishes, and of which he gives a fac-simile. The title is thus :
'Coiuctions &opposicões solis et lune ac miucões electie nec no dies p[ro ] medicis
laxatiuis sumendis In anno dui Mcccclvij Cui⁹ b lĩa dñicalis xiiii aure9 nūs Interuallu ix ebdomide Concurrentes vna dies. ' The preceding is in 2 lines and a little
more than the half of a third of about eight inches and three eights in length.
There are 9 more lines of a similar length, comprehending the months January,
February, and March, beneath. The type has a strong resemblance to that of
Pfister ; and there can be no doubt of the original being metal. Fischer however
is wrong in calling it le premier monument typographique, en caractères
mobiles, avec date, connu jusqu'à ce jour -as the Letters of Indulgence, in
every respect a similar monument,' are entitled to precedence.
"
•
There is another publication of a temporary nature ' to notice. It is a metrical
Exhortation infavour of a Crusade against the Turks in 1454. Mr. Singer is the
first writer who has made us acquainted with Von Aretin's account of this highly
curious typographic discovery ; ' and Mr. S. thinks, as this also is printed in the
same large letter as the Almanack described by Fischer, namely, in the type
used by Pfister, that that printer began his typographical career much earlier
than is supposed ; or that Gutenberg was in fact the printer both of these and
of the Bible hitherto considered as the production of Plister's press. I hope to
prove that the latter inference is utterly untenable. We shall quickly hold
parlance with the Father of the Bamberg press. Meanwhile, reverting to the
• Exhortation ' published by Aretin, it is certainly singular that four of the leaves
should be printed on both sides ; but the reader must consult Mr. Singer's book
for a minute description of this extraordinary document.
As closely connected with an account of fugitive pieces of an early date, let
me not fail to make the reader acquainted with that prodigiously rare typographical morceau, containing the DECLARATION OF THE ELECTOR DIETHER
AGAINST ADOLPHUS COUNT OF NASSAU, printed in 1462- unquestionably in
the office of Fust and Schoiffher, and with their smallest type . This declaration
or proclamation, which Schwarz only, of all the bibliographers, appears to have
seen, has been recently transported into the SPENCER LIBRARY ; where it now
rests within the leather-covered case which encloses the Letters of Indulgence.
Rare and most delectable union ! But to the point. Lehmann, as noticed by
370 FOURTH DAY.
there is prima-facie evidence of their being genuine documents. They are, however, extremely isolated documents :
but, as I have again and again observed, not the less worthy
Marchand, Schwarz, and Würdtwein, is the first writer who has made mention
of this curiosity : see his Chronicon Spirense, lib. vii . cap. cv.: or p. 957, as
quoted by Hoffman in his Lexicon Universale, vol . iv. p. 549, col. 2 The object
of the Declaration was this. Diether was attacked by Adolphus of Nassau, in a
competition for the Archbishopric of Mentz ; and on retiring to Höchst, between
Frankfort and Mentz, he affixed , to the portico of the palace and the church,
this declaration of his rights. It was also sent to the magistrates of Spire,
to invite their aid ; and is dated the Tuesday after the Sunday Latare in 1462.
Lehmann thought it, inaccurately, the first specimen of printing. Schwarz says
he saw a copy of it , upon paper, in the library of Professor Miegius at Heidelberg, and calls it a small work hardly exceeding 2 sheets or 4 leaves.' He
conceives it to have been executed at Mertz. Prim. Quæd. pt. ii . p. 13.
Marchand supposed it was only a brochure, of which it would be difficult at
this day to discover a copy, and consequently to determine its form.' Hist. de
l'Impr. p. 38. See also the Act. Erud. Lips. 1739, p. 586, where (according
to Würdtwein, Bibl. Mogunt. p. 80) it is described as a very small production
ofthe press of Fust and Schoiffher ; but of such rarity that scarcely any vestige
ofit appeared at that time.'
"
"
6
This precious document is , in fact, only a large sheet, about 2 feet in length,
by nearly 16 inches in width. The copy under description is in its pristine state,
and perfectly clean and unadulterated ; with the exception, of a word, in the 75th
line, between those of gesworner ' and lehēmā, ' being concealed by a broad
black line, evidently of a later date, and executed with a pen. The printing is
on one side only ; being, in length, 18 inches and six-eighths, by about 12 and a
half in width. In the whole, 106 lines ; beginning thus :
[A] llen vnd iglichen fursten. Grauen. herren. prelaten. &c. &c.
and concluding as follows :
Geben zu hoeste vnder vnserm vffgedrucktem Ingesiegel am dinstag nach dem
Sontag Letare. Anno domini Millesimo quadringentesimo sexagesimo secundo.
There can be no doubt of the date being that of the issuing of the declaration ;
and equal certainty appertains in the printing of the document in the office of
Fust and Schoffher. It is therefore the second specimen of the smallest type
used by these printers : the Constitutions of Pope Clement V. of the date of
1460, exhibiting the earliest specimen of the same type. Mr. Horn, from whom
Lord Spencer obtained it, observes in his letter, sent with it , that it was not till
between the years 1782-4, that a copy of it was found in the archives of the then
imperial town of Ratisbon. This is the second known copy ofit, and such is the
demand for it at Mentz, both in consideration of its antiquity in printing, and its
historical importance, that the University of Mentz applied to me for it last year,
FOURTH DAY. 371
of credit on that account. Their being also published for
temporary purposes, rather confirms their authenticity : for
a similar document, of a general and didactic character,
might have excited just grounds of suspicion. Admit
therefore that those cabinets are much enriched by the
possession of such singularly rare and curious memorials of
the early exercise of the art of printing.
At length we come to the notice, in this bibliographical
panorama, of yonder homely building, where the BAMBERG
PRESS was first put in motion. The name of PFISTER, the
father of that press, is held in no small veneration by
myself and I have a shrewd suspicion that he printed
much earlier than is imagined. His Fables ....
PHILEMON. Hold ! I saw them at Paris. They are of
the date of 1461.* The learned and amiable librarian of the
offering me any books in return which I might think proper to select ; provided
they were not Mentz productions.' This letter is dated Frankfort, March 1816.
It was of course obtained at a price proportionate to its extreme rarity.
·
Before however I dismiss the account of publications of this perplexing and
doubtful aspect, let me just observe that the MS. by Paul of Prague,' noticed
by Mr. Singer at page 159- in which mention is made of printing, of some kind,
in the year 1459, at Bamberg-has been referred to in the Bibl. Spenceriana,
vol. i. p. 8. There can be no doubt, I submit, that the press of Pfister was here
alluded to.
* His Fables . . . . of the date of 1461.] This prodigiously rare book was first
described by Saubertus in his pretty little manual (but, in truth, a flimsy performance) entitled Hist. Bibl. Reip. Noribergensis, 1643 , 18mo. p . 116. It is
mentioned in a parenthesis, just at the head of the list of early books, and beneath
the following title- Moguntiæ anno 1460, & seqq. ut ex typis colligere est,
opuscula varia, quorum supra in rarioribus nostris mentio facta'-thus : (NB. Quæ
ligno incisa sunt, huc non refero ; v. g. Libellum fabularum & similitudinum, ubi
sub finem rhythmos hos legeris :
Zu Bamberg disz Buchlein geendet ist,
nach der Geburt vnsers HErrn JEsu Christ,
da man zahlt tausend vnd vierhundert Jahr
vnd im ein vi sechszigsten, dz ist waar:
An Sant Valentinus Tag:
Gott behut vns vor seiner Plag,
372 FOURTH DAY.
Royal Collection told me that, previous to the removal of
this unique gem to its original destination-the Wolfenbuttel library-he used, every morning and evening, ( the
coming and parting day,' as Virgil's shepherd sings ) to
take a fond and anxious gaze upon it : imagining that
every look would be the last. But I apologiseLYSANDER. There is no occasion. I can forgive the
thousand sensible vibrations which the very mention only of
Hartlieb's Chiromancy, and the Speculum, are then noticed as similar performances ' in wood. Heineken, who saw this book in the Wolfenbuttel Library,
and who has given a fac- simile of the first cut-with these subjoined verses —
Einsmals ein Affe kam gerät
:
Do es viel guter musefand, &c.
quotes the description of Saubertus, but differs from those who think that description to have been given from an examination of a copy in the Nuremberg Library.
I incline to this latter opinion, and consequently am at issue with the Baron
Heineken for why should Saubertus, expressly writing the History of the
Nuremberg Library, be so particular in his description of the Fables of Pfister,
and so briefin his notice of the Speculum, &c. ?-except that he had seen the one
and not the other—and, if so, had , in all probability, seen it in the very library
the history of which he publishes ! This however is not a very material point ;
except it go to shew that the Wolfenbuttel copy was formerly the Nuremberg one,
as De Murr, in the first volume of his Memorabilia Bibliothecar. Publicar.
Norimbergens. p. 258-9, passes this important volume sub silentio.' Heineken
further informs us (what was probably to be expected) that these Fables, like all the
rest of the early Bamberg books, are executed with metal types, and not with
blocks of wood-as Saubertus had erroneously conceived." He says also that the
volume contains 101 cuts, resembling, in the style of art, the one of which he has
given a fac-simile. p. 276. I presume that the book is pretty much in the same
style of execution as is the Biblia Pauperum, from the same press, noticed at
vol. i. p. 100 of the Bibl. Spenceriana.
"
The pathetic circumstance, above-mentioned by Lorenzo, is not purely ideal.
Afriend of mine told me that Monsieur Van Praet (and to his immortal honour
be it spoken ! ' ) had betrayed those marks of emotion, described by Lorenzo,
previous to the restoration of this unique gem' to its ancient repository. It
had been seized upon by the French in their former plunder of Prussia ; and it
now shines
(
velut inter ignes
Luna minores
upon the shelves of theWolfenbuttel library : a memento of RETRIBUTIVE JUSTICE.
FOURTH DAY. 373
this keimelion must excite in the bosom of a thorough bred
bibliographer. To return. Of Pfister we have only two
works which bear dates : namely, that of the Fables just
mentioned; and that of the Four Biblical Histories, of the
date of 1462. His Biblia Pauperum is a conjectural document, but his Belial* carries his name along with it. Yet I
* the Belial.] A full account of this curious volume is given in the Bibl.
Spenceriana, vol. iii . p. 181. It is without date, but has the name of Albert
Pfister expressly subjoined thus :
Albreht pfister zu. Bamberg.
Mr. Singer had probably forgotten this second book in which the name of Pfister
appears, (see his Researches, &c. p. 159) otherwise he would hardly have ventured to class the Bible-printed in the very types with which all these early
Bamberg books are executed—and in two of which the name of Pfister is expressly
mentioned as the printer of them-he would hardly, I say, from a pure enthusiastic attachment to Gutenberg-have ventured to class the aforesaid Bible (fully
described in the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. i. p. 7.) among the productions of
Gutenberg's press !? What will not a love of hypothesis lead to ?-and what
fourth typographical fount of letter, (for Gutenberg, if he printed this Bible,
already appears to have used three) ' unclaimed and unbaptised,' will next be
considered as the genuine property of the adventurous Gutenberg?'
The earth hath bubbles as the water has,
And these are of them.
To conclude ; first as to Pfister, and secondly as to the type used by him.
Upon the maturest consideration, I incline to consider the Almanack of the date
of 1456-7, and the Exhortation to the Turks, of the date of 1454, as the probable
first fruits or earliest experiments of Pfister's press ; and that, when the ms. of
Paul of Prague (now preserved in the public library of Cracow) makes express
mention of some one, in the year 1459, being occupied in the impression of a
Bible,' that ' quidam ' must have an exclusive reference to ALBERT PFISTER .
and, in imitation of the Mentz Bible of 1455, being without date, and without
name of printer, so he, Pfister, chose to publish his own Bible with the like
characteristics. This really strikes me, on revision, as being orthodox bibliographical doctrine. Secondly, and briefly ; as to the type of Pfister it was the
common, large, square, missal type of the day ; and the original, in ms. , was
certainly the model, both of that particular type, and of what we see in the
Bible of the supposed date of 1455. The difference is only in size . There are the
same features, and the same limbs ; but in the productions of Pfister they assume
a more colossal form. Lord Spencer possesses all the known works of Pfister,
with the exception of his Fables ; and of that very work, he once had something
beyond a mere visionary glimpse !
-
374 FOURTH DAY.
cannot help feeling a secret intimation, or rather strong
persuasion, that the active spirit of every kind, which is now
abroad, will lead to still further discoveries connected with
the works of my favourite Pfister :-the first printer in
Germany who introduced wood-cuts-of a character and
execution, however, essentially different from those of the
Low Countries, and very many degrees inferior.
Hark ! ...do I hear the vesper-chant of the monks in the
SOUBIACO MONASTERY ?! See how picturesquely gray the
turrets of that venerable abode yet appear ! -turrets, consecrated, in the estimation ofthe man of thorough feeling and
taste, by the recollection of the useful and ingenious arts
which were once exercised within them !
LISARDO. Immortal SWEYNHEYM AND PANNARTZ ! ...
am I at length, with no unhallowed foot, to step over the
threshold of the abode wherein ye first exercised the new
and ' marvellous art' of printing ?! Proceed-and be not
sparing in your narrative, dear Lysander.
LYSANDER. I crave your mercy, Lisardo. With all
the love and reverence which I profess towards the
Fathers ofthe Roman Press, I must remember that many
a worthy typographical wight is yet to be noticed—and that
the greater part of the time, allotted for this day's discussion, has already gone by : fugit irreparabile tempus ! '
Remember the admonition of Virgil, my brave Lisardo—
< past moments are irrevocable.'
C
PHILEMON. A well-o-day ! Let us hang up lamps, numerous and gorgeous as the lanterns of the Chinese-and let
our night, as the day dies off, emulate the warmest blushes
of Aurora. Lorenzo will ...
LORENZO. Do every thing that you wish. Each Argand
vehicle shall be put in requisition-even the billiard-table
FOURTH DAY. 375
shall be stripped of its intended illuminators : and the entire
produce of a whale fishery shall be devoted to throw lustre
upon Lysander's discourse !... I own, I feel mightily pleased
now that you have touched the Sweynheym and Pannartz
chord!
<
LYSANDER. Give me back, then, the play of lungs and
power of articulation which I possessed at the commencement
ofthe day. Do not mock me, fellow student.' Will even
the splendour arising from the conflagration of the printing
offices of Messieurs Bensley and Bulmer-and those of
Messieurs Strahan and Nichols to boot-resuscitate exhaustion ? "Tis the inner oil of which I stand in need : so I pray
you let the lamps of the billiard table rest in peace. We
will disport ourselves anon with that pastime ..... But we
are now in the Sublacensian Monastery. *
in the Sublacensian Monastery. ] This monastery, the FIRST SPOT in Italy in
which THE ART OF PRINTING was exercised, is minutely described both by
Montfaucon and Schelhorn. In the former the description is accompanied with
a small copper-plate, pretty much in the wretched (Vander- Gucht) style of ornament seen in Hearne's works ; and which, the worthy Tom ' would have republished, on the score of its beauty, if it had fallen in with his pursuits : see the
Diarium Italicum, p. 338-40. In Schelhorn , the description is of the time of
Cardinal de Turrecremata, the head of the Monastery, and narrates a visit
paid to that Cardinal by Pope Pius II. De Optimor. Scriptor. Edit. p. 74, note :
taken from Pi II. Pont. Max. Comment. rer. memorab. quæ ipsius temporibus
contigerunt, cum Jacobi Piccolominei, Card. Pap. rer. gestar. &c. Comment. ac
Epist. 1614, fol. Franck. recus, lib . vI . p. 161. Suffice it here to observe, that
this monastery, situated in the Campagna di Roma, and about 30 miles distant
from that metropolis, is built upon a huge and steep rock. But for the forementioned visit : The Pope was received with great pomp by all the monks, with the
Cardinal at their head ; for, in the memory of man, never was there an instance
known of any previous papal visit . The town (of Soubiaco) has rather a numerous
population ; and the ascent from thence to the Monastery is about 2000 paces,
along an abrupt acclivity. At the top of the rock upon which the monastery is
built, a part of it only-comprehending the Chapel and the Offices, &c. — is
tolerably plain but mid-way down, surrounded by frightful precipices, far from
human ken,' are the cells of the monks, and the refectory ; while, to the right,
is the excavated cell, almost inaccessible, where St. Bendict made his bed of
376 FOURTH DAY.
The only works executed here, of which we have any
authentic account, are a Donatus, without date ; the Institutes of Lactantius, printed in 1465 ; St. Austin, ofthe
City ofGod, in 1467 ; and Cicero ofOratory, without date:
each in a folio form. I mention these works in the order in
stone, and reposed his emaciated body. They yet relate (that is, upwards of
340 years ago) many miracles of the saint, and shew the bell with which the
devil strove to wean him from good works. About 20 monks (chiefly Germans)
inhabit the place : they never eat flesh, but live upon olives and bread, with a
few vegetables ; it being thought luxury to eat even a couple of eggs. Their
wine is much qualified with water ; and with this simple diet their tables are
usually spread. The time devoted to meals and to sleep is equally short : the
greater part of the day being consumed in the offices of religion . Many of the
present monks are aged , (some of them eighty years old) with intelligent countenances, and extremely instructive in their discourse : their chief care being
"
To sleep in peace, and rest with God.'
But we are deviating somewhat from the papal visit : When Pius observed an
extensive and ripe vintage purpling ' the plain whereon the church stood, and
planted with prodigious difficulty in the flinty ribs ofthe rock, with a wine press
in the middle, and an olive plantation around, and the white monastery presenting its inviting front, he enquired who was the founder of this recent institution? '
The answer given was, that a certain Spanish Bishop of the name of Silvius,
a Portuguese by birth, equally disgusted by the pomp of office , and with the
cares of this world, renounced his church and reserving for himself a certain
annual pension, from which he might lead an honest life, took up his residence
among the Soubiaco monks, and devoted his superfluous wealth to the erection
of a new monastery, and the plantation of a vineyard, &c. Pius was pleased to
express his approbation of the good resolution and good conduct of the Spanish
Bishop ; and concluded his visit by a minute inspection of the whole building, by
ordering the church service to be performed, and by kissing every spot which
report had consecrated as having been touched by St. Benedict. He then
showered down, upon the venerable heads which sought them, his spiritual
blessings ; and, well pleased with his reception, descended to the town and slept
there the same night.' According to Burchard it appears that Alexander VI. in
1501, gave the patronage of this monastery, in perpetuity, to the Borgia family.
Bibliographically speaking, the descriptions both of Montfaucon and of Schelhorn
are provokingly defective ; as no mention is made, not a conjecture even advanced, respecting either the printing office or the preservation of the types.
The author of the foregoing narrative preferred, I fear, the wine press to the
book press ! Consult also Mr. Beloe's Anecdotes of Literature, &c. vol. iv.
p. 146-9.
FOURTH DAY. 377
which they are given by the printers themselves ; as that
order or list appears in the Commentary ofDe Lyra upon
the Bible, of the date of 1471-2.* It is undoubtedly a most
extraordinary circumstance, that a press, so skilfully conducted, so admirably well furnished with Greek and Gothicoroman founts of letter, should, after the fore-named productions, appear to have absolutely perished. There is no
* Commentary of De Lyra upon the Bible, ofthe date of 1471-2. ] See the list
of the books printed by Sweynheym and Pannartz, up to this period, as prefixed
to De Lyra's Commentary, in the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. i . p . 160. Of the
Donatus, 300 copies were printed ; and of each of the other works, above specified, only 275 copies. A pretty correct idea of the roman type used in the
Soubiaco books may be formed from the fac-simile of it in the Bibl. Spenceriana,
vol. i. p. 205 ; but the Greek type, at p. 206, is very much too heavily executed.
Audiffredi has been equally unsuccessful in his fac- simile of the Greek type, and
has completely failed in that of the Roman : see the copper- plate at the end of
his Editiones Romanæ. Laire is, in this respect, preferable to Audiffredi. Spec.
Typ. Rom. p. 123, plate. The Greek type first used by Sweynheym and
Pannartz at Rome (namely in the Aulus Gellius of 1469) is faithfully represented in the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. i. p. 267. The SOUBIACO Books must not
be dismissed without an observation or two, strictly bibliographical. As far as I
can discover, no one has as yet examined them on the score of paper, watermarks, and press-work : - but the first two points may be taken together. The
three books just mentioned are not printed upon paper of the same quality, nor
do they exhibit the same water-marks. The whitest and finest paper seems to
be that of the LACTANTIUS ; and it contains the water mark of a Horn, or Cornucopia, suspended by a straight line : not noticed by Santander among the
Italian water- marks used by Sweynheym and Pannartz : Pl. iv. nos. 98, 99, 100,
101 : but resembling somewhat the water- mark in the Turrecremata of 1467 :
see De Murr, vol. i. p. 261. The ST. AUSTIN is printed upon thicker paper, of a
more creamy tint, and has the water-mark of a Cross-Bow ; different however
from no. 98 of Santander. The Cicero, DE ORATORE has two water- marks ;
just where the leaves are folded-which probably denote it it to be a quarto-and
these marks are a Cardinal's Hat, and the Shears or Scissars : the latter of which,
Santander, with too much rashness, seems to attribute exclusively to Ulric Han ;
the former is no. 100 of Santander. Supplément au Catalogne, &c. p. 6, Pl. iv.
In regard to the press work, the latter is the more unskilfully executed. The
two former merit all the commendations which Maittaire, re-echoed by Freytag,
has bestowed upon them. Adpar. Literar. vol . ii. p. 853. It may be further
remarked that Sweynheym and Pannartz, in their subsequent productions at
Rome, never exhibited that regularity of register, especially in the perpendicular
of the right-hand margin, which is observable in the Soubiaco Books.
378 FOURTH DAY.
vestige of any other work containing the same fount of
letter ; nor did the printers of the foregoing, when they
removed to Rome, * in 1467, carry thither those founts ;
but printed with a more purely roman fount, yet destitute
of Greek characters-as the Familiar Epistles of Cicero,
of the same date, ( 1467) are without them : nor do we see
any Greek letters in the productions of Sweynheym and
Pannartz till the Aulus Gellius of 1469 -from which,
the preference may be given to the Sublacensian Greek
fount.
ALMANSA. Are we to undestand, then, that the work of
Cicero, just mentioned, is the earliest book printed at Rome?
Such a question may not be thought very obtrusive.
LYSANDER. It is not in a well-bred Lady's power to be
obtrusive ; and Almansa knows not what rudeness is. The
question has been before started, and has given rise to a
pretty sharp controversy-namely, whether ULRIC HAN, of
removed to Rome. ] Mr. Beloe thinks, and with justice, that Sweynheym
and Pannartz were invited to Rome by Pope Paul II. They established their
printing office in THE HOUSE of PETRUS DE MAXIMIS, ' as their colophons frequently denote. It is by no means an incurious circumstance (observes Mr.
Beloe) that the palace of the family of Maximis now exists at Rome in the same
situation, and employed for the same purposes, as when Sweynheym and
Pannartz were suffered to print in it. What is allotted to the business ofprinting does not make a part of the regular building, but it has probably been used
ever since as a printing house. Mr. Edwards informs me, that he found a printer
established in it, who assured him that he could unequivocally ascertain five
different masters of printing, who had exercised their profession in it before his
time.' Anecdotes of Literature, &c. vol. iv. p. 108. These printers must have
made haste in procuring a new fount of letter in order to publish the very year
in which they put forth the St. Austin ; namely in 1467. Their first Roman
production was however, comparatively, a small one : see the Bibl. Spenceriana,
vol. i. p. 318. The Father Laire ' will have it that Sweynheym and Pannartz
whipped and spurred their typographical coursers towards Rome as hard as they
could- not being able to endure the idea of Ulric Han's running away with the
honour of establishing the first press there. ' This is one among the manyfabliaux
in the Spec. Hist . Typ. Rom. p. 67-8.
FOURTH DAY. 379
Vienna, who printed the Meditationes Johannis de Turrecremata at Rome in the same year, 1467 —or whether the
fore-mentioned printers-have the honour of executing the
first printed book in the Metropolis of Italy ? I own the
point to be rather a puzzling one ; * but incline to give the
Soubiaco printers the honour of being the Parents of the
Roman press ; although there can be no question about the
superior, and indeed astonishing, rarity of the work just
mentioned as the first production of Ulric Han. We will
however not mix up Sweynheym and Pannartz with Ulric
Han. Reverting therefore to the former, let it be mentioned
that, from the years 1467 to 1475, inclusively, those able
* the point to be rather a puzzling one. ] Meerman and Laire worked themselves up to a persuasion that, while Sweynheym and Pannartz were busied in
their typographical experiments at the Soubiaco press, Ulric Han came to Rome ;
(towards the beginning of the year 1466) and that, previous to the date of the
Turrecremata of 1467, he was busied, as well in preparing the bizarre decorations for that work, as in publishing a few brochures, without dates, by way of
trials of his skill. See the Orig. Typog. vol. i. p. 252 ; Spec. Hist. Typ. Rom.
p. 71-2 ; and particularly the judicious remarks upon the improbability of either
circumstance, by Santander, in his Dict. Bibliogr. Choisi du xvme Siecle ; vol. i.
p. 137-8, 144. The sensible Mercier de St. Leger is even affected with the
supposed reasonableness of Meerman's hypothesis ; but when he talks of Ulric
Han's grand volume de 1467 ' it is evident that he reckons without his host.'
Neither Meerman nor himself had ever seen it. Supplément, p . 35, edit. 1775. It
does however appear somewhat extraordinary that the Cardinal de Turrecremata,
the Head ofthe Soubiaco Monastery, should have given his Meditations ' to be
printed by Ulric Han, at Rome-and not by Sweynheym and Panartz —with
whom he had probably often quaffed more than one flagon of good wine ’ ·
manufactured at the fore-mentioned vintage ! I have rather a sly and shrewd
suspicion that the withdrawing of the ' Fratres Typographici' from this monastery
might have arisen, in part, from some little misunderstanding about the Meditations ' of the Cardinal : who, peradventure, might have insisted upon wood-cut
decorations-which the worthy Sweynheym and his mate were incapable of
producing. In fact, no work printed by them exhibits the least graphical ornament. Had they sworn by the sword, ' or by the puncheon, never to introduce
such ornaments ? I do not forget the arabesque border round some copies oftheir
Suetonius of the date of 1470 ; but hereupon a sentence has already been past
in the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. ii. p. 382-3 ; —against their legitimacy.
380 FOURTH DAY.
and industrious printers -although visited by severe misfortune -pursued their steady and meritorious course * in
giving to the world a series of the most magnificent and
valuable impressions of sacred and classical works which
ever adorned the annals of the press. Poetry and prose
* From the years 1467 to 1475, inclusively,—pursued their steady and meritorious course. ] A very long note might grow out of this observation, but there is
no necessity to be outrageously wire-drawn upon it. Sweynheym and Pannartz
went on merrily (let us hope and believe) together, till the year 1474, when they
separated : the Latin version of the first five Books of Polybius, by Perottus, of
the date of 1473, being the last public proof of their partnership : see the Bibl.
Spenceriana, vol. ii . p. 282. Sweynheym is afterwards supposed to have practised the art of copper-plate engraving ; not, however, as Laire idly intimates,
from any jealousy of the fame of Ulric Han in the same department. The principal proof in support of such inference is drawn from the preface of the
Geography of Ptolemy, printed by Buckinck at Rome, in 1478 ; from which it
appears that having devoted three years to the labour of instructing mathematical men how they might execute these plates, he (Conrad) died. ' See this excessively rare book fully described in the B. S. vol . iv. p. 537, 540. In the year
1475, Pannartz produced an edition of Seneca's Epistles, of Herodotus, (in
Latin) of Hierocles, of Josephus, (in Latin) and of the Sylvæ of Statius, with his
own name solely subjoined ; and is supposed to have died in the year 1476, after
he had executed the first volume of an edition of St. Jerom's Epistles, -the
second volume of which was finished by Laver. The Spencer library contains a
copy of each of the foresaid books of the date of 1475. In two of them (the
Seneca, and the Statius) Pannartz introduced a new and smaller fount of letter : the
omission of which, however, might have done him more credit than its adoption.
The union of such talent as was exbibited by, and the production of such
works as we owe to, the press of SWEYNHEYM and PANNARTZ, are really almost
wonderful to think upon : -nor can we bestow less admiration upon the invincible enthusiasm with which these printers carried on their works, after the total
ruin that threatened them upon the completion of the commentary of Nicolas
De Lyra upon the Bible . This luckless speculation overwhelmed them, like
a sudden torrent, with 1100 ponderous folios-for which there was no demand,
and of which the very shelves of their warehouses groaned beneath the weight!
In their supplicatory letter to Pope Sixtus IV. , penned by the usual kind editor
of their works, John Andreas Bishop of Aleria, poor Conrad and Arnold seem
bitterly to bewail the inauspicious star which directed them to the biblical
labours of the interminable Nicolas De Lyra. See the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. i.
p. 160. I cannot but think that the Pope lent them pecuniary aid, or their
press must have stood still whereas it was as active as ever throughout the years
1472-3. It is worth observing, as Lichtenberger (Initia Typog. p. 148-9) has
FOURTH DAY. 381
alike grace the pages of their resplendent volumes ; and to
them Virgil and Livy owe their first appearance in the
imperishable form of a printed text.
There can be no question as to the taste of selection of
authors manifested by these printers ; and if, on the score
of typographical merit, their types be less beautiful, less
according with perfect symmetry, and less skilfully worked
than those of the Spiras and Jenson, their publications
have nevertheless a most magnificent and imposing aspect.
Both the text and the margin are of the amplest dimensions ;
and the paper, occasionally perhaps of too foxy a tint, is
manufactured in a manner so firm and close, that I can conceive Salvator Rosa must a thousand times have expressed
his regret at not being able to procure a few blank sheets for
the exercise of his pencil in delineating ambushed banditti
and horror-breathing caverns ! Copies of their works UPON
VELLUM are of the rarest occurrence. *
done upon the authority of Schelhorn, that within the space of six years, (from
the year 1465 to 1471, inclusively) Sweynheym and Pannartz had executed not
fewer than twelve thousand four hundred and seventy-five volumes— according to
the number of copies of each work particularly specified in the fore-mentioned
supplicatory letter. No doubt a great number of copies of their earlier publications
were then on hand'-as the melancholy phrase is.
6
their works upon vellum are of the rarest occurrence. ] When the reader is
informed that the well- known collection of vellum books of the late Count
Mc Carthy did not contain a single specimen by Sweynheym and Pannartz of this
description, he may well imagine the worth at which Lord Spencer and Sir M.
M. Sykes estimate their respective copies of this kind ; the former possessing the
SECOND PLINY, the latter the FIRST LIVY, upon vellum, by these earliest Roman
printers. It is well known that Sir Mark obtained his treasure at the sale of the
library of the late Mr. Edwards, for a sum which shewed how keenly he was set
upon the acquisition of it. I will not dissemble, when-after an examination at
once careful and unprejudiced —of these magnificent and rival volumes, I declare
the Pliny to be the finer book : —but Buonaparte yields only to Wellington ! Sir
Mark, at his own particular request, visited the Spencer library on the very day
of the sale of the Livy. On requesting my opinion upon the relative value of
the two books, that opinion was given promptly, fearlessly, and honestly : what
VOL. I. B b
382 FOURTH DAY.
.
We now come to the mention of the early rival Roman
press : I mean, to the publications put forth by Udalricus
Gallus, or ULRIC HAN, a German, and a citizen of Vienna. *
the one may be thought to gain in beauty (for their size is pretty nearly equal),
the other undoubtedly acquires in intrinsic worth—as who shall compare Pliny
the Elder with Livy ? ...Yet Pliny the Elder is no contemptible gentleman !' Sir
Mark was silent ; but on giving his coat another button or two, I distinctly saw
the determination of a book-knight to case himself in his completest suit of
steel, and to win his prize let it cost what it would ! We should not however
forget that the Blenheim Library contains the Roman Aulus Gellius of 1469, and
that some collection abroad boasts of the Roman Casar of the same date, each
upon vellum . The latter was formerly in the Hulsean Collection, Bibl. Huls.
vol. i . p. 192, no. 3072. Yet the enthusiastic collector of vellum books should
be informed that the Roman vellum, although upon the whole nearly equal to that
of Mentz, is much inferior to the Venetian.
a German, and a citizen of Vienna. ] This is his usual designation of himself
in his colophons ; but from the two colophons exhibited by Audiffredi, in the
years 1475, (see the Edit. Rom. p. 189-90) and probably in a few others, he
styles himself a native of Ingelstat, and a citizen of Vienna.' According to
Lichtenberger, Denis thinks Ingelstat to be the name of a village in Franconia :
Initia Typographica, p. 151, note o. According to Santander, it is Ingolstad in
Bavaria : Dict. Bibliog. vol. i. p. 145. We may just remark that, in the colophon
of his Turrecremata of 1467, Han introduces only the word ' Rome : ' in those of
Cicero, De Oratore, 1468 , and theTusculana Quæstiones ofthe same author, 1469,
he designates himself ' of Vienna.' Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. i. p. 333, 339-40. Our
printer is called ULRIC HAN, or Udalricus Gallus ; as Hahn in German, and Gallus
in Latin, signifies a cock. This afforded a subject of merriment to the celebrated
Campanus, (a man of equal learning and humour) in the well known colophon
usually subjoined to the books printed by U. Gallus. The story is thus told in
the life of this Cardinal prefixed to his works of the date of 1495 ; printed by
Eucharius Silber- cum Vuldricus quidam Gallicus tunc qui formas in urbem
librarias nuper intulisset interquiescere illum assiduis emendationibus non permitteret. Remque litterariam ex magnis difficultatibus inopiaque ad ingentem
hubertatem gloriosissimo illo et diuino opificio euocaret in illum iocatus carmen
hoc edidit :
Anser Tarpei custos Iouis undeque alis
Constreperes gallus decidit ; ultor adest
Vuldricus gallus : ne quem poscantur in usum
Edocuit penis nil opus esse tuis.
Quando illius impressiones scribendi necessitatem penarumque usum substulisse
uiderentur.' Sign. vii. I wish there were room here for the merry story of Campanus and Cantalicus, related directly below : but there is not —so search for it
yourselves, lovers of the memory ofthe very erudite and most eloquent Campanus !
FOURTH DAY. 383
You have been just told that the first book, with a date, in
the colophon of which the name of this printer appears, is
called The Meditations ofJohn of Turrecremata, executed
in 1467 , in folio. Rare, almost beyond conception, and
without parallel, as that book is, I have nevertheless both
seen and closely examined it. * It is printed uniformly in a
The editor of the preceding edition of the works of that Cardinal, has forgotten
two additional verses-appended, probably for the first time, to the Justin,
without date-yet considered as of the year 1471. They are these :
Imprimit ille die: quantum non scribitur anno
Ingenio: haud noceas : omnia uincit homo.
No wonder, from such testimonies of self- approbation , that Audiffredi fell foul
ofthe vanity and presumption of poor Han. We must indeed admit that that
learned bibliographer never loses an opportunity of slinging a stone at his undefended forehead. It should seem that the bustling, but really meritorious, Ulric
Han, took up his residence at Rome- IN DOMO DE TALIOXIS : ' see the
colophon to the Tortellius of 1471 : in which the expression Insculptum est
Romæ' first appears. Thus the Maximi and the Bishop of Aleria protected
Sweynheym and Pannartz ; while the Talioxi and Cardinal Campanus threw
their ægis round Udalricus Gallus—the latter, however, only to the year 1471-2.
And here, let me entreat the benevolent reader to discard all belief in that idle
tale -propagated by Skrinkingborgius, in his Memorabilia rer. Rom. gestar.
Sac. XV. lib. xv. ch. ü. § ix. edit. 1499, folio. That, ' on a dark night, long after
the setting of an early moon, all the rival patrons, editors, and printers, just
mentioned, met by agreement, mid- way between their respective residences, to
adjust a quarrel of long standing and of a deadly nature : that the weapons of
attack consisted of fusile types, and those of defence of printed folios, used in the
manner of a shield : that the Bishop of Aleria had nearly lost his left eye by a
furious discharge, from Campanus, of a handful of the large gothic fount used
by Ulric Han-while, by way of retaliation , Sweynheym and Pannartz got Ulric
Han between them, and pummelled him almost to death with their huge balls ,
charged with an extra-portion of ink ! The result is unknown.'-I may add, that
neither beginning nor ending ever existed but in the saucy imagination of
Skrinkingborgius.
* both seen and closely examined it . ] What a day was that, in the bibliographical annals of my humble life, when I first beheld the TURRECREMATA OF
1467 ! Read, first of all, courteous bibliomaniac, the conclusion of the first note at
page 354. Was ever prediction more fortunate? Was there ever an hope more
delightfully realised ? The Turrecremata is now within the glass-doors of the
SPENCER LIBRARY. And such a copy ! tall, clean, and perfect. What neither
Maittaire, nor the De Bures, nor Marchand, nor his annotator the Abbé Mercier
384 FOURTH DAY.
broad bold gothic type, with large coarse wood-cuts ; the
latter, imitated on a miniature scale, and enriched with
something like light and shade, by Numeister, at Foligno,
•
•
de St. Leger, nor Meerman, nor Heineken, nor Audiffredi, nor Santander, nor
Brunet, had ever beheld, I have seen and closely examined —to borrow the
language of Lysander. Describe, describe ! ' methinks I hear the enraptured
bibliographer exclaim ! I obey the welcome call : and a most minute and
methodical description is, in consequence, here laid before the reader :
Folio.
I. Recto, blank. On the reverse, beneath a cut of the Creation (of which
De Murr has given an indifferent fac-simile) is the following title,
printed in a delicate but rather brilliant red coloured ink :
Meditatones Reueredissimi patris dui Iohannis de
turrecremata Sacrosce Romane eccl'ie Cardinalis posite & depicte de ipsius mādato i eccl'ie ambitu sce Marie de Minerua Rome.
The first line of this title has been also fac- similised by De Murr, but
very faithlessly. There are 10 lines beneath the title.
II. On the recto are 21 lines, and one word of a 22nd line ; namely,
' possit.' On the reverse, is a cut of the creation ofAdam, with 15 lines
beneath. Cut copied by Numeister.
III. Recto ; 17 lines, and two words of the 18th. A SPACE LEFT for the
cut of Adam and Eve eating the forbidden fruit. On the reverse are 32 lines.
IV. Recto ; 24 lines. Reverse ; cut of the Salutation, and 15 lines
beneath. Cut strictly copied by Numeister.
V. Recto ; 24 lines and nearly a half. Reverse ; cut of the Nativity,
(copied by Numeister) with 15 lines beneath.
VI. Recto ; 8 lines. Reverse ; cut of the Circumcision (copied by Numeister)
and 15 lines beneath.
VII. Recto ; 19 lines and a half. Reverse ; cut of the Adoration of the
Magi (copied by Numeister) with 15 lines beneath.
VIII. Recto ; 16 lines. Reverse ; cut of the Benediction of Simeon (copied
by Numeister) with 15 lines beneath.
IX. Recto ; 21 lines. SPACE FOR CUT. (Flight into Egypt. ) Reverse,
33 lines.
X. Recto ; 29 lines and a half. Reverse ; cut of Christ among the Doctors
(copied by Numeister) and 15 lines beneath.
XI. Recto ; 21 lines, and two thirds of the 22nd. Reverse ; cut of the
Baptism ofSt. John (copied, but one figure to the right of the attendantangel omitted, by Numeister ; see fac- simile in Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. iv.
p. 40.) There are 15 lines beneath the cut.
FOURTH DAY. 385
in the year 1479. The first sentence of Ulric Han's edition
is printed in red ; a variety, rarely again exhibited by that
printer ; and we have only one other volume by the same
artist (as far as I can recollect) executed throughout in the
Folio.
XII. Recto ; 20 lines and a quarter of the 21st. Reverse ; cut of the
Temptation (copied by Numeister) with 15 lines beneath.
XIII. Recto ; 8 lines and a half. Reverse ; cut of the Delivery of the Keys
to St. Peter (copied by Numeister) and 15 lines beneath.
XIV. Recto ; nearly 31 lines. Reverse ; cut of the Transfiguration (copied
by Numeister, but with less expression and effect, especially in the
centre figure) with 15 lines beneath.
XV. Recto ; 27 lines. Reverse ; in the centre, unaccompanied by text, the
cut of Christ washing the Feet of his Disciples. Copied by Numeister.
XVI. Recto ; 11 lines, and two words ( impatientiam tuam ' ) of the 12th :
belonging to the subject expressed in the preceding cut. Reverse ;
cut of the Last Supper (copied by Numeister) and 16 lines beneath.
XVII. Recto ; 33 lines. Reverse ; cut of Christ Betrayed : (copied by
Numeister) beneath, 15 lines.
XVIII. Recto ; 16 lines. Reverse ; cut of Christ before Caiphas : copied, but
not with fidelity, and treated with infinitely less spirit, by Numeister.
There are 15 lines beneath.
XIX. Recto ; 11 lines, and one word (' crudeli ' ) of the 12th. Reverse ;
cut ofthe Crucifixion- not strictly copied, and treated in an inferior
manner, especially in the figure of St. John, by Numeister. Beneath,
15 lines.
XX. Recto ; 31 lines, and ti sunt ' of the 32nd. Reverse ; cut of Mary
comforted by her Associates-copied, but with less expression, by
Numeister. Beneath, are 15 lines.
XXI. Recto ; 22 lines and a half. Reverse ; cut of the Descent into Hel ;
wholly different from what appears in Numeister's reprint the latter
(as may be seen from the fac-simile of it in the Bibl. Spenceriana,
vol, iv. p. 40) being much more grotesque. There are 15 lines beneath.
XXII. Recto ; 31 lines, and one word ( miseros ' ) of the 32nd line. Reverse ;
cut of the Resurrection-essentially different from Numeister's copy :
beneath are 15 lines.
XXIII. Recto ; 11 lines. Reverse ; cut of Christ discoursing with St. Peter
and the Apostles. Numeister has made a feeble copy of this group,
especially in the figure of Christ ; which, in the representation here
described, has really considerable merit. There are 15 lines below it.
XXIV. Recto ; nearly 22 lines. Reverse ; cut of the Ascension : copied, not
strictly, and with less spirit, by Numeister : 15 lines beneath.
386 FOURTH DAY.
large gothic type-which is, the Roman Missal of 1475 :
in the description of a vellum copy of which, Audiffredi, if
my memory be not treacherous, appears absolutely to disport
himself with extraordinary gaiety of heart.
Folio.
XXV. Recto ; 15 lines, and one word ( contende ') of the 16th line. Reverse;
cut of the Descent of the Holy Ghost -copied by Numeister, but not
with the same spirit. The pavement, also, is wholly different. There
are 15 lines beneath.
XXVI. Recto ; nearly 15 lines. Reverse ; cut of Carrying of the Host ;
copied, in rather better style, by Numeister. This is in the centre,
without text.
XXVII. Recto ; 17 lines and 2 words ( effudit gentium ' ) of the 18th line ;
being the subject matter belonging to the preceding cut, beneath
which it might have been placed ; as, on the reverse of this 27th leaf,
there are 32 lines without a cut. A SPACE therefore is left on the
recto of this leaf, for the cut representing Abraham prostrating before
three Angels ; copied by Numeister.
XXVIII. Recto ; 28 lines. Reverse ; cut of the Genealogical Tree, copied by
Numeister, with improvement. There is no text with the cut.
XXIX. Recto; 33 lines : containing matter belonging to the preceding cut.
Reverse ; cut ofChrist appearing to St. Sixtus, copied by Numeister for
the better. Only 7 lines beneath.
XXX. Recto ; cut of the Assumption of the Virgin, and the only cut on the
recto of a leaf. This has been copied, but not strictly, by Numeister :
18 lines and a half are beneath. Reverse ; the Almighty in a Choir of
Angels, ( copied by Numeister) with 15 lines beneath.
XXXI. Recto ; 8 lines and 2 words (' caritatis benefitia ' ) of the 9th line.
Reverse ; cut of Christ with the Virgin in Glory; copied, but not
quite strictly, by Numeister : 15 lines are beneath.
XXXII. Recto ; 29 lines. Reverse ; cut of the Office of the Mass for the
Dead ; copied, but not strictly, by Numeister : 15 lines beneath.
XXXIII. Recto ; 13 lines and a half. Reverse ; cut of the Day ofJudgment;
copied, not strictly, and perhaps improved upon, by Numeister. There are 15 lines beneath.
XXXIV. Recto ; 17 lines : beneath which is the colophon, thus :
Finite sunt contemplationes supradicte &con
tinuate Rome per Ulricum han Anno domi
ni Millesimoquadringentesimosexagesimo sep timo die ultima Mensis decembris. .I. R.
The reverse is blank. There are no capital initials, and the right side of the
text is uniformly irregular.
FOURTH DAY. 387
-
Han immediately gave up this gothic type, and adopted a roman one in conformity with the better taste
which prevailed among his contemporaries and rivals.
He had three different founts of roman letter ; a small
one, used in his earlier works ; a large one, used in his
latter works (once in conjunction with Simon De Luca)
and a middling size type, which appears in the Livy,
Thus much for the arrangement of the contents ofthis singularly rare volume.
Aword now respecting the decorations : which, as they were repeated in the reimpression of 1473, printed at Rome by the same printer, and in this latter
edition were seen by Audiffredi, may probably be somewhat more familiar to the
curious. They are in outline ; upon the whole, rudely conceived , and still more
rudely executed, and by no means ' elegant, considering their antiquity,' as Major
and Audiffredi would seem to infer. Edit. Rom. p. 135-7. They were most probably executed by Ulric Han himself, or by some German artist under his immediate inspection. Indeed, the uniform absence of shadow, or horizontal lines , (which
is peculiar tothe embellishments in the books printed by Pfister) clearly bespeaks
their German extraction —and affords some indirect evidence of the antiquity of
the block- books before described. Lysander properly remarks that these cuts
were imitated ' by Numeister in his edition of 1479 : with the introduction of
light and shade. It has been shewn that the copies, or imitations, by Numeister,
are not always for the better : and it will also be seen, that, in the copy under
description, there are only xxx1 cuts ; as spaces are left for the introduction of
the cuts on folios III, IX , and XXVII. These spaces, in the copy described by De
Murr (Mem. Biò. Pub. Norimb. vol. i. 261-5, ) were filled by the cuts before
mentioned, which were pasted upon them. It was rather whimsical in Ulric Han, to
insert all the decorations on the reverses ofthe leaves, with the exception of that
on folio xxx. But it is time to bid farewell to the MEDITATIONES IOANNIS DE
TURRECREMATA of the date of 1467 !
a small one—a larger one—and a middling size type. ] As the small type
may be considered the more desirable specimen, on account of its supposed
priority of execution, the reader will not object to be made acquainted with a
most rare and precious folio volume, (exhibiting, throughout, specimens of Ulric
Han's smallest type) which Lord Spencer has recently obtained from the
Continent, through the bibliographical exertions of Mr. Horn. What adds to the
worth of this volume is, that, on the face of it, it appears to have been the
printer's own and choice copy, deposited by him in some monastic library, as a
memento for the occupiers of it, to pray for the souls of himself and his family.'
The condition and size of this extraordinary volume are perhaps matchless ; and
what must give it an additional value, is, that it is preserved in its ancient oaken
binding, with the margins of the leaves untrimmed and ungilded : an appro6
388 FOURTH DAY.
6
Tortellius, Justin, Juvenal and Persius, and in the generality
of his works. Upon the whole, I cannot commend the typography of Ulric Han, on the score of beauty. His types,
notwithstanding Laire (in his History ofthe early Roman
Press) says they were brought to perfection, ' have occasionally a looseness of appearance by no means favourable to
elegant and regular printing ; but he executed many noble
works, chiefly prosaic, and his larger volumes approach in
magnificence to those of Sweynheym and Pannartz. Among
priate dark blue morocco covering only being put over the oaken boards-upon
which, Mr. Lewis hath exerted himself with his usual taste and skill. The
following are the works within it, in the order in which they are there arranged.
1. Cicero, de Oratore, 1468 : 2. Cicero, de Officiis, Paradoxa, de Amicitia; each
without date : 3. De Senectute ; without date : 4. Somnium Scipionis, without
date : 5. Tusculana Quæstiones, 1469-so that it should seem that the works
intervening between the years 1468 and 1469, were, in fact, printed within the
same period : and if so, we have here (as Lord Spencer has justly remarked) the
Editio Princeps of the SOMNIUM SCIPIONIS, as well as that of the Tusculan
Questions. Beneath the colophon of the latter work (which may be seen in the
Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. i. p . 339-340) we have the following interesting memorandum, in the hand-writing (in all probability) of ULRIC HAN HIMSELF.
Quem
Vna cum vxore parentib9 fautoribus consāguineis
et progenitorib9 familiaribusq; in vris memoriis
teneatis necnon deum pro ipis exoretis.
Admit, tasteful collector of ANCIENT CLASSICS, that this is a gem of no ordinary lustre. Admit also, I beseech you, that it could not have had a more
appropriate setting, or a more appropriate resting place :-and if the spirit or
ghost (call it what you will) of the aforesaid Ulric Han, should, in one spot
more than another, take delight to wander and to meditate, it must be within a
certain room which faces a certain Green Park-where the cattle browse without
molestation, in spite of the busy-hum' and the never-ceasing bustle of what may
be fairly called -the Metropolis of the World.'
and in the generality of his works. ] In discoursing of Ulric Han and Simon
de Luca, we must not forget the first Roman edition of the Institutes of Justinian,
of the date of 1473, wherein appeared, for the first time, a large broad-faced
gothic type by way of text, surrounded by a narrow thin-faced roman letter by
way of commentary. A noble copy of this desirable volume has lately enriched
the Spencer library.
FOURTH DAY. 389
his rarer pieces, each equally destitute of date, numerals,
signatures, and catchwords, is a Latin impression of the
Epistles of Phalaris, in folio, and a Terence, also in folio.
The latter is not executed according to dramatic rhythm,
and is without doubt an early and very rare specimen of
Han's press. Lord Spencer has recently enriched his
collection with copies of these curious tomes. I never
think of the three RIVAL LIVIES, in the same collection, *
(the first executed by these last mentioned printers, the
second by Ulric Han, and the third by Vindelin de Spira)
but what I feel a glow and exhilaration of spirits which
would make me warm in the snows of Siberia.
LISARDO. Excellent i̇' faith , ' my noble Lysander. Commend me always, I beseech you, to such stoves in the
middle of January-in this country of perpetual north-east,
or north- west, blowing ! Rumford had not a glimpse even
of such blood-stirring expedients ! ...But is not Audiffredi,
the learned and accurate Audiffredi, a little caustic upon
your beloved Ulric Han?
LYSANDER. Audiffredi is indeed almost systematic in his
abuse of him; as his colophons, undoubtedly, oftentimes
betray excessive vanity and conceit. The mention of Audiffredi induces me to notice the favourite Roman printer of
* rival Livies in Lord Spencer's Collection. ] De gustibus non est disputandum. '
My friend Mr. Heber prefers, upon the whole, the Ulric Han. He is a brave
Gentleman, and understands things well but I consider the Sweynheym and
Pannartz copy not only far preferable to either of the copies above alluded to,
but by much the most beautiful book, in every respect, which ever issued from
the early Roman press. They are the first editions by the respective printers
above mentioned ; and that of Sweynheym and Pannartz is considered to be the
first of the author. They stand in Lord Spencer's library each close to the other ;
and, with the Milan impression of 1478 - of nearly equal magnitude -present
such a grenadier corps of early Livies, as could not fail to have satisfied the
Father of Frederick the Great of Prussia- had that Monarch indulged himself
in bibliographical or classical propensities.
390 FOURTH DAY.
that learned bibliographer ; namely, JOHN PHILIP DE LigNAMINE * -the third in the chronological order of Roman
printers. He was undoubtedly a learned and a modest
6
"
* John Philip de Lignamine. ] The Suetonius of 1470, in pinea regione via
pape,' is considered as the first specimen of De Lignamine's press ; and Audiffredi
pronounces this type to be more elegant than any previous or subsequent fount
ofletter used by either Sweynheym and Pannartz or Ulric Han .' This encomium
is very disputable. The size of the latter may be seen from a fac-simile of it
(as used in the Quintilian of the same date) in the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. iii.
p. 307 ; where also appears a specimen of the Greek type used by the same
printer at the same period. The Roman type is a little too heavily executed in
the fac-simile : yet the fairest specimen of the original could never, I submit, be
deemed much superior to the contemporaneous productions of the printers last
mentioned. De Lignamine's type is larger, and therefore more imposing ; but it
is loose, and sometimes very irregularly worked. This printer rarely executed
large works, and his Laurentius Valla of 1471 is the noblest specimen of his
press with which I am acquainted . He also, with one creditable and curious
exception-namely, some Opuscula of Philippus de Barberiis, 1481 — (see Bibl.
Spenceriana, vol. iii. p. 173) used only one and the same fount of letter : but his
zeal for literature, and his acknowledged modesty and learning, place him high
in the estimation of competent judges. See Audiffredi's elaborate and interesting
defence of him. Edit. Rom. p. 112-117. His books UPON VELLUM are so rare,
that, with the exception of a copy of the Italia Illustrata of Flavius Blondus,
of the date of 1474, folio-of this kind, and as noticed by Audiffredi —I am not
able to mention any such copy which exists. Nor have we, as Lysander above
suggests, many specimens of De Lignamine's press which present us withthe agreeable typographical picture of Roman or Italian Poetry. Indeed, I know of none.
Some of the works from the press of this estimable printer are of the rarest
possible occurrence : such as the Pongie Lingua of Dominico Cavalcha, of the
date of 1472, folio ; and rarer still, the Horatii Opuscula ; which latter, fromthe
epistle to Father Matthæus de Marco, prefixed to Cavalcha's work, are expressly
said to have been executed by our printer. Audiffredi never saw the Horace ;
and the only copy of Cavalcha's Pongie Lingua which he ever met with, wanted
the important epistle just mentioned-for the reprint of which, indeed, he was
indebted to the Opuscoli di Autori Siciliani, vol. ix. p. 305, of S. M. de Blasis ;
taken, in turn, from a perfect copy of Cavalcha's work in the library of S. Martinus de Scalis. See the Edit. Rom. p. 111-118 . La Serna Santander has
reprinted the epistle of De Lignamine, from Audiffredi : Dict. Bibliogr. , &c.
vol. ii . p. 285. From the title of this epistle, we find that De Liguamine calls
himself ‹ Sicilian , ' and ' a familiar of Pope Sixtus IV. ' and he is supposed to have
formerly practised physic. A copy of Cavalcha's work, and of course of the
Horace, is a great desideratum with Earl Spencer ; but his Lordship has recently
obtained a copy of the De Sanguine Christi, and De Potentia Dei, each executed
FOURTH DAY. 391
typographer ; and many valuable works (almost entirely in
prose) issued from his press : but in point of number and
importance of publications, he must unquestionably yield to
his contemporaries before noticed. His type is usually a
large roman ; but his printing is not, I think, particularly
distinguished for its beauty and symmetry. Having thus
firmly fixed the art at Rome-having shewn youthe fountain
head from which innumerable streams took their rise, and
fructified the surrounding country .....
LORENZO. Are we to understand that you have noticed
all the rare early Roman printers ?
LYSANDER. By no means. I leave you to hunt, at your
leisure, after the REISINGERS, SACHSELS and GOLSCHES,
the LAVERS and the DE BOPARDIAS ; and to keep a still
sharper look out upon that subtle and coy typographical
artist, ADAM ROT : * of whom we know little or nothing in
in one volume, of the supposed date of 1472, beneath the colophon of which, at
the end of the latter tract, are the mysterious words GoD . AL:-as first exhibited
in the colophon of the De Civitate Dei of 1467. See the Bibl. Spenceriana,
vol. i . p. 169, 170.
* the Reisingers, the Sachsels and Golsches, the Lavers, the De Bopardias, —and
Adam Rot ] What crabbed, inharmonious, teeth-breaking names are these !
Could men, with such barbarous appellatives, have wrought any thing in a beauteous and inviting manner? Let us see ; and first for REISINGER, OF RUESINGER :
not exactly, perhaps, in chronological order, but in the order in which Lysauder
chooses to mention him. A fac- simile of his type may be seen in the Bibl.
Spenceriana, vol. ii. p. 234 : from which it appears to resemble the smallest type
of Ulric Han. Indeed, some Opuscula and Epistles of St. Jerom, in folio , without
date (described in the B. S. vol. i , p. 202) which I have attributed to the press
of Ruesinger, are thought, in the opinion of Count Delci, to be the production
of Ulric Han ; especially as the words IA. RV. which are at the end of the
colophon of the second volume, are supposed to have the same meaning as the
initials I. R.—at the conclusion of the colophon of the Turrecremata of 1467 :
see p. 386 ante. What these letters designate, I am utterly at a loss to conceive.
The name of SIXTUS RUESINGER (for so he is called) appears expressly in the
Rufus Sextus ; and his execution of other volumes, exhibiting the same type, is
entirely conjectural. All the works of his press, which I have seen, are without
dates. La Serna Santander says he printed at Naples from 1471 to 1479 ; when
392 FOURTH DAY.
this country. It is now really time to notice the rise and
early progress of the typographical art in one other great
Italian city -and you will perhaps readily give a guess in
what other city this may be ?
he quitted that city and printed at Rome with Georgius Allemannus. He also
printed at Naples with Franciscus de Tuppo. Consult the Dict. Bibliogr. Choisi,
vol. i. p. 260-1 . His supposed device may be seen in the Bibl. Spenceriana,
vol. iii. p. 179.
In the second place, of SACHSEL and GOLSCH. These are rare but not very
comely printers. The only books (as La Serna Santander justly intimates) with
dates,which are known to have issued from their presses, are the Ammianus Marcellinus, and Sabinus in Juvenalem, each of the date of 1474, and each in the library of
Earl Spencer ; but an edition of Aurelius Victor, of Rufus Sextus, and of Terentius
Varro, without dates, probably by the same printers, are also in the same collection. The Ammianus Marcellinus is of great value. Laire, in his Spec. Hist.
Typog. Rom. p. 112, is sufficiently jejune relating to these printers.
GEORGE LAVER requires a more ample mention. It seems agreed among
bibliographers that he first printed at the Eusebian Monastery, at Rome ; whither
he was invited by Cardinal Caraffa. Yet, if the period of his typographical
labours at this monastery be from the year 1470 to 1472, inclusively, it is quite
certain that he used different founts of letter ; as the St. Chrysostom, 1470, the
Nonius Marcellus without date, and the Silius Italicus and Eutropius (the two
latter of the date of 1471 ), evidently exhibit different specimens of typography.
I am however disposed to doubt his labours at the Eusebian monastery, notwith- standing the quaint colophon to the tract of Father Antonio ' De Instit. seu Direct.
Simplicium Confessorum, ' 1472, 4to.; from which, according to Laire, Typog. Rom.
p. 182, and Audiffredi, Edit. Rom. p. 107, it appears that Celestinus, a monk of
the monastery of St. Eusebius, corrected -and George Laver, a native of
Wurtzburg, printed-this latter work. But these are facts which do not necessarily regulate the printing of it at the Eusebian monastery. Audiffredi is, I
think, disposed to quiz Laire a little, respecting the high value of 3400 livres
attached to a copy of this tract, as Laire saw it sold at a public auction at Paris!
We may further remark that Laver printed under the auspices of two learned
editors ; Pomponius Lætus, and Bartholomæus Platina : concerning whom see
the notes in Laire, p. 85-7 . Mr. Beloe may also be consulted ; Anecdotes, &c.
vol. iii. 257 ; vol. iv . p. 383.
There can be no doubt of Laver's having printed the Nonius Marcellus,
briefly noticed by Mr. Beloe, in vol . iii . p. 261 ; as the extract given in the Bibl
Spenceriana, vol. iii. p . 93, places this point beyond question. In the year 1473
Laver associated himself with LEONHARD PFLUGEL; and these printers published
together, in that same year, a folio volume of the Constitutions ofPope Clement V:
see the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. iii. p . 291. However, I consider the type of this
FOURTH DAY. 893
PHILEMON.
LISARDO. } Venice !
LYSANDER. Twice accurately spoken ! The nurse (as
work to have been exclusively Pflugel's. In the year 1475, Laver came forth
without his associate, and published the Decisions of the Roman Court in a large
folio volume, which is fully described in the work last referred to ; vol. iii. p. 300,
The Sermons of St. Chrysostom, Pomponius Festus, Quintus Curtius, and Terentius
Varro, (the chief productions of his press) will be found particularly described
according to the references in the Index of the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. iv. p. lix.
Laire, at page 85 and 106, may also be consulted. Upon the whole, the type
ofLaver has no particular claim to commendation . It is irregular in form, and
frequently irregular in execution : and care must be taken not to confound it
with that of Schurener de Bopardia ; to whom it is now high time to give the
reader a slight introduction.
JOHN SCHURENER DE BOPARDIA (of what parentage, and when born,
heaven knows ! ) does not appear to have exercised his press much before the
year 1475 ; when we have the Epistles of Eneas Sylvius (composed when that
Pope was a Cardinal) published by him of that date. This impression is among
the more elegant specimens of his printing. See Bibl. Spenceriana, vol . iii. p. 144.
His Three Declamations of Quintilian, of the same date, is a book of very rare
occurrence. Id. vol. ii. p. 313. But probably his Solinus, without date, is his
rarest production ; and his Modestus and Pomponius Lætus, also without dates,
of nearly equal rarity-if not of greater antiquity than the Eneas Sylvius of
1475. Consult the B. S. vol . ii. p. 360, vol . iii . p. 423. Schurener de Bopardia
is a printer of second rate merit, on the score of beauty ; yet much preferable to
Laver. His works are of considerable scarcity, and his name very rarely appears
in a colophon ; so that we must judge of his productions chiefly by comparison
with those to which his name is expressly subjoined. Panzer, vol. v. p. 537,
notices probably a brother of this printer, of the name of Conrad de Bopardia,
who printed at Cologne in 1486.
It is with a timid pen and an abashed countenance that I introduce the name
of ADAM ROT; as, in the second volume of the Bibl. Spenceriana, p. 331 , I have
had the temerity to doubt of this Gentleman's existence. Count Delci, in his
minute and valuable strictures upon the work just mentioned, first called the
attention of Lord Spencer to this, my most heinous and most flagrant, offence ;
and those who cannot consult the articles xvI. and XVII. in Audiffredi's Edit. Rom.
p. 104, may possibly have an opportunity of looking into Panzer, vol. ii . p. 432,
nos. 88, 89, 91 - where this said Adam Rot appears in no questionable,' but,
on the contrary, in a most ' palpable ' form. His books, however, are of excessive
rarity ; and whether the edition of Sallust, described in the B. S. vol. ii . p. 331,
with the initials A. R. subjoined, be that of this printer, must at present remain
' sub judice ' -as I am not acquainted with any volume wherein his name is
colophonised atlength.
"
394 FOURTH DAY.
Philemon the other day not inaptly expressed it) of ten
thousand useful and elegant arts, the central mart of
European commerce, the city both of Jenson and of Titian,
it was reserved for Venice to give a different turn, and to
adopt a purer style, in the productions of its first printers.'
All hail to thee, JOHN DE SPIRA, parent of the Venetian
press ! * I see thee yonder, in imagination, pale, emaciated,
* John de Spira, parent of the Venetian press. ] This point, I submit, is now
triumphantly established by the existing privilege of the Senate of Venice,
granted to John de Spira, of the date of September the 18th, 1469. A copy of
this privilege was transmitted to Denis, by the Abbé Morelli, and appears in the
Suffragium pro Johanne de Spira Primo Venetiarum Typographo, Vienna, 1794,
8vo. of the former. It is too important not to occupy some twenty lines in this
present note. Le voici ! 1469, Die 18 Septembris. Inducta est in hanc nostram
inclytam civitatem ars imprimendi libros, in diesque magis celebrior et frequentior
fiet, per operam studium et ingenium Magistri Ioannis de Spira, qui ceteris aliis
urbibus hanc nostram præelegit, ubi cum coniuge liberis et familiâ totâ suâ
inhabitaret, exerceretque dictam artem librorum imprimendorum : iamque
summâ omnium commendatione impressit Epistolas Ciceronis, et nobile opus
Plinii de Naturali Historia in maximo numero, et pulcherrima litterarum forma,
pergitque quotidie alia præclara volumina imprimere ; adeo ut industria
et virtute huius hominis, multisque præclarisque voluminibus, et quidem pervili
pretio, locupletabitur. Et quoniam tale inventum ætatis nostræ peculiare et
proprium, priscis illis omnino incognitum, omni favore et ope augendum atque
fovendum est, eidemque Magistro Joanni, qui magno urgetur sumptu familiæ, et
artificum mercede, præstanda sit materia, ut alacrius perseveret, artemque suam
imprimendi potius celebriorem reddere, quam desinere, habeat ; quemadmodum
in aliis exercitiis sustentandis, et multo quidem inferioribus, fieri solitum est ;
infrascripti Domini Consiliarii ad humilem et devotam supplicationem prædicti
Magistri Joannis terminarunt, terminandoque decreverunt, ut per annos quinque
proxime futuros nemo omnino sit, qui velit , possit, valeat, audeatve exercere
dictam artem imprimendorum librorum in hac inclyta civitate Venetiarum, et
districto suo, nisi ipse Magister Joannes. Et toties, quoties aliquis inventus
fuerit, qui contra hanc terminationem et decretum ausus fuerit exerce ercere ipsam
artem et imprimere libros ; multari condemnarique debeat, et amittere instrumenta et libros impressos. Et sub hâc eadem pœna nemo debeat, aut possit tales
libros in aliis terris et locis impressos vendendi causa huc portare,
Angelus Gradenico.
Bertuccius Contareno.
Angelus Venerio.
Jacobus Mauroceno.
Franciscus Dandulo.
Consiliarii.
FOURTH DAY. 395
and breathless : living only just to witness the completion of
thy Cicero and Pliny-to clasp thy barely-commenced St.
Austin to thy breast, and to expire in the embrace ! See, he
This document is curious on many accounts. It informs us, if we were not
already informed by his own colophons, that I. de Spira printed the Epistles of
Cicero before the Pliny-and, what is rather strange, that he had a five years
patent or privilege for exclusive printing at Venice ! How came it then to pass that
Jenson opened his press in 1470, and continued, for many successive years, a
popular printer at Venice ? Was the privilege granted to I. de Spira only conditionally if he should so long live ? There is no accounting for the rival press
ofJenson upon any other ground. As to the date of 1461, in the Decor Puellarum, that point is now at rest : it being, beyond all further reasonable doubt,
an error for the date of 1471 , See the authorities referred to in the Bibl.
Spenceriana, vol. iv. p. 116-118. Of the Familiar Epistles of Cicero, the first
effort of his press, there are two editions—in the same year-1469 ; which have
been particularly described in the work last referred to, vol. i. p. 321-3. The
Blenheim and the Mc Carthy libraries each contain a copy of one of these impressions UPON VELLUM. The Pliny, upon paper, is in Lord Spencer's collection : but how can I convey an adequate idea of its condition and amplitude ?
Think, enthusiastic collector, of the uncontaminated snow upon the highest of
the Apennine peaks, and you will have an idea of the size and colour of the
Spencerian copy of the first Pliny ! The press-work of this surprising volume
is quite perfect. I have carefully examined it with that of the earliest and
latest specimens of Jenson's press, and it ' beats them all hollow ! Yet remember, Spira-loving reader, that the Imperial library at Vienna contains a copy of
this very first Pliny UPON VELLUM ! Who, that hath drank deeply and freely
at the fountain-head of Bibliomania, would not make a pilgrimage to such a
shrine?
-
Let it however be observed that, generally speaking, the Pliny of 1469 is by
no means a very rare book, (see the B. S. vol. ii . p . 253-6,) notwithstanding,
from the colophon, only 100 copies of it appear to have been struck off — and
these within the short space of three months ! The knowing will remember that
there are no Greek letters introduced ; but that the Greek passages are rendered
by means of Roman types.
VINDELIN DE SPIRA, as Lysander above properly intimates, carried on the
business which his brother had successfully established. The matchless collection
of Lord Spencer contains, I believe, all Vindelin's known works of the date of
1470, with the exception of the Priscian ; of which, however, he is only the
reputed printer, as his name is not attached to it. The Mc Carthy collection
contains a magnificent copy of this scarce impression, PRINTED UPON VELLUM :
see the Cat. Mc Carthy ; vol. i . uo. 2170. The St. Austin De Civitate Dei,
which his brother left unfinished, was Vindelin's first performance ; but Cicero,
(three pieces only of him) Livy, Sallust, Virgil, and Petrarch, each came forth in
396 FOURTH DAY.
dies in the arms of his brother, VINDELIN ; who, on his
decease, conducted the business with great credit and success
for many subsequent years, and who has proved himself to
be worthy of the mantle which his brother cast upon him.
the same year, (1470) as monuments at once of his diligence and skill. Ofthe
St. Austin, a copy UPON VELLUM will be found in the Blenheim, Mc Carthy,
and Devonshire collections. A copy of the Virgil, UPON VELLUM, is also in the
Blenheim and Mc Carthy libraries ; but the latter (vol. i. no, 2543) should seem
to be a part only of the complete edition .' A vellum copy of this exceedingly
rare book is likewise in the collection of the Right Hon. T. Grenville, from the
Larcher library ; but, for the sake of the known taste and discrimination of its
present owner, I could wish the colour of the vellum to have borne a closer resemblance to that of the lily or snow drop--whichever the reader, or the owner of it,
may please. The Tacitus, without date-in which, for the first time, appears a
gothic v, mingled with roman type -has been thought not only the first edition
ofthat author, but the first specimen of the SPIRA PRESS. This assumption is
founded upon the following passage in the colophon of the same edition :
"
pressit
Spira premens : artis gloria prima suæ.
Having already (Bibl. Spenceriana, vol . ii . p. 393) considered this point pretty
fully, I can here only observe that the construction of the phrase renders ‘ Spira’
the antecedent to gloria prima ' —for if the impression had been considered as
the first boast' of his art, ' it would have been gloriam primam.' Further,
as well in the privilege of the Venetian Senate just extracted, as in the important
colophon to the De Civitate Dei,' we are expressly told what were the works
which John De Spira had executed previously to his death in 1470 ; and in
these the Tacitus is omitted. It follows, therefore, from both these considerations,
that the Tacitus was not printed by John de Spira- that it is not the first production of the Spira press -and very questionable it is, whether it were printed
in the year 1470, or 1471. Let it however be considered as the first book in
which catchwords appear. La Serna Santauder says that the name of Vindelin
de Spira is not to be found in any dated book after the year 1477. His career,
therefore, was short but glorious.
This brings us to say a few words respecting his skill as a printer. He used
two founts of letter : one gothic, the other roman. His gothic, luckily for his
reputation, is not of frequent occurrence. The earliest specimen of it which I
remember to have seen, is in the Duns Scotus of 1472 ; and the latest, in the
Dante of 1477. They are each miserable enough ; and must have been supplied
from the worn- out fount of some German printer of most wretched taste. His
Roman type, however, stands as high as his gothic is mean : it is bold, elegant,
and extremely legible ; of a fount which our printers call English. I must not here
omit to mention a very singular and barbarous (but I hope and believe unique)
1
FOURTH DAY. 397
ALMANSA. Am I wrong in mentioning the name of
NICOLAS JENSON? There was, I think, such a printer, and
a beautiful one too !
LYSANDER. His name well becomes a lady's lips ; for he
was elegant and brilliant beyond all comparison. There is
an evenness in his press work, a symmetry in his types, a
mellow tone in his paper, and an exquisite delicacy about
every thing which he did, that I cannot forbear giving him
the superiority over every other contemporary printer * on
the score of brilliancy of execution.
specimen of roman type to which the name of V. de Spira is subjoined as the
printer, in a quarto volume, entitled ' Io. Scotus : super quatuor libris sententiarum
Medicine et de anima '-formerly in Mr. Singer's, and now in Lord Spencer's,
collection. It is in double columns, with frequent contractions, and the type
appears as irregular in formation and press-work, as it is dissimilar from any
known production of the press of Vindelin de Spira. Were forgeries of ancient
printers' names practised ? If so, this may be one. We will now take leave of this
eminent typographical artist in the words in which he was supposed to be
addressed by the reader, on his publication of Quintus Curtius, probably in the
year 1471 :
Vindeline meo prius hic redditurus in auras
Spiritus et corpus linquet inane meum,
Quam tua nobilitas, virtus, atque inclita fama
Pectore labatur candide amice meo.
superiority over every other contemporary printer. ] If Sardini has contrived to
furnish a pretty thumping folio, divided into three books, of which the two latter
are exclusively devoted to an account of the JENSON PRESS, what quantity of
presumption is attributable to myself, for striving to render justice to the annals
of the same press, in a note which may possibly contain only the three hundred
and fifteenth part of Sardini's volume ?! Nevertheless, I will do my best in such
a space-however contracted : Multum in parvo ' is always a creditable and
encouraging motto. And, first, let us beat- not about The bush aboon Traquair,'
but—about our ancient and accredited bibliographical Classics (if I may, ' with
no unhallowed pen,' thus venture to designate them) respecting this said NICOLAS
JENSON, a Frenchman by birth. Hear how Maittaire becomes absolutely extatic
in praise of him. O stupendum Artificem, Statuâ (ubi ubi vigent litteræ)
dignum marmorea, nisi litteraria monumenta sibi exegisset quovis apparatu magnificentiora, omni ære perenniora ! .... Puduit in limine cunctari ; extemplo
in ipsa Artis penetravit adyta ... uno tentamine Artem incepit et perfecit,
simul ac semel discipulus ac magister .... adeò ut prorsus dubium sit, utrum
VOL. I. C
398 FOURTH DAY.
LISARDO. I wish in my heart he had also adopted a
smaller fount of letter, and had executed pocket volumes ;
or, what the learned in bibliography call, chap-books. A
magis miremur, Artémne an Artificem ; cui plus debeamus, illíne, quæ tot erudita
scripta nobis nostrisque posteris conservavit, an huic, sinè quo ea pro suorum
authorum dignitate prodire non potuissent, sinè quo Ars ipsa minùs utilis, minùs
lepida et ornata, et penè iners jacuisset. ' . . Yet more .. Ignoscat, oro, Lector ;
si admiratione raptus in grandiori materiâ stylum tenuiorem exercuerim, meíque
illius popularis laudes teutaverim, quæ eloquentiam vel TULLIANAM fatigâssent.'
Annal. Typog. p. 37-8 . edit. 1719. There's for you, Jenson-loving reader !——
but, remember well-Maittaire believed in the authenticity of the date of the
Decor Puellarum : hence his constant reference to the supposed early period of
Jenson's press.
In this he was egregiously mistaken : as the Artis adyta ' had
been previously, and as successfully, explored by Sweynheym and Pannartz and
the Spiras.
"
We might, however, have first noticed the commendations of a contemporary,
Omnibonus Leonicenus ; editor of the works usually printed by Jenson — who,
impelled by a sudden parainetical gust, has been pleased not only to call our
Jenson another Dædalus, ' ( to which I have no objection) but also the wonderful inventor of his art '-to which I have a very great objection. Consult his interesting testimony prefixed to the edition of Quintilian's Institutes,
of the date of 1471 , in the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol . ii. p . 310. Jenson's press (says
Chevillier) was one of those which had the greatest reputation at Venice : L'Orig.
p. 64. Monsieur De Boze (a name never, I trust, to be slighted in the annals of
bibliography) discovered an ancient MS. ( De Monetis Galliæ antiquis ') from
which it appeared that Lewis XIth sent Jenson to Mentz in order to instruct
himself thoroughly in the art of printing. This could not have taken place
before the year 1461, as Lewis did not begin to reign before that period : ' consequently (as La Serna Santander has shrewdly and sensibly remarked) there is an end at once to the supposed legitimate date of the Decor Puellarum.' Mr.
Horne, (Introd. to Bibliography, vol . ii . Appx. p. lviii, ) apparently on the authority
of De Boze, (Mem. de l'Acad. des Inscriptions, vol. xiv. p. 236) seems to think
that Jenson was sent abroad in order to introduce the art of printing into France ;
but the then troubled state of that country induced the printer to sojourn, and
set up his press, at Venice. Laire makes out Jenson to be rei monetariæ apud
Turonenses peritus artifex,' but I suspect a little that we have here another
Flourish ofTrumpets !:' see page 326-7 ante ; and the gossipping note in the Spec.
Hist. Typog. Rom. p. 42-4 : where it is affirmed, on the authority of the Decretals
of Pope Gregory IX. , 1475, that the skill and solicitude of Jenson, respecting
his art, was so gratifying to Pope Sixtus IV. , that he called him to Rome and
ennobled him with the title of Count Palatine. ' Observe further, that the
notice respecting Jenson's being sent to Mentz, and described as garçon saige,
et l'un des bons graveurs de la Monnoye de Paris'— is a mere marginal note in
FOURTH DAY. 399
duodecimo Horace by that delightful printer, would have
been worth twice the number of all the chap-books which
that pains-taking editorial grub, Robert Burton, ever put
forth ! A duodecimo Virgil and Horace by Jenson-the
the MS. consulted by De Boze. So I find it mentioned in Lichtenberger's
Initia Typographicia, p . 167-8.
I cannot imagine why Fournier (De l'Origine de l'Imprimerie, p. 23) should
have led both himself and subsequent bibliographers, including even Sardini,
into a mistake, that we are indebted to Jenson for our present proportions of the
Roman capitals and small letters ; as I see nothing in Jenson which had not
previously appeared in John de Spira. Au reste (says La Serna Santander) cet
artiste est un des plus célèbres dans les fastes de l'histoire typographique ; ses
caractères sont d'une grande beauté, et ses impressions des chefs-d'œuvres de
typographie : on peut dire de cet artiste qu'il donna à l'imprimerie le dernier
degré de perfection. Dict. Bibliogr. Choisi, vol , i. p. 180-1. Jenson printed as
late as the year 1482, but the period of his death is unknown. His first books
are of the date of 1470 ; namely, the Eusebius, (Præp. Evangelica) Cicero,
(Rhetorica Vetus, and Epistolæ ad Atticum) and Justin. The earliest specimen
of his Greek Letter (precisely the same in character as was used by V. de Spirasee the fac-simile of it in the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. i. p. 269- a little too heavily
executed) appears, I believe, in the Tortellius of 1471.
·
To what is above said, in the shape of Jensonian eulogy, by the DRAMATIS
PERSONE' of this work, nothing can be here effectually added. Let me however first remark, that both Aldus and Baskerville appear to have chosen Jenson
for their model ; and I think I can discover in the Gloria Mulierum , Luctus
Christianorum, and Decor Puellarum, of Jenson, the Bembo, de Etna, of Aldus ;
and in the Virgil of the former, of 1475, the Virgil of Baskerville. All this
however may be mere fancy. The gothic type of Jenson (which Laire is Vandal
enough to abuse) has always appeared to me to be singularly beautiful and
striking. It consists of two founts ; both of which may be seen to the greatest
possible advantage in the Constitutions ofPope Clement V. and the Decretals of
Boniface VIII. , each of the date of 1476 ; and of each of which a copy UPON
VELLUM is in the Spencer library. I shall have occasion to speak of the Lati
Bible, of the same date, ' anon ; but cannot here forego the opportunity of
placing a humble, and I trust not quickly perishable, wreath upon the very
beautiful and rare copy of the Latin Bible, of 1479, in folio-printed throughout
in the largest gothic type of Jenson, and struck off UPON VELLUM — which
ennobles the collection of my friend Mr. George Hibbert : it being a worthy
companion of the Vellum Bible mentioned at page 164 ante. This exquisite
monument of Jensonian skill was obtained at the sale of the library of the late
Mr. Edwards (Cat. no. 810. ) for 115l. 10s. Such a price sufficiently bespeaks
the sharp contest-the shower of balls and of bullets-through which it was
-
400 FOURTH DAY:
very thought is transporting ... and I love to cherish the
bewildering fiction !
LYSANDER. What was left undone by Jenson was performed by his imitator, Baskerville. You forget the little
Horace of 1762, executed by the latter ; in which there is
as much elegance of typographical arrangement and execution, as in any other volume which owes its production to
the earlyVenetian press. Do not let us fail to remember, in
the estimation of Jenson's typographical reputation, his great
skill in the use of the black letter, as well as the Roman.
His impressions ofthe Papal Constitutions, executed after the
plan of those of Fust and Schoiffher, are models of elegance
in the adaptation of two different founts of gothic ; while his
black letter Bible of 1476, especially when upon vellum, is
worthy of every praise : yet not superior to those of Hailbrun and Moravus, of the same date. * It should be
obtained. I shall conclude this tremendous note with a list of the JENSONS
PRINTED UPON VELLUM, in the Mc Carthy collection ; referring to the numbers in the Catalogue of the same library.
Eusebius, 1470, Cat. de Mc Carthy, no. 517.
Cicero, Ep. ad Att. 1470, no. 2325.
Quintilianus, 1471, 110. 2263.
Tortellius, 1471. no. 2144.
Plinius, Senior, 1472, no. 1705.
Gratianus, Decretum. 1474, no. 1109.
Biblia Latina, 1476, no. 66.
BonifaciusVIII. Decret. 1476, no. 1116.
Clement V. Const. 1476, no. 1123.
Plinius, Senior, (Ital. ) 1476, no. 1713.
no. 5368.
Plutarch, Vit. Par. 1478, (first volume only)
The Justin, however, of 1470, is not here-but in our own Royal collection ;
and is perhaps unique. The Rhetorica Vetus of Cicero, of the date of 1470, and
not here, is in the Blenheim library ; as well as the Pliny of 1472, also here ;
and of which latter the Duke of Devonshire possesses a copy. I speak now
exclusively of vellum copies. The De Civitate Dei of 1475 is also upon vellum,
in the Blenheim library ; but a vellum Macrobius of 1472, a rare and truly
estimable volume, is the exclusive boast of the Earl of Pembroke's Collection.
* those ofHailbrun and Moravus, of the same date.] That is, of the date of
FOURTH DAY. 401
remembered that Vindelin de Spira failed miserably in his
gothic letter.
In the estimation of the more celebrated early printers of
Venice, let us not forget CHRISTOPHer Valdarfer, (printer
of the Boccaccio of 1471 ) JOHN DE COLONIA, (partner of
VINDELIN DE SPIRA) FRANCISCUS DE HAILBRUN, ADAM DE
AMBERGAU, and ERHARD RATDOLT. These are all fine fellows
in their way; * and choice copies of their works, especially if
·
1476. At page 389, ante, we have discoursed of RIVAL LIVIES :' in the present place it remains to discourse upon RIVAL BIBLES.' The volumes, here
alluded to, will be found minutely described in the Biblioth Spenceriana, vol . i.
p. 32-36. They are all UPON VELLUM, and press each other hard for precedency. Yet it must be admitted, on a comparison with the vellum copies of the
Jensonian edition, of the same date, in the collections of the Duke of Devonshire and Sir Mark Sykes, that Lord Spencer's copy is too much cropt : and the
sacred volume, put forth by Moravus, (from the Pinelli collection -of excessive
rarity) is most unskilfully bound. Hailbrun's impression has received better
treatment at the hands of its former possessors ; but, take them as they are, where,
vellum-loving reader, wilt thou find three such copies of such interesting tomes?
They are each executed in the gothic letter, of pretty nearly the same size ; and
the vellum is also of pretty nearly the same texture-ductile, white, and perfect :
yet upon the whole, the Bible of Hailbrun is, to my eye, the more covetable
treasure. As for MORAVUS-while this Bible is seen, and while his impression of
the first edition of the Moral Works of Seneca, of the date of 1475, (see Bibl.
Spenceriana, vol. ii . p. 338) is duly cherished, as it cannot fail to be, in the
cabinets of the curious-he will not want a MONUMENT of typographical skill, in
the execution of the Gothic and the Roman type, which shall place his name in
the foremost rank of ancient printers of renown.
* all finefellows in their way. ] ‘ All hail ' to thee, Christopher Valdarfer ! —and
to thee, John de Colonia, Franciscus de Hailbrun, and Adam de Ambergau, and
Erhard Ratdolt, all hail ! ' These were really fine fellows, ' and of the VENETIAN
SCHOOL ; a school, which merits all the rambling eulogies of Chevillier, and the
pithy but pointed panegyric of Lichtenberger : see his Initia Typographica, p. 166.
Such charms , such magic, were attached to the name of Venice, as a school of
priuting, that Theodore Martens, in the colophon of his Libellus Fratris Baptistæ
Mantuani,' of the date of 1474, told his countrymen, in order to give greater
éclat to a new work, that he placed before them a specimen of that typographical
skill which he had learnt of the Venetians :' see Lambinet, vol . ii. p. 100 ; who
is more full than Marchand (Dict . Hist. &c. vol. ii. p . 26, note (c) sect. iv. ) or
Maittaire ; Annal. Typog. vol. i . p. 334, note 1. There was doubtless good policy
in such conduct on the part of the said Theodore Martens. But first for
402 FOURTH DAY.
upon vellum, cannot fail to make the heart rejoice, and add
to the weight of the purse : as the Venetian vellum of that
time is proved to be greatly superior to that of every
other city.
CHRISTOPHER VALDARFER-the printer of the most mischievous book (perhaps
morally as well as bibliomaniacally speaking) that every issued from the press. I
mean the Boccaccio of 1471 ; over which magical volume, for the present, it is
fitting that I draw a veil of close texture-to be withdrawn on the EIGHTH DAY
of this work. Both Valdarfer and Jenson commenced their career in the same
year, namely, in 1470 ; and the Cicero de Oratore of the former, is the first fruit
of his press. In the colophon of this very rare and beautifully printed book,
Valdarfer thus designates himself:
Christophori impressus hic liber arte fuit
Cui stirps Valdarfer : patria estq; ratispona tellus.
•
hence plainly telling us that he was born at Ratisbon. His Orations ofCicero,
of the date of 1471 , folio , is also a magnificent performance : of which Mr.
Renouard possesses (what I believe no other library can boast of) a copy UPON
VELLUM-and which he jocosely calls his darling child . ' The types, paper, and
mechanical execution, exhibited by ChristopherValdarfer, are eminently beautiful ;
superior, unquestionably, to those of Philip de Lavagna ; but inferior, upon the
whole, to many specimens from the presses of the Spiras and Jenson. Was it from
failure in business, or from the overwhelming success of his rivals, that Valdarfer
quitted Venice in 1474, and went to establish himself at Milan ? Or was it
necessary that Zarotus, the father of the Milan press, (who commenced his career
in 1471 , not in 1470, according to the doubtful list, of this date, noticed by
Saxius in his Hist. Lit. Typog. Mediol p. DLIX. ) should have a rival in order that
the Milanese might buy books at a cheaper rate ? The Offices of St. Ambrose,
of the date of 1474, are said to be printed at Milan by Valdarfer of Ratisbon ;'
and probably exhibits the first specimen of his Milanese press. See the Bibl.
Spencer. vol. i. p. 166.
"
In the second place, of JOHN DE COLONIA ; who is, in every respect, worthy
of the eulogy which has been bestowed upon his predecessor. I am not sure
that we have any dated book, of his printing, before the year 1471 ; when
appeared the Terence and the Cicero de Finibus. In the colophon of the Terence (see B. S. vol. ii . p. 411 ) he styles himself, in the whimsical naïveté of the old
school, Ioanes Agrippinae coloniae decus. ' In the year 1472 he appears to
have gone into partnership, or at least to have printed in conjunction, with
Vindelin de Spira ; as the colophon of the Plautus, of that date, bears a proud and
positive testimony. And here Mr. Grenville's glorious copy of this rare and fine
volume comes immediately to one's recollection , and is an absolute refresher in the
midst of all this bibliographical digging ! Yet how can I omit to mention, with
the distinction which it merits, the very beautiful, if not matchless, copy of
FOURTH DAY. 403
BELINDA. Did I not, in the early part of the day, hear
mention made of one ULRIC ZEL of Hanau-who told the
editor of the Cologne Chronicle something about the origin
of the art of printing?
Theodore Gaza's Latin version of Aristotle upon Animals,' of the date of 1476,
in folio, UPON VELLUM, from the press of John of Cologne-of which my friend
Sir M. M. Sykes is the fortunate possessor ?! If my memory be not treacherous,
this is the most exquisite specimen of an early Venetian vellum book that I have ever seen.
Our printer appears to have been fond of a social compact ; for in 1474 , if not
before, he published in conjunction with JOHN MANTHEN DE GHERRETLHEM,
or DE GERRETZEM-as the colophons of the Orationes Philippica, and Calderinus
in Martialem, ofthat date, evidently testify. In 1481, if not earlier, we find him
coming forth with the celebrated Jenson, and using a device (in red ) which will
be given in the ensuing pages. A Latin Testament of this latter date, with the
commentaries of De Lyra, Paul Bishop of Bruges, and Matthius Dorinck, gives
us the following jocund ' colophon : charactere vero ipressum habes iucundissimo : impensaque : curaque singulari optimorum Iohannis de colonia Nicolai
ienson : sociorumque,' &c. Lord Spencer's library contains beautiful and precious
specimens of I. de Colonia's press, from the year 1471 to 1479, inclusively ; of
which latter date is the Vita Pontificum of Platina-an impression, in its uncastrated state, and of more importance than I had formerly imagined ; according to
the saucy notice of Marchand, in his Hist. de l'Imprimerie, p. 97. At the first glance,
there is a strong resemblance between the types of John de Colonia and Vindelin
de Spira. Where no name of printer is subjoined, the books of these great typographical artists may be taken for each other : or, as I conceive, perhaps not
with perfect accuracy, the books of J. de Colonia are known by a gothic v , and a
gothic final ij, as may be seen in the B. S. vol . ii. p. 419.
FRANCISCUS DE HAILBRUN is our third typographical hero ; and I can
readily anticipate a presentiment of satisfaction , in the mind of the reader,
respecting the account of this distinguished printer. Of his abilities in the
management of the gothic type (with which he printed two Latin Bibles, one of
the date of 1475 , and another of that of 1476, in conjunction with NICOLAS DE FRANKFORDIA) a word or two has been already spoken : see p. 401 , ante. He
commenced his career about the year 1472 ; when he printed, in a thin and spare
Roman type, the Opus Quadragesimale of Robertus de Litio- described in the
Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. iv. p. 526. This type was afterwards abandoned by him
for one of a fuller face, and more perfect symmetry ; as his Pomponius Mela and
Sacrobustus, each of the date of 1478 (see B. S. vol. ii . p . 285, vol . iii . p. 501,)
decidedly and most satisfactorily prove. These latter are truly elegant little
productions ; varied by ornamented capital initials, and the introduction of red
ink. They are however clearly executed upon the model of Ratdolt's press ;
404 FOURTH DAY.
LYSANDER. I thank you for the hint. Zel ought indeed
to have immediately succeeded Sweynheym and Pannartz ;
but, to speak fairly, he is not a great favourite with me. He
brought with him a true German taste. His type is uniformly
gothic, of rather a barbarous aspect, and not very skilfully
worked. His earlier pieces, such as the Chrysostom of 1466,
between which and that of Hailbrun there is an almost perfect concordance.
Let Franciscus de Hailbrun, however, have more than one niche in a library
sparkling with the gems of early printing!
ADAM DE AMBERGAU shall be briefly dispatched ; yet he is a typographical
wight ofno insignificant calibre . His type I think has quite an imposing aspect ;
and as it bears a close resemblance to that of FLORENTIUS DE ARGENTINA, a
fac- simile of the latter, as given in the B. S. vol . iii . p. 499, ( although much too
heavily impressed ) will afford some notion of its character and effect, His
Lactantius of 1471 is a grand as well as rare volume ; and the copy of it, UPON
VELLUM, in the Blenheim library, must have an effect which a thorough- bred
bibliographer and collector can duly feel and appreciate. I make no doubt that
a copy of his Orations ofCicero, of the date of 1472, also exists upon vellum.
Beauteous gems ! .. diffusing a lustre beyond that of the most successful trials of
gas or oil!
' Last, though not least, ' in the order of this note, comes ERHARD RATDOLT ;
thedear delight' of a skilful typographical antiquary and tasteful collector.
Bring hither the curious cushion, bordered with flowers or classical groups
executed by Titian ... and let the Appian of1477 repose upon the same ! Scatter
fragrance, extracted from the most precious and pungent aromatics, and let the
sounds of soft music float in the hushed air, while the Euclid of 1482, UPON
VELLUM, unspotted as the Alpine snow, is gently laid upon the said Appian of
1477 ! Romantic extravagance ! .. Know then , quiet reader, in simple and sober
language, that the edition first mentioned contains one of the most beautiful
specimens extant of Roman, and the edition, last mentioned, a specimen of equal
beauty of Gothic, printing. The former has broad ornamental borders, at the
beginning, sometimes in red, but more frequently in black, ink. The smaller
pieces of Ratdolt, such as his Hyginus of 1482, his Publicius of 1485, and his
Chronicle ofHungarian Kings of 1488, each in the Gothic type, and the Pomponius
Mela of 1477, in the Roman character, are exceedingly elegant and successful
experiments of his press. He used ornamented capital letters ; and his mathematical figures, in the Euclid, shew how carefully and admirably he had exerted
himself in what was requisite to do complete justice to his art. It will be a
satisfaction to the Ratdolt- loving collector, to know, that specimens of his press
are by no means of uncommon occurrence. And thus take we leave of these five
' fine fellows-CHRISTOPHER VALDARFER, I. DE COLONIA, FRANCISCUS DE
HAILBRUN, ADAM DE AMBERGAU, and ERHARD RATDOLT."
FOURTH DAY. 405
are the better printed ; but his taste, I think, in the selection
ofauthors, was almost uniformly bad : and such an indefatigable printer of quarto brochures, has rarely appeared
before the public ! I never saw but one of his books UPON
VELLUM ; which is the Enchiridion of St. Austin. He is
supposed to have been the earliest printer at Cologne ; *
supposed to have been the earliest printer at Cologne. ] There can be no doubt,
I think, of Ulric Zel's being the FATHER OF THE COLOGNE PRESS. The first
book of his printing, with a date, is the St. Chrysostom upon the 50th Psalm, of
1466, in quarto : in the colophon of which he describes himself as Ulric Zel of
Hanau, a Clerk of the Diocese of Mentz.' In the De Singularitate Clericorum of
St. Austin, of the date of 1467, ( B. S. p. 178-9) the same designation of himself
occurs ; but in neither the colophon of the one nor the other is the word ' Cologne'
to be found. Yet it is unquestionable that Zel lived, and carried on his business,
at Cologne. In the preceding, as in almost all the earlier pieces of Zel's press,
there are 33 lines in a page ; but in the Offices ofCicero (id. p. 307-10) there are
34 lines-while the generality of his publications, and those of a later date, have
only 27. His productions are almost endless, and, with the preceding exceptions
only, are without dates. He was, as Lysander intimates, an indefatigable printer
of quarto brochures ; ' among the scarcest of which is an impression of the
Orations of Cicero against Catiline (recently obtained by Lord Spencer) which
may possibly be the parent edition of that interesting performance. Another
scarce piece, from the Zel press, has also been recently acquired bythe Noble
Owner of the last mentioned work. It is a spurious work of Ovid, entitled ⚫ De
Nuncio sagaci,' beginning thus :
"
[S]ummi victoris fierē cũ victor amoris
Speraba curis fine posuisse futuris
Rursus ad arma vocat me querit et ecce cupido
Dic amor vnde venis. phraretris sic vndiq; pleis
Cui castra petis. vel cui9 vulnera tendis
Perde quem queris. certamina velle videris.
&c. &c. &c.
These savour strongly of their monkish origin. The poem is printed on 7 leaves,
with 24 lines in a page, concluding on the recto of the 7th leaf, after & lines of
text, thus :
Ouidij nasonis Sulmonensis poete
De nucio sagaci liber Explicit.
With the exceptions of his Latin Bible, and the Gesta Romanorum, which are
executed in his large type, Zel uniformly printed in a middle-sized and legible
character, but precisely gothic ; with the exception of the large E, which is like
a writing E. He seldom or never used numerals, signatures, or catchwords. The
406 FOURTH DAY.
but I should remind you that the first book, in the colophon
ofwhich the word Cologne appears, was printed by PETRUS
DE OLPE, in 1470. I will conclude this Cologne part of my
typographical review, by the mention only of TER HOernen ;
a frightful name, and in perfect unison with his printing ...
But I begin to grow wearied. Is it not time to adjourn ?
LORENZO. You will not surely dismiss us without saying
a word about the early Strasbourg, Augsbourg, and Milan
printers ?
LYSANDER. Our host is a bibliographical cormorant.
First, then, be it known that MENTELIN is considered as
the Father of the Strasbourg, as the ZAINERS are of the
Augsbourg, Press. They probably commenced their career
vellum book, above mentioned, is in the possession of Lord Spencer. It is fair
and sound, and the only VELLUM ULRIC ZEL I ever heard of.
It is true that PETRUS DE OLPE, in his Auctoritates Decretorum of 1470,
presents us with the first specimen of a printed book in which the word ' Cologne '
appears in the colophon. The type in this volume has rather a resemblance to
the smallest type used by Fust and Schoiffher ; while CONRAD DE HOMBORCH,
in the Manuale Confessorum ofJohn Nider (another Cologne production) exhibits
a better fount of letter than either Zel or De Olpe. Homborch is a very rare
printer. See the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol . iii . p. 168, 430. TER, or THER HOERNEN
shall occupy but a small niche here. He is rather a barbarous printer, as his
type is small, irregular, and ill-worked . He was however early in the Cologne
field, as the dates of 1470, 1471, and 1472, sufficiently testify ; and his Petrarch,
De Rem. Utriusq. Fortune,' of 1471, is, I believe, the first book which contains
PRINTED NUMERALS, See Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. iii. pp. 506, 452, 230.
* Mentelin, Father of the Strasbourg : the Zainers, Fathers of the Augsbourg
Press. ] First of MENTELIN ; concerning whom there is a sort of quickset hedge
to be previously got over. When did he begin to print-and what is his earliest
book with a date ? According to Wimpheling (as I read him in the later bibliographers), who appears to be followed by Leibnitz and Meerman, Mentelin was
well acquainted with Gutenberg at Strasbourg, and was not only probably in
structed by him in his art, but on Gutenberg's final departure to Mentz, he
established himself as a printer in the first named city. See Lichtenberger's
Initia Typographica, p. 53. That Mentelin was resident at Strasbourg, in the
middle ofthe xvth century, is quite conclusive from the two documents extracted
by Schoepflin (Appx. p . 42 : A.D. 1445-1450. ) respecting his talents as a calligraphist. There have not however been wanting those, who, influenced rather
FOURTH DAY. 407
about the same period, although we have less accurate intelligence of the precise date of the earliest specimen of the
press of the former : for, certain it is, that Ginther or
Gunther Zainer printed as early as 1468 -while we have
(
by misplaced zeal, or invincible prejudice, than by dispassionate enquiry, have
made out Mentelin to be the Father of Printing in general ! .. but these gentlemen,
to wit, Gebvilerus, I. Schott, J. Mentel (a physician, and descendant- it is presumed) and J. Spiegel (especially the first) have been properly trounced for
their temerity, in the valuable pages of Schoepflin. Mentelius's Excursus, ' and
' Paranesis ' are published in the Monument. Typog. vol. ii . p. 189 , 404. Nor
must greater credit be attached to the Anonymous Strasbourg Chronicle of the
latter end of the xvth century,' adduced by Tenzelius, which makes Gutenberg
a servant of Mentelin ! Consult Lichtenberger, p. 56. The sober testimony of
I. P. de Lignamine is quite refreshing in the midst of these idle gossippings.
That learned printer places the operations of Mentelin's press between the year
1458 and 1464 ; and says that as well as Gutenberg and Fust, Mentelin
printed 300 sheets a day at Strasbourg.' Bibl. Spenceriana, vol . iii. p. 253.
I think there can be no doubt that the De Arte Prædicandi of St. Austin was
executed before the year 1466, and was probably the first fruit of Mentelin's
press. Of this very rare typographical curiosity, there are two editions : see
the B. S. vol. i . p. 179-181 . The Homilies of St. Chrysostom, and the Latin Bible,
(each dateless, but executed in his same small and barbarous type) are probably
Mentelin's next works in chronological order ; while the Terence, Valerius
Maximus, and Virgil, executed in a larger, but equally barbarous, gothic type,
may be considered as later performances : however, in respect to the authors
themselves, they may claim the rank of Editiones Principes. The only work
with a date, to which his name appears in the colophon, is the one above mentioned by Lysander. The smaller gothic type of Mentelin does certainly bear a
resemblance to that of the Catholicon of 1460, supposed to have been executed
by Gutenberg. It is sufficiently mean and irregular. EGGESTEYN's impression
of the Decretum Gratiani, 1471, folio, is the first book in which the date, name
of the printer, and of the town, (Strasbourg) appear together in the colophon.
The ZAINERS (GUNTHER and JOHN) were unequivocally the first printers at
Augsbourg ; and the earliest book, printed (by Gunther Zainer) in that city, is of
the date of 1468 —namely, Bonaventure's Meditations upon the Life of Christ.
The Catholicon of 1469, and Aurbach, upon the Seven Sacraments, ' also in 1469,
and each executed in the same handsome and full faced gothic type, were the
next Augsbourg productions ; while in the year 1471 came forth, for the first
time, a new gothic fount of letter, by the same Gunther Zainer, in the Ovid de
Arte Amandi: see Bibl. Spenceriana, vol . ii. 201. The latter very broad and
coarse- visaged gothic character, was used by the younger brother, John, in his
very curious and rare Latin and German edition of Æsop's Fables : a volume, in
408 FOURTH DAY.
no book, in which the city of Strasbourg is colophonised, (if
you will admit of this barbarous expression) before the year
1471. Perhaps more fuss is made about Mentelin than he
merits ; as his type is exceedingly indifferent, and many
works bear the character of having been put forth from his
press, which in fact may have been elsewhere executed. The
only book wherein I have seen his name, as the printer, is
the Speculum Historiale of Vincent Beauvais, executed in a
roman letter, of the date of 1473 ; and of which a magnificent copy is in the possession of His Grace the Duke of
Devonshire. As to the Milanese printers, they partook, in
the formation of their types, and in the skill of their performances, of the Venetian school of the art of printing.
ZAROTUS and PHILIP DE LAVAGNIA are at the head of
them : * but pray read Saxius's History of Milanese
Literature and Printing, and you will scarcely want any
which it delights me, at this moment, to think that I have revelled to excess.
But Gunther (or Ginther, as he is sometimes designated) has the proud distinction of having printed the first book, in roman types, in Germany : namely,
the De Responsione Mundi ' of Isidore, of the date of 1472 ; of which Earl
Spencer and Sir M. M. Sykes each possesses a copy UPON VELLUM. This roman
type is of a good size, but much inferior, both in shape and execution, to what
we see in the contemporaneous productions of Venice. Let me here ask whether
Gunther Zainer left off his smaller, and better proportioned, gothic type, on
account of Schuszeler's having come forward with precisely the same gothic fount
in his Josephus of 1470 ? Was there any duel between the elder Zainer and
Schuszeler in consequence ? Let the Augsbourg antiquaries look to this point.
Tis worth a full three months roll -rummaging!
* Zarotus and Philip de Lavagnia are at the head of them. ] The printing of
ZAROTUS is distinguished for its evenness, firmness, and legibility ; and his letter
comes nearer to Jenson's type than the generality of that of contemporaneous
printers. His Pompeius Festus of 1471 is probably his first printed book. PHILIP
LAVAGNUS, OF PHILIP DE LAVAGNIA (for he spells his name both ways) is also
a printer of great elegance ; but his type is perhaps rather too tall and close for
perfectness of symmetry. He had, as well as Zarotus, a fine taste in the selection
of authors ; and among the more beautiful and desirable specimens of his press
are the Epistles of Cicero, of 1472, the Historians of the Augustan Age, 1476, and
FOURTH DAY. 409
further information upon this point. Let me not however
omit to direct your attention to the typographical productions of two other Monasteries, as well as to those of the
Soubiaco ; in which latter our friend Lisardo seems so
anxious to take up a lodging ... I mean, the Eusebian and
Sortensian Monasteries.* At the same time I must admit
that the works which have issued from the presses of these
the dateless folio Horace, usually, but inaccurately, called the Editio Princeps.
It is owing to the sagacity and perseverance of Count Delci of Vienna that this
latter piece of desirable intelligence is here made public.
6
* the Eusebian and Sortensian Monasteries. ] Some mention of the Eusebian
monastery, or rather of the supposition of Laver's having been the director of
that monastic press, will be found at page 392, ante. It remains here to add,
that the Homilies of Șt. Chrysostom upon the Gospel of St. John, of the date of
1470, are supposed to be the first production of the same press : see the Bibl.
Spenceriana, vol. i. p . 194-6 ; where a fac- simile of the type is also given. Yet
are we sure that these Homilies were printed there ? The words are : in S.
Eusebii monasterio scripta et diligëter correcte '-We desiderate therefore the important word impressæ. ' A singular variety, or deviation-call it what you
please -occurred in a copy of this rare and fine book in the possession of Mr.
Singer, from the collection of the late Duke of Grafton. Within about 106
leaves of the end of that copy, were 2 lines, printed in a detached manner, on
the bottom-margin, thus :
ex operibus : ita et cognatio iudicatur. Neq: cötinuo
respondit non esse ex semine Abrae homicidas iusti
which, in Lord Spencer's copy, do not appear. This however may be classed
among the nuge- rather perhaps the cruces-of bibliography. The Spencer
library has been recently enriched with two other specimens from the press of
the Eusebian monastery. One is a small dateless quarto ; being a Latin version
of Lucian's Dialogue called Charon,' (with a poetical and prosaic prefix by the
anonymous translator, ) consisting of 80 leaves, without numerals, signatures, or
catchwords, with 24 lines in a full page ; and concluding with a dialogue respecting the precedence of Alexander, Annibal, and Scipio-as in the edition of 1482,
described in the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol . ii . p . 148. The other is a Bull of Pope
Paul II. of the date of 1470 , in folio, 4 leaves : of excessive rarity.
From the SORTENSIAN MONASTERY only one volume is at present known to
have issued : and that volume contains a Comedy of Leonard. Aretin, and the
Plays of Terence of the date of 1478. These impressions are fully described
in the work last referred to, and fac- similes of the type will be found in vol. ii .
p. 422, and vol. iii . p. 163. Without doubt these plays were originally published
together in the same volume.
410 FOURTH DAY.
monasteries are by no means remarkable for their elegance
of execution.
I must now really pause : having visited all the objects
in the bibliographical landscape which was placed before
you at the commencement of this Day's discourse. If I
have occasionally led you to tread upon rough stones, or to
stumble against projecting points, such accidents were probably unavoidable. Over a surface so varied, and at times
so intricate, who could expect to glide along with the swiftness of Camilla ? But I am mounting a high horse : . . and
so, reserving the remaining part ofthis Pleasant Discourse'
till the morrow, I give you all God's blessing and a good
day. It is really time to taste the fresh air.
6
On the following morning Lysander resumed thus :
H
N
Ma
Q.R
HansSebald Beham fet
S.T.
Y
Swainefre
ISB
LONDON:
FROM THE Shakspeare Press , BY
WILLIAM BULMER AND CO. CLEVELAND- ROW,
ST. JAMES'S.
1817.



}
11
APR 1 1 1947
