
THE
Library Companion;
OR,
THE YOUNG MAN'S GUIDE,
AND
THE OLD MAN'S COMFORT,
IN THE
R
CHOICE OF A LIBRARY.
BY THE
REV. T. F. DIBDIN, F. R. S., A. S.
BOOK OPENETH BOOK.
LONDON: PRINTED FOR
HARDING, TRIPHOOK, AND LEPARD, FINSBURY- SQUARE ;
AND J. MAJOR, FLEET- STREET.
MDCCCXXIV.
N. libr. 77 9-112
779-
W. NICOL, PRINTER, SUCCESSOR TO W. BULMER AND CO.
Shakspeare Press.
H
Bayerische Staatsbibliothek
München
то
MR. THOMAS PAYNE,
BOOKSELLER,
THIS WORK IS INSCRIBED
WITH EVERY SENTIMENT
OF RESPECT AND ESTEEM,
BY HIS FAITHFUL
AND HUMBLE SERVANT,
THE AUTHOR.
Bayerische
Staatsbibliothek
THE
PREFACE.
ITT will be obvious, from the slightest glance at the
ensuing pages, that it has been the object of their
author to present a great quantity of useful information within a reasonable compass. A work which,
like the present, aspires to be a Guide to Youth and
a Comfort to Old Age, should be rendered at once
commodious in form and moderate in price ; and
considering the extent and variety of the subjects
here treated, it is presumed that both these points will
be found to have been accomplished in the volume
now in the hands of the Public.
But a consideration of much greater importance
has influenced me on the present occasion . From the
beginning to the end, I have never lost sight of what
I considered to be the MOST MATERIAL OBJECT to be
gained from a publication of this nature ; namely, the
imparting of a moral feeling to the gratification of a
literary taste. Let us consider the subject dispassionately. Great Britain is the most wealthy, and, politically speaking, perhaps the most powerful kingdom
upon earth. Considered in a domestic point of view,
here are thousands of large and affluent families ; and
b
ii PREFACE.
education, both in Public Schools and at our two Universities, necessarily assumes an expensive form. No
liberal-minded parent grudges the devotion of a considerable portion of his income to the maintenance
of his family. But even wealth and personal influence
cannot procure immediate admission into our Universities ; where the number of applicants exceeds the
means of accommodation at least in a two-fold degree.
It follows therefore, that of the rising generation, a
large proportion, inheriting a considerable property,
and educated in the most accomplished manner, commence their career in life with the means and opportunities of gratifying their tastes and passions in a
thousand diverse, and at times contradictory, pursuits.
To SUCH, in particular, whether emerging from the
cloisters of a college, or from the upper form of a
public school, this LIBRARY COMPANION will be found
of more consequence than may be at first imagined :
'for I am greatly deceived if experience does not prove
that much more than half of the misery which is
abroad in the world, in the higher classes of society,
has arisen from the mischievous application of superfluous wealth. I address myself therefore immediately,
directly, and honestly, to the YOUNG MAN, in whose
hands such means may be deposited, to devote them
to the gratification of a legitimate taste in the cultivation of Literature ; and as this object cannot be
accomplished without the acquisition of a LIBRARY,
of greater or less extent, I venture to indulge a
humble hope that THIS GUIDE, in the choice of such
PREFACE. iii
a Library, may be found, as far as it extends, * useful
and accurate. The objects, to be attained in such a
* A list of the table of Contents, immediately following the preface, will shew what is to be found in "the Library Companion, '
If I had taken up other subjects, it is clear that, to be treated in a
satisfactory manner, they would have enlarged this work to at least
double its size. But it may be here right to remark, that, în TopoGRAPHY, nothing could be added to the satisfactory and indispensable
work of MR. UPCOTT upon that subject, published in three well
arranged and well printed octavo volumes ; but of which I learn
with regret that the impression is limited, and not likely to be
renewed. The lover and collector of COUNTY HISTORIES, ( of which
class of readers the number is very considerable) has only to avail
himself of this work, and he will find all his wants supplied ... in a
bibliographical point of view.
For HERALDIC RESEARCHES, I was compelled to decline the kind
offer of Mr. Richard Thomson (whose pursuits so decidedly qualified
him for the task) to furnish me with a dozen or twenty pages upon
that subject ; since I considered Mr. MOULE's Bibliotheca Heraldica,
1822, 8vo. admirably well calculated to satisfy every enquiry. For
the FINE ARTS, the very curious Catalogue ofthe Books on Art, and on
Antiquity, in the possession of Count Cicognara, (published in the Italian
language) 1821 , 8vo. 2 vols . might have furnished me with many useful hints ; but the task seemed to grow upon, and to perplex, me as I
considered it. Of all others, it is one of the most difficult departments
to execute in a bibliographical manner. Inthe mean while , it is pleasing to observe that no stimulants are necessary for the encouragement ofthis department of Taste ; and that publications of every
description, in which the art is good, never fail of patronage. I
might have descanted copiously and warmly upon the Views of the
South-Western Coast ofEngland, executed by Messrs. Cooks and others
from the magical pencil of Mr. Turner ; but such an eulogy were
useless. The publication cannot keep pace with the eager demands
of the Subscribers. The ILLUSTRIOUS PORTRAITS now in a course of
publication, by the Publishers of this work, are properly noticed in
iv PREFACE.
pursuit, are of a most important and substantial
character. Religion, patriotism, public and private
happiness, pure and fixed principles of taste, intellectual refinement, of the most exalted kind, in its present and future results, are all involved in a sedulous
and straight-forward cultivation of the pursuit in
question. I forbear fortifying these remarks by the
authorities of ancient and modern writers of acknowledged celebrity . From Cicero to Richard of Bury,
the stream of such authorities is uniformly bright and
the department of " Biography, Memoirs, Anecdotes, " at page 503,
post. Yet, while on this department of art, let a hearty tribute of
commendation be bestowed on the miniature engravings, in the line
manner, of Mr. Walmsley's Physiognomical Portraits. They are now
completed ; and the works of nearly all the most distinguished Artists
of the day will be found to be incorporated in it .
But that the subject may not be WHOLLY Overlooked, let me recommend to those, who have the means of gratifying themselves with a
copy of it, the Histoire de l'Art par les Monumens, &c. of AGINCOURT
SEROUX, 1820 ; in six folio volumes ; and containing not fewer than
325 plates of every description. A well bound copy of this work is
worth 30l. A noble concomitant to it, is the Storia della Scultura, &c.
of LEOPOLD CICOGNARA, 1813-1818 ; in 3 folio volumes, containing
181 copper plates . A handsomely bound copy is worth 15l. There
were only 20 copies worked off on fine vellum paper, which are very
Italy boasts of few living COGNOSCENTI of greater eminence
than the author of this magnificent work.
scarce.
As to ANTIQUITIES, the department is so copious that it will be
obvious it could not be included, with other subjects, in the compass
of an octavo volume. Had I entered upon that department, my attention must have been drawn in the first instance to press strongly
upon the consideration of both " the YOUNG" and THE OLD, " the
beautiful , and indeed captivating performance, which has just appeared
PREFACE .
strong ;* and callous must be the heart, or obtuse the
intellect, of that Young Man, upon whom such authorities make no impression.
The days of Youth, so devoted, lead to the comforts of OLD AGE. To the more advanced in life,
therefore, an appeal is made with the greater confidence ; inasmuch as memory will be refreshed, and
under the title of The Monumental Remains ofNoble and Eminent Persons, comprising The Sepulchral Antiquities of Great Britain ; with historical and biographical Illustrations . The engravings, in the line manner, are from the faithful pencil, and in part from the burin, of Mr.
BLORE ; and more brilliant, or rather characteristic performances,
havenever yet been witnessed. The proof impressions, on India paper,
have a fascinating effect ; but the critical antiquary will be equally
well pleased with the ordinary copies . This work is also as reasonable in price as it is rich in embellishments ; and the text is executed with equal neatness and care.
* The whole of the first book of Morhof's Polyhistor Literarius is
more or less occupied with references to such authorities ; which,
to repeat at second hand, might subject me to the charge of affectation. But in regard to that division of the work, appropriated to
DIVINITY and ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY, and about the favourable
reception ofwhich I am necessarily the most anxious, it may in several instances be urged that many works of piety and moral worth
have been omitted, and that a preference has been given to those
writings which are considered to savour more strongly of the orthodory ofthe BRITISH CHURCH . But this is only a confined, and in
truth, a partial view of the whole question : for the point at issue is,
what is the probable aggregate good of the writings of those Divines,
of whom , in the following pages, such honourable mention has been
made ? The wayward, the prejudiced, and the bigotted, may draw
what inferences they please. I contend that, from THOSE writings,
“ the learned (in the language of Lactantius*) maybe directed to true
* Divin. Instit, Lib. I. Edit. Du Fresnoy ; 1748, vol. i . p. 3.
vi PREFACE.
experience confirmed, by a reference to the pages of
this " Library Companion." There are many, doubtless, of such experienced Readers, whose extensive
reading, and whose copious Libraries, will furnish
them with the means of supplying many omissions,
and of illustrating many remarks : but, in a work of
this nature, the difficulty has been rather to compress,
than to enlarge, the several subjects which presented
themselves. To the well read young Man-be he
enthusiastic in the cause, or well-versed in the mysteries, of BIBLIOMANIA, or not-and to the OLD, of
whatever denomination-it may be fairly stated, that
the work before them is replete with curious and
diversified intelligence ; gleaned with unceasing industry, and embodied with no ordinary care. Indeed,
with perfect confidence may it be stated, that no single
volume in our language contains such a record of so
many rare, precious, and instructive volumes. The
wisdom, and the unlearned to true religion. " And farther, that, from
the SAME writings, the intrepid Christian may speak in the energetic
language of the same polished author ... " Da mihi virum, (for the
most successful translation would somewhat weaken the passage)
qui sit iracundus, maledicus, effrænatus : paucissimis Dei verbis
tam placidum, quàm ovem reddam.
Da cupidum, avarum, tenacem ; jam tibi eum liberalem dabo, et pecuniam suam plenis manibus largientem. Da timidum doloris ac mortis, jam cruces, et ignes, et taurum contemnet. " &c. Div. Inst. Lib. III.
On this, and on every similar occasion, I exclaim with honest CHILLINGWORTH— " it is Truth I plead for ; which is so strong an argument for itself, that it needs only light to discover it. Whereas it
concerns falshood and error to use disguise and shadowings, and all
the fetches ofart and sophistry." Works, 1742, Fol. Ded. to Ch. II.
PREFACE. vii
fault is my own, if the method of conveying that
instruction be not clear and satisfactory.
66
There is one point of view in which the advantage
of a work of this nature may be noticed, however
slightly : especially as, in the present instance, it may
be illustrated by an example of no mean authority.
From the several departments of a volume of THIS
kind, the reader may select what will be useful for the
several objects of his pursuit : what is fitting for his
town, and what for his country, residence : what
should be the light troops, as it were, to attend him
on a journey; and what the heavier or household
troops to remain at head quarters. I have alluded to
an example of no mean authority, " as confirmative
ofthe advantage of such a plan. That example iş his
late Majesty GEORGE III.: who could not only boast
of the finest private library (of his own collecting) in
Europe, but who was himself no inconsiderable bibliographer. In the year 1795 , when his Majesty was
about to visit Weymouth-and wished to have what
he called " a closet library, " for a watering place-he
wrote to his Bookseller for the following works.
The list was written by him from memory ; and I
will fairly put it to the well read bibliographer and
philologist, whether it be capable of much improvement? It is as follows- copied from the original
document in the King's own hand writing :
The Holy Bible ; 2 vols . 8vo. Cambridge.
New Whole Duty of Man, 8vo.
The Annual Register, 25 vols. 8vo.
The History of England, by Rapin, 21 vols. 8vo . 1757.
Elémens de l'Histoire de France, par Millot, 3 vols. 12mo. 1770.
viii PREFACE.
Siècle de Louis XIV. par Voltaire, 12mo.
XV. par
Voltaire
, 12mo
.
Commentaries on the Laws of England, by William Blackstone,
4 vols. 8vo. , newest edition.
糖
The Justice of Peace, and Parish Officer, by R. Burn, 4 vols. 8vo.
An Abridgement of Samuel Johnson's Dictionary, 2 vols. 8vo.
Dictionnaire François & Anglois, par M. A. Boyer, 8vo.
The Works of the English Poets, by Sam. Johnson, 68 vols . 12mo.
A Collection of Poems, by Dodsley, Pearch and Mendez, 11 vols.
12mo.
A Select Collection of Poems, by J. Nichols, 8 vols . 12mo.
Shakespeare's Plays, by Steevens.
Œuvres de Destouches, 5 vols. 12mo.
The Works of Sir William Temple, 4 vols. 8vo.
The Miscellaneous Works of Addison, 4 vols. 8vo.
The Works of Jonathan Swift, 24 vols. 12mo.
Thus, to revert to the position with which this
branch of our enquiries set out, the purchasers of this
Work (who may not probably be so well versed in
selecting " a closet library" as his late Majesty) may
have it in their power to compress or enlarge their
libraries, on any scale which may seem most convenient and advisable.
I now come to a more particular account of the nature of the work itself. Referring to the note, in a
preceding page (iii . ) as to the inevitable Omissions,
be it permitted me here to say a word as to its absolute Contents. There are two collateral branches,
inevitably growing out of a work of this nature, which
require more skill in the treatment than I am conscious of having exhibited. These are, Extracts and
Anecdotes. A bibliographer should not only know
PREFACE. ix
the dates and conditions of books, but he should
know some little of their internal character, and of
the histories of their authors. In regard to the former,
it will be seen that those passages have been extracted which are not only exclusively professional, *
but which are supposed to be replete with original
and interesting matter. The volumes from which
they are taken are also of unusual occurrence. But
in spite of these claims to approbation, I fear that the
SERMONS ofthe Old English Divines may have been a
little too freely dealt with : and that even this " mentis
gratissimus error" cannot be received as an apology.
--
A more difficult temptation to resist, was that of
Anecdote : the most delightful, and at times the
most instructive, department of literary research.
But it has been sparingly introduced. Slight sketches
are given of a few of the more prominent characters
of former and modern times, in order to enliven the
* The extracts from the Sermons of LATIMER, FOX, DRANT, and
EDGEWORTH, extend from page 66 to 83 ; but they are replete with
both curious and edifying matter. Previous to which the reader may
examine a short but noble passage from BARNES, (page 27) and a
very singular extract from a work called Grounds and Occasions ofthe
Contempt ofthe Clergy and Religion enquired into, 1670, 8vo. p . 57-8,
For other extracts, the reprint (in three pages only) of that extraordinary Dialogue between Bishop GARDINER and Judge HAILES, in the
time of Queen Mary, is the longest to be qualified by an apology ;
while, onliterary and philological subjects, the extract from Hearne
and from the Itinerary of Fynes Moryson (page 227 and page 433)
are alone of a length to need excuse.
+ OfPERSONALANECDOTES and CRITICISM,the chiefmay relate to the
articles Mezerai (p. 291) , Bayle, (p. 484 ) Amyot (p . 489) Fugger (p . 495)
X PREFACE.
unavoidable dryness of bibliographical detail ; and
many living Characters are frequently mentioned, to
whom, in this place, any allusion would be premature
if not indecorous.
To critics, of every denomination, I am anxious to
address myself as not being desirous of shunning
merited castigation for frequent and palpable errors.
But, on the other hand, if the omission of much that
might be deemed essential for introduction, be
pointed out and condemned, it must be remembered
that much has been collected and brought together
from numerous, and at times discordant, sources :
and that the LIBRARY COMPANION, with its present
contents, might have been easily dilated into three
respectable volumes. And here, let me be allowed to
anticipate an objection which may be made, from the
apparent vanity of such frequent references to my
own publications. The truth is, in the first place,
that an author has a right to make use of his own
property as he may think proper : but, in the second
place, having devoted so many years to the study,
and published so many works on the subject, of BIBLIOGRAPHY, it were barely possible to avoid noticing
rare, curious, and valuable books, which had not been
described, with more or less minuteness, in the publications referred to. In no instance however, have I
made such reference, where I was conscious of having
it in mypower to direct the reader to a more copious
Dr. Johnson (pp. 510, 523 ) Strype (page 516) Robert Burton (page 599)
Addison (page 603) Swift, De Foe (page 606) -and to the most eminent of living Poets.
PREFACE. xi
or accurate detail. This avowal, fairly and honestly
made, will, it is hoped, justify, as well as account for,
the frequent references to the Bibliomania, Bibliographical Decameron, Typographical Antiquities, and
Bibliotheca Spenceriana. The age of " Commendatory Prefixes " is past. The Muse of a friend is no
longer invoked to throw her protecting arms round
the labours of an author ; who is now doomed to
stand or fall by the intrinsic merit, or the insufficiency,
of the performance which he submits to the world at
large.
*The fashion of prefixing commendatory verses to publications of
any note, obtained till as late as the end of the reign of George II.—
ifnot later. During the seventeenth century these verses were in high
vogue : but among them, my reading has furnished me with none so
truly quaint and original as the following -prefixed to " Solomonis
HAN APETOX : or a Commentarie upon the Book of Proverbs, Ecclesiastes,
and the Song of Songs ! By JOHN TRAPP, M. A. Pastor ofWeston upon
Avon in Glocestershire, 1650, 4to. " [The Author was the Father of the
well known Translator of Virgil.]
On the Books of Solomon opened by Master Trapp.
I stood in Solomon's Forch before,
Unable to unlock the doore,
And view the glory that within
Rather than live I would have seen.
Nowin his Temple walk I can,
And hear my Maker talk with man,
And clearly understand his mind ;
Though mysteries, no mists, I find.
The Holy of Holies open lies,
No longer kept from common eyes.
Each Starre may now an Eagle be,
And freely up to Phœbus flee.
xii PREFACE.
But in the anticipation of a favourable or unfavourable issue, from such a formidable tribunal, it is impossible for that author not to feel something like
anxiety, in spite even of the approbation which may
have attended his previous labours. The growth of
knowledge is daily increasing in rapidity and strength.
In this wonderful country, it is barely possible for
those, who lead a quiet and uniform life far beyond
the reach ofthe hum of our great Metropolis, to form
a correct notion of the various channels by which
knowledge is so swiftly and so widely diffused ; and it
is not the least instructive feature in the HISTORY OF
Books, to be apprised of the expenses incurred, and
hazards run, in the establishment of a popular and
useful work. The gift of speech and the gift of knowledge should seem to be almost simultaneous. There
are at this moment before me, the CATALOGUES of
SCHOOL BOOKS circulated by the two greatest Publishers in England. I mean the catalogue of Messrs.
Longman, Hurst, Rees, and Co. and that of Messrs.
G. and W. B. Whittaker. The most superficial view
of the contents of these Catalogues, shews the extraordinary and advantageous variety of instruction which
they contain. Science, Arts, Trade, Manners, Customs
-something of every thing, and of the very best kind
-will be found in each ; and little does the studious,
or fanciful, or classical Writer imagine, that, while
Ifyou would know how in I gat,
I passed through the Beautifull Gate ;
This Dore ofTrapp, or this Trap-dore.
Trapp, Trapp !--but GoD I must adore.
PREFACE. xiii
months and years are consumed in the composition
ofa Work, of which the success is doubtful, and the
remuneration remote, some of the authors, whose productions are found in the catalogues just mentioned,
bring a never failing golden harvest to their Proprietors. The names of LINDLEY MURRAY and PINNOCK * may, in this point of view, almost vie with
that of the AUTHOR of WAVERLY.
* First, for the" Catalogues of School Books " published by the abovementioned Booksellers . They are of about the same extent with
each other. In that of Messrs. Longman and Co. the following are
the names which appear to be of the greatest importance. Adam,
Aikin, Barbauld, Bingley, Blair, (Rev. D.) Bonnycastle, Carey, Gregory,
Hornsey, Hort, Howard, Hutton, Joyce, Mavor, Molineux, Murray,
(Lindley) Pinkerton, Robinson, Shepherd, (with Joyce and Lant) Smith,
Taylor (Mrs.) Trimmer, Valpy, Vyse, Walker, Wanostrocht, and Watkins. I mention only those authors of a comparatively modern date ;
and omit the countless impressions, in every variety of form and
price, of the English Classics, of a longer established reputation.
The names of Goldsmith and Watts alone furnish a little library of
amusing and instructive information.
But of authors of modern celebrity in this copious list, none appear
to have been so fruitful, and to have produced works of which the
sale has been so eminently prosperous, as Mr. LINDLEY MURRAY. His
English Grammar (including all the publications connected with it )
is a work of which it would be better to speak of editions of tens of
thousands ofcopies, than of a few solitary thousands. His Power of
Religion on the Mind and his Spelling Book arethe next publications of
numerical, as well as intrinsic, importance ; and both abroad and at
homethe sale is wonderfully extensive and successful.
In the Catalogue of Messrs. Whittaker the names of Millar,
Pawley, Roberts, Stackhouse, and Wyld, are distinguished as authors of
ATLASES on different scales ; and relating to different countries . The
sale ofthese works is perhaps greater than can be readily conceived.
xiv PREFACE.
The diffusion ofknowledge for adult readers, has of
late years, or rather very recently, been equally rapid
and efficient. The time is in the remembrance of
every man of forty-five, when we were well content
to wait for monthly contributions, in the shape of
Magazines, to our stock of knowledge. That time is
gone by, perhaps never to return. There is, at preBut let me go at once to the name of PINNOCK. The publications
under the title of Pinnock's Catechisms comprise not fewer than
SIXTY FOUR in number. They are arranged in alphabetical order ;
beginning with Agriculture and ending with Universal History. They
comprise a great variety of subject of literature and science ; and
besides these, there are the County Histories, and the Histories of
England, Greece, and other Countries, by the same hand. Of the same
Author's Catechism ofthe Bible and Gospel Histories, one impression has
reached SEVENTY THOUSAND Copies ; but the price of the work is
necessarily low and I believe I am not exaggerating the fact, when
I state that the exclusive copy right of the whole of these Catechisms
has not been secured to the Proprietors under the sum of THIRTY
THOUSAND POUNDS. Let the reflecting reader consider, from the data
here laid down, what is the quantity of instruction which is daily in
circulation among the infantine world ; or among those who have
scarcely reached their sixth year ? Fifty years ago there was
hardly any pabulum of the kind ; or that pabulum was exclusively
distributed, from the repository of our old acquaintance Dan Newbury, in St. Paul's Church-yard .*
But in this record of the rapid and general diffusion of KNOWLEDGE for the appetites of all ages and sexes, let me not omit to
* The coincidence is not a little singular, but the name of Thomas Newbery is
attached to one of the rarest little poetical volumes, composed for CHILDREN, of
which we have any knowledge. It was printed in 1563 , 4to. under this title : " A
Booke in English Metre called Dives Pragmaticus, or the Great Marchantman—very
preatiefor Children to rede. Lord Spencer is in possession of this unique treasure,
which I purchased for his Lordship at the sale of the Roxburghelibrary for 301.
PREFACE. XV
sent, such an hunger and thirst after information,
that the reading man looks towards his weekly Journal, or Register, or Chronicle, with the same eagerness and certainty that he used to anticipate his
monthly supplies of mental food. Hence he hails his
Literary Gazette, or Literary Chronicle, or Somerset
House Gazette !-to which may be probably added
one or two of the many two-penny publications that
are also weekly distributed, and of which the aggregate total is scarcely to be credited . * Nor is it the
make commendable mention of what I should call the pocket editions
ofour best writers in poetry and prose, so assiduously, so neatly, and
so reasonably, put forth by Messrs. SUTTABY, EVANCE, and Fox. No
author, contained in the bulkiest dimensions, exceeds the price of 5s.
per volume ; and there is none, as far as I can discover from the list
ofthe authors published, which a female need fear of being found
upon her toilette or boudoir table. The typographical execution
of these small duodecimo volumes is delightful, and the engraved
frontispieces are very respectable. Thousands of copies are circulated
abroad ; especially in America. Within these last twenty years,
seven hundred THOUSAND volumes of the whole, collectively, have
been dispersed at home and abroad, averaging 35,000 copies per
annum. Upon such a vast scale does knowledge, of every kind,
travel.
* I had hoped to have been able to give a pretty correct account ofthese " twopenny publications," but have been unexpectedly
disappointed. The fact is, however, that upwards of ONE HUNDRED
THOUSAND ofthem are circulated per week ; among which, the Mechanic's Magazine, the Mirror, the Lancet, and the Chemist, take the lead.
Ofthe first ofthese, alone, I learn that fifteen thousand copies are distributed. To shew the avidity with which knowledge of all kinds,
and sometimes of the best kind, is sought after, a friend informs me
that Pennant's London is now to be purchased on the same cheap terms
xvi PREFACE.
least recommendable quality of such reasonably
priced publications, that the matter contained in them
is, generally, as correct as their exterior forms are
attractive from good paper and printing. In the mean
while, it is consoling to think that such numerous
and useful works keep down the currency of the
wretched blasphemy and absurdity which find refuge
only in the premises of Mr. Carlile.
But that literary tastes and longings of every decription, may be gratified, there has recently appeared
a Review, which is published every two months, under
the title of the Universal ; * while Knight's Quarterly
Magazine, the Westminster Review, and the Cambridge
Is it chimerical to suppose that Bacon's Abridgement (of the Law) and
Comyn's Digest will be forthwith produced in the same manner ?
* The plan of this Review is excellent. It gives, after the sober and
sensible plan of the Old and New Memoirs ofLiterature, published about
acentury ago, a brief analysis, with a few pertinent remarks, of each
article : so as to leave the reader, generally, to draw his own conclusions from the facts adduced. The second (and last published)
number is now before me. There are XXVI articles in it of comparative elaborate execution, followed by a great number of brief
notices of domestic and foreign literature ; which latter are essentially
useful for one of the principal objects, in such periodical publications, is, to give the reader intelligence of what is actually going on
in the literary world. Among the larger articles, at page 239 of
this number, is a review of the Deformed Transformed of Lord Byron.
The preliminary remarks are penned with great vigour and unsparing
severity against the immoral and unpatriotic cast of the later effusions of that Noble Lord : —and with justice. * In the department
I have not long risen from the perusal of another Review of the same poem in
the Edinburgh Magazineand Literary Miscellany, for March, 1824 ; of which the in-
PREFACE. xvii
Quarterly Review make their appearance once in
three months, after the manner of the Edinburgh and
Quarterly Reviews. Mine is not the province to pass
critical opinions upon the respective merits of these
more recent Magazines and Reviews. It is sufficient
for the purposes of this Preface, that such publications are here recorded.* But while upon this theme,
of Poetry, in the ensuing pages, I have freely passed those sentiments
upon Lord Byron's muse which seem to be dictated by the honestest
view of the subject.
* Of the sales of the more recent Magazines and Reviews above
mentioned, I am unable to say any thing. They are all starting
with the vigour and buoyancy of " fresh and four- year old " literary
Coursers. Ofthe Edinburgh and Quarterly Reviews, I should apprehend the minimum to be 9000, and the maximum to be 12,000, copies
of each new number. Inthe history of Literature, the subscriptionbook of Mr. Murray (for my residence necessarily makes me unacquainted with that of the publisher of the Edinburgh Review) would
cut a splendid figure : and the ease and dexterity with which each
number is divided into allotments, and distributed according to the
copies subscribed for (the payment being PROMPT) by the several
great bookselling houses, would astonish a looker on...At sun- rise,
the QUARTERLY TREE reaches to the sky-
(Exiit ad cœlum ramis felicibus arbor)
At sun set, it is levelled to the earth ...
(Δρυός πίσωσης πᾶς ἀνὴς ξυλευεται)
and every man hugs his log (alias, number) with eager and undiminished delight. What a SUB-NOTE might be here appended, as to the
sensations which certain numbers, ofeither of these Reviews, are known
to have sometimes produced ? For periodical reading, these Jourtroductory remarks are equally distinguished for their propriety and ability of execation. In short, to think and to speak otherwise, were a species of stultification.
C
xviii PREFACE.
let me be permitted to make honourable mention of
a periodical publication of a peculiar character
under the title of the Retrospective Review* —to
which, as the ensuing pages demonstrate, my obligations have been frequent and great. Thus the reader
may remark, how varied and wonderful is the periodical diffusion of knowledge, of every description, in
this wealthy and energetic country.
But a review of the causes of the progress of literature in general, does not exclude the notice of the
state of Bibliography , or (if the reader so please to
nals may be considered as the venison and turtle dishes of the literary
Epicure. I found them as such, at Munich and Vienna, some six
years ago
* Will the editor of this Review forgive the suggestion, whether
the articles be, occasionally, sufficiently RETROspective ? and whether they be not occasionally a little too long ?
+ In publications on BIBLIOGRAPHY, there is nothing of very
recent occurrence to notice, except it be the two beautifully printed
volumes of Mr. JOHNSON's Typographia, or the Printer's Instructor,
✦ Of MAGAZINES, the Gentleman's, the New Monthly, the London, Blackwood's, and
the Edinburgh, have the greatest sale. Each of these has its admirers and sworn
champions of defence : -and long may this bloodless warfare, or literary excitability, last ! I cannot presume to weigh the respective merits of these Magazines
in my own critical scales of justice ; but I may be allowed to notice the matterof-fact simplicity, antiquarian lore, and topographical embellishments ofthe firstthe polish, delicacy, and occasional felicitous humour, of the second- the neatness, variety, and usefulness of the third-the spirited, cart and tierce, cut and
thrust, character of the fourth-(" Tros Tyriusve ... nullo discrimine agetur,")
and the vigour, sense, and well-digested intelligence, of the fifth. The amount of
all this , is , that throughout the Empire of GREAT BRITAIN, there is, weekly and
monthly, such a mass of intelligence-in the shape of wit, humour, narrative, and
reflection-imparted, that one is equally surprised at the unfailing number of
readers as well as of writers. A country, in SUCH a state, has reason to be proud
of its bibliomaniacal pre-eminence.
PREFACE. xix
designate it) of the BIBLIOMANIA, in particular. With
joy and triumph have I witnessed the close of the
Book-campaign of the past season. It has turned out
to be what every lover of his country's literary reputation could wish. The gloom which, at the conclusion of the last season, darkened the countenances,
not only of many worthy members of the Roxburghe
Club, but of a great number of distinguished Collecwith wood-cut portraits of several English Printers. This ingenious
work is dedicated to the RoxBURGHE CLUB ; and the wood- cut embellishments, prefixed as frontispieces, are of a most brilliant and
pleasing description. One of these contains the arms of the several
members of the Club very happily conceived and executed : but they
have all equal merit. I learn, also , that Mr. Edward Poole is occupied
with the History of the ELZEVIR PRESS, including a great portion of
the literary history of that Augustan age of literature in Holland.
It will be much more copious than the French work (occasionally
referred to in the ensuing pages) upon the same subject.
But in Bibliography, let me not forget the notice and commendation of that wonderful work of the late Dr. WATT, called Bibliotheca Britannica. It is now complete, in two quarto volumes, each
about the size of Ainsworth's Dictionary, at 61. 6s. per volume.
Such a concentration of labour was hardly ever beheld ; but the authors, Father and Son, both FELL VICTIMS to their zeal. The first
volume contains the names of authors, alphabetically arranged ; the
second, the several works under their classes, or general names,
thus : " Angling," "Bible, " " Cookery, " &c. To say that such a
work, on so stupendous a scale, should be faultless, would be equally
rash and ridiculous. On the contrary, it contains numerous errors,
and must not be unlimitedly confided in. But its uses and advantages are manifest and indispensable : and it should never fail to be
a LIBRARY COMPANION in all Collections of extent or importance.
The history of the completion of this great labour is amongthe most
eurious on record.
XX PREFACE.
tors of libraries, has vanished. The sun shine of good
humour, content, bright hopes, and cheering prospects,
has succeeded. The reader has already anticipated
the ground or cause of these remarks. The sale of
the library of the late lamented SIR M. M. SYKES,
Bart. was conducted, and closed, in a manner the
most unexpectedly gratifying. While, at the west
end of the town, the Books of the same Baronet were
dispersed at splendid prices beneath the auspices of
Mr. Evans, towards the east end of the town (in
Wellington-street, under the hammer of Mr. Sotheby)
his prints, of every description, brought excessive
prices and 300 guineas for an impression from a
Niello, and 891 for a couple of British Portraits, in
one plate, are achievements of unprecedented gal-
*
* Specimens of the prices of a few of the rarer articles, in ENGLISH POETRY, will be found in the SUPPLEMENT, at p. 841 post. The
manner in which the Catalogue of this splendid library is executed,
is extremely creditable to the author of it, and the three GREAT GUNS
ofthe Collection may be described in the Livy of 1469, the Greek
Testament of Erasmus of 1519, ( each UPON VELLUM) and the Deed of
Divorce between Henry VIII . and Anne of Cleves. The gain upon
the two latter articles made up for the loss on the first. The first is
now with Messrs. Payne and Foss ; the secondis in the archiepiscopal
library at Lambeth, (purchased by his Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury) and the third is in the State Paper Office. Could the two
latter be better placed ? It remains to observe what will be the
ultimate destination of the first.
It was the portraits of James I. and Prince Henry, each on
horseback, engraved by Vaughan. The condition was most beautiful.
The impression of the Niello had been obtained from W. Y. Ottley,
Esq. and is engraved at p. 304 of his History and Engraving. Sir
Mark gave only 150l. for it.
t
PREFACE. xxi.
lantry and liberality of feeling. The total or grand
amount of the two sales, united, amounted to 36,000%.
Who therefore shall say that property is misplaced in
collecting together such objects ? If the question
arise, what was given for such a property ? a prompt
and satisfactory answer is at hand: less was given than
the produce here recorded.
But this state of bibliographical prosperity is not
confined to the Metropolis. I continue to hear and to
receive the most flattering accounts from all parts of
the country. A re-action is taking place. Circulating
libraries are enlarged and multiplied. The surplusage
of wealth, in these " piping times of peace," finds a
vent in the channel of book-purchasing. Noblemen
and Gentlemen begin to think (as the old monkishwriters thought and have expressed it) that a " mansion
without a library is like a castle without an armoury”
--and accordingly, halt where you will, you are sure,
on a little gossip with the humblest provincial bookvendor, to glean intelligence of " some famous library
in the neighbourhood"-and if none of these equal
that at Eshton Hall, or at Yarmouth,
* they may be
* These selections are made without a wish to institute invidious
comparisons ; but the Catalogue of the library at Eshton Hall, the
property of Miss CURRER, (see page 832 post) is at this moment
before me; as I am favoured with one of the 36 copies only of it
which were printed. It is carefully and unostentatiously executed by
Mr. Triphook. The collection in all its branches (but especially in
British History) does great credit to its amiable and sensible owner.
With the library of my friend DAWSON TURNER, Esq. of Yarmouth I
am intimately acquainted. The Fine Arts and Botany are its stronger
and more prominent features. The collection is select and costly. Of
xxii PREFACE.
their owner may
My gratification
yet deserving of examination, and
receive a passing tribute of respect.
is well nigh unbounded to learn that the name of
WATT, at Aston House, near Birmingham, is coupled
withthat of the "good old cause ;" and I may yet live
to witness it as great in BOOKS, as in MECHANICS.
Meanwhile I have the additional gratification of
learning, that the number of Travellers dispersed all
over the country, from the great houses in Paternoster
Row, is nearly doubled ; and that three orders are
now received where one formerly was scarcely given.
the AUTOGRAPHIC treasures in it, more than a slight notice is taken in a
subsequent page. I could easily have added to the number of these
rural examples of the BIBLIOMANIA ; and my friend Mr. Broadley, (late
of Kirk Ella, near Hull) may probably scold me for the omission of
his enviable book- treasures : while Mr. Archdeacon Wrangham tells
me that he is constantly revelling in the midst of 15,000 tomes (at
Hunmanby in Yorkshire) of endless variety and never failing amusement. Long may he enjoy this revelry. Close to London, again , I
could mention friends who spare no cost in securing, nor pains in
making acquaintance with, their book- treasures. The exquisite
paintings of LENTULUS lose nothing of their lustre or value by the
neighbourhood of a library (on the basement floor) of tasteful
structure, and replete with volumes in which Piranesi, and Bartoli,
and Hollar, and Bartolozzi, and Morghen, display their peculiar
and unrivalled powers. Nor are philology and the sciences wanting.
In the immediate neighbourhood of this Tusculum, is another
cabinet, on a smaller scale, and with fewer treasures. But here are
early and powerful specimens of the pencil of Turner, Wilkie, and
Callcott, with no mean sprinkling of large paper tomes of modern
authors of established celebrity. These be the boast of NESTORIUS ;
and his quincunxes and espaliers, clipt yew hedges and velvet lawns,
affordhim recreation and food for thought .. as he meditates on DEATH.
PREFACE. xxiii
In again reverting to the work before the reader,
I conclude this preface with the exercise of the pleasureable task of acknowledging obligations received.
My friend the Rev. Dr. Bliss, of the Bodleian Library,
has enabled me to enrich these pages not only by the
examination of many treasures in that wonderful
repository, but by the loan of the first volume of his
work (not yet published) of the Reliquiæ Hearniance.
The pages of his Athene Oxonienses* have been also
at times singularly useful. For the unwearied services of Thomas Amyot, Esq. in enlarging and correcting many of these sheets by the aid of his own
choice library, and numerous bibliographical memoranda, I cannot be sufficiently thankful. The library
of the Right Honourable Thomas Grenville has been
on this, as on every other occasion, thrown open to
my researches in the readiest and most liberal manner ; and to the treasures contained in it I am chiefly
indebted for the account of the rarer volumes to be
Somewhat nearer home, is another library, sweetly disposed, and
judiciously furnished ; of which its excellent owner thus wrote to
me, on breaking up his establishment to come to town for the last
winter season : "We go to town this day se'nnight for the season. I
shall leave MY LIBRARY with great regret. Its cheerful character, its
soft and quiet scenery from the lawn in front, its comfortable and
social aspect, its manageable and not overwhelming size, its companionable and inexhaustible sources of amusement and delight, make
me cling to it with the fondness of grateful affection and attachment."
These COMFORTS are to be found at Edmonton. For other libraries of
large extent, and remote situation, search well the index of this
work.
For a character of this work, see p. 507-8 post.
xxiv PREFACE.
found under the head of the History ofIreland. The
owner of that library will therefore be here pleased to
accept my best thanks. My acknowledgments are
also due to Frederic Barnard, Esq. for free access to
the Royal Library at Buckingham House : the facility
and liberality of accommodation, in that magnificent
and truly regal collection, can be appreciated only by
those who have experienced it. The unrivalled treaşures at Althorp and at Spencer House have been
submitted to my free inspection with the usual liberality and kindness of their Noble Owner : while the
richly furnished libraries of my intimate friends
George Hibbert, Esq. Richard Heber, Esq. Francis
Freeling, Esq. Francis Douce, Esq. and Robert Lang,
Esq. have supplied me with materials of which the
yalue will be evident from a perusal of the ensuing
pages. On all sides, and in the most unqualified
manner, the kindest aids were offered me ; and if the
fruits of such friendly assistance are not seen in the
work before the reader, the fault is in him to whom
they were tendered.
In the last place, something like an acknowledgment remains due to those respectable BOOKSELLERS,
by means of whose copious catalogues something like
a fixed or rational price has been attached to the
numerous works contained in these pages. The present is peculiarly the age of bibliopolistic adventure
and enterprise. There is no nation in Europe which
can boast of such an extensive diffusion of knowledge
by means of well-executed Catalogues ; and it is without any invidious distinction that I notice those of
.
PREFACE. XXV
Messrs. Payne and Foss, Longman and Co. J. and A.
Arch, Rivington and Cochran, Ogle, Duncan and Ogle,
Triphook, Thorpe, and Bohn. * But, with every attention to fix a fair and authorized price upon suchworks
ofintrinsic merit, of which the marketable value was
1
* Since the commencement of this work, Messrs. PAYNE and Foss
have published a catalogue of 5872 articles or books, in foreign languages exclusively. My principal references have been to the preceding catalogue of last year, in which English works also appear.
Both catalogues are preciously furnished, and the prices are reasonable. I have smiled, in common with many friends, to observe rare and
curious volumes selling for large sums at auctions, when sometimes
better copies of them may be obtained in that incomparable repository in Pall-Mall at two-thirds of the price. Whoever wants a classicalfitting out must betake himself to this repository. The various
catalogues or portions of them, according to the sizes ofthe volumes,
which have issued from the house of Messrs. LONGMAN, HURST, REES,
and Co. for the last three years, contain scarcely fewer than 17000
articles ; while, of modern articles, the same House has, of each,
from one to ten thousand copies. This latter necessarily includes the
wonderful stock of Elementary works alluded to at p. xiii. ante. To
the Bibliotheca Anglo-Poetica, or A Descriptive Catalogue of a rare and
rich Collection ofEarly English Poetry, published by the same House in
1815, under the care of the late Mr. Griffiths, the ensuing pages, in
the department of " English Poetry, " contain frequent and apposite references. The rarest article in this catalogue (Chester's Loves
Martyr, or Rosalin's Complaint, 1601 , 4to . ) marked at 50l. and purchased by the late Sir M. M. Sykes Bart. was sold at the sale of that
Baronet's library for 641.
The catalogue of Messrs. J. and A. ARCH is on a smaller scale ;
but it exhibits both valuable and rare works, and my references to it
have not been unsparing. Indeed I consider the situation of these
respectable booksellers, in the very heart of the Metropolis, as most
fortunate on many accounts : -for the periodical circulation of their
Catalogues may have a salutary effect in counteracting manias of a
xxvi PREFACE.
ascertainable, I fear that, in some few instances, the
collector may be disappointed in his calculations. It
different description. I do not indeed quite despair of seeing groups
of philologists and critics collected in the Royal Exchange, beneath
the statue of Edward IV, (when Printing and the Bibliomania were
first conjointly introduced into this country) and counteracting, by
their book-speculations, the direful ravages of the Scrip and Consols
manias. The catalogue of Messrs. RIVINGTON AND COCHRAN, which
is chiefly theological, contains not fewer than 17,328 articles. The
arrangement is good : the works submitted to sale are rich in all
classes, especially in theology and oriental literature, while the
printing and paper are alike inviting. There is a sort of episcopalian
air about this volume ... within and without. But here it behoves
me to make honourable mention of that curious catalogue (now become a rare book) of Theology and Oriental Literature, published] by
Messrs. OGLE, DUNCAN AND Co., and containing upwards of 12000
articles of Divinity. I am not compelled to subscribe to the critical
canons occasionally attached to these articles ; but I can never be
backward in acknowledging the obligation which the CLERICAL
WORLD is under (from this desirable volume) to its respectable publishers. The catalogues of Mr. TRIPHOOK are, many of them, of absolute necessity to the Collector ; since the titles and colophons are
printed at length with great accuracy ; and I may fairly say, that, in
few places of sale have I seen such copies of Old English Philology as
in Mr. Triphook's repository. The collection of Mr. Triphook is
now merged in that of his partners, whose names appear in the
TITLE PAGE of this work ; and it may be triumphantly affirmed, that
the catalogue of Messrs. HARDING, TRIPHOOK, and LEPARD, takes
precedence of ALL on the score of numbers : for not fewer than
twenty-seven thousand and fifty- seven articles form the grand total of
works, in the course of sale, at the TEMPLE OF THE MUSES ! Apollo
and the Nine were never kept in such a constant state of activity, as
these spirited Bibliopolists keep them-equally to the surprise and
advantage of the lettered world.
Mr. THORPE is indeed a man of might. His achievements at Book-
PREFACE. xxvii
should however be always borne in mind that the condition of a book will materially regulate its price.
It remains therefore, only to indulge a rational but
sales are occasionally described in the ensuing pages. It is his Catalogues of which I am here to treat. They are of never ceasing production : thronged with the treasuses which he has gallantly borne off, at
the point of his lance, in many ahard day's fight, in the Pall-Mall and
Waterloo Place arenas. But these conquests are no sooner obtained,
than the public receives an account of them ; and during the last
year only, his Catalogues, in three parts, now before me, comprise
not fewer than SEVENTEEN THOUSAND Nine hundred and fifty NINE
articles. What a scale of buying and selling does this fact alone
evince ! But in this present year, two Parts have already appeared,
containing upwards of 12,000 articles. Nor is this all. On the 24th
day of September, in the year of our Lord 1923, there appeared the
most marvellous phenomenon ever witnessed in the annals ofBIBLIOThe Times Newspaper had four of the five columns of its
last page occupied by an ADVERTISEMENT of Mr. Thorpe, containing
the IIId Part of his Catalogue for that year. Ona moderate computation, this Advertisement comprised eleven hundred and twenty lines.
The effect was extraordinary. Many wondered, and some remonstrated but Mr. Thorpe was Master of his own mint, and he never
mentions the circumstance but with perfect confidence, and even
gaiety of heart, at its success !
POLISM.
3
If Mr. Bonn be the last, he is not the least, of enterprising and
successful Bibliopolists. His Catalogue, in two parts, contains not
fewer than 14,614 articles. These articles are chiefly books in
foreign languages : and Mr. Bohn's knowledge of the German language has enabled him to translate Fuhrmann's work on the Greek
and Latin Classics with considerable advantage. But bibliographers
and critics have been liberally consulted ; and in the department of
Philology and Miscellanies, there are some volumes worth the cunning
investigation of lovers of literary rarities. The whole catalogue is a
proof of unwearied diligence in description, and commendable taste
in collection.
xxviii PREFACE.
an ardent hope, that the work now before the reader,
and intended as a Guide to the Young and a Comfort
to the Old, may be crowned with that success, which
has been sought for in a most anxious and unceasing examination of materials for the last two years ;
and of which nearly as much has been kept back as
brought forward. For a toil of this nature, I can
most unfeignedly avow that no pecuniary reward is
likely to be commensurate. Every thing that a liberal spirit could devise, on the part of my Publishers,
has been promptly conceded ; but I look for eventual
and substantial remuneration only in the generous
sympathies of the "YOUNG," and the well-weighed
approbation ofthe " OLD."
Wyndham Place,
Aug. 2, 1824.
THOMAS FROGNALL DIBDIN.
I just learn that the Diary of SAMUEL PEPYS (see the Index of
this Work) is nearly completed at press. It will contain about ten or
a dozen well executed portraits ; andthe work, in two quarto volumes,
will be doubtless a popular companion to Evelyn's Memoirs.
SYNOPTICAL TABLE OF SUBJECTS
AND AUTHORS.
Introduction, pages 1,2.
DIVINITY, 8-128.
BIBLES, 6-37.
Polyglot, 6-10.
Complutensian, 6. Brian Walton's, 7.
Plantin's and Hutter's, 9.
Reineccius' and Bagster's, 10.
Latin, 11-17.
Editio Princeps, or Mazarine, 11.
Pfister's (Bamberg) , 13.
Fust's and Schoiffer's (Mentz) , 14, 15.
Fontibus ex Hebræis, 15.
Fontibus ex Græcis, 15.
Pagninus' , Sabatier's, and the Aldine, 16.
German, 18.
Mentelin's and Luther's, 18.
Italian, 18, 20.
Malherbi's ; Bruccioli's, and Diodati's, 19.
Martini's, 20.
Hebrew, 20-23.
Kimchi's Psalter, Jarchi's Pentateuch, 20.
Soncino Bible, 21 , 829.
Bamberg, Stephens, 22.
Michaelis' , Houbigant's, Kennicott's, 23.
Jahn's, Leusden's, Boothroyd's, 24.
Greek, 24, 26.
Erasmus, Aldine Septuagint, Zanetti's, Bos,
Holmes's, 25.
XXX SYNOPTICAL TABLE
DIVINITY. -BIBLES.
French, 26.
Lempereur's, Protestant Version, Thoulouse, 26.
English, 27-37.
Tyndall's, 29.
Coverdale's, 30.
Matthewe's, Taverner's, Cranmer's, the
Bishops, Grafton's, Whitchurch's, Day's,
Redman's, the Scotch, 31. Geneva, 829.
King James's, 32.
Baskett's, Field's, Hayes's, 33.
Patrick's, Lowth's, Whitby's, D'Oyly's and
Mant's, Wilson's, 36.
Dr. Henry's, Dr. Gill's, 37.
TESTAMENTS,
Greek, 38-40.
Complutensian, Erasmus, Stephen's, the
Elzevirs, Bengel's, Wetstein's, Griesbach's, 38, 39.
PRAYER-BOOKs, 40—46. 830.
First Impressions, 1549, 42.
Whitchurch's, Marbecke's Barkerville's, 43.
Jarvis's, Reeves's, Oxford and Cambridge,44.
Abridgement, 45.
FATHERS AND COMMENTATORS, 46-48.
Greek, 47.
Origen, S. Chrysostom, Cotelerius Coll. 47.
Latin, 47.
Tertullian, Lactantius, Austin, 47. Jerom,
830.
OLD ENGLISH DIVINES, 49-59
Taylor, 491, 53, 831.
Baxter, 50.
Barrow, Pearson, Usher, 51 , 830.
Chillingworth, Mede, Tillotson, 52.
Bishop Hall, 55.
W. Penn, 56.
Lightfoot, 830 .
OF SUBJECTS AND AUTHORS. xxxi
DIVINITY.
LATE ENGLISH DIVINES, 60–66.
Leslie, 61.
Dr. Clarke, Bishop Bull, 62.
Bishop Lowth, 63,
Dr. Doddridge, 64.
Dr. Watt's, Dr. Macknight, 65.
OLD SERMONS, 66-83.
Latimer's, 66.
Fox's, 73.
Drant's, 75.
Edgeworth's, 81.
MODERN SERMONS, 84-90.
Gisborne's, 86. Bampton Lect. 831
Hall's, Forster's, Jay's, 87.
SUMMARY OF FOREIGN DIVINES, 89-95.
Erasmus, 90.
French, 91-95.
Bossuet, 91.
Massillon, 92.
Bourdaloue, 93.
Saurin, 94.
ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY, 96-120.
French, 97-99.
Mabillon's, Ste. Marthe's, 97.
Longueval's Le Conte's, Gesta Dei per
Francos, 98.
Fleury's, 99.
Tillemont's, 101.
Italian, 100-103.
Baronius, 101, 102.
Bzovius, 102.
Acta Sanctorum, 103.
English, 103-120.
Venerable Bede's, 104.
Fox's, 105, 832.
Parker's, 107.
Dugdale's, 109.
Fuller's, Collier's, 111.
xxxii SYNOPTICAL TABLE
ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.
Bingham's, Cave's, 112.
H. Wharton's, 113.
Burnet's, 114.
Dodd's, 115 .
Jortin's, 116,
Strype's, 117.
Mosheim's, 118.
Wordsworth's, 119.
Spelman's and Wilkin's, 120.
MANUALS OF DEVOTION, 120-128.
Thomas à Kempis, 121.
Monument of Matrons, 123 .
Collections of Prayers, 127.
Bishop Kenn's Divine Love, 128.
HISTORY, 129–364.
HISTORICAL CATALOGUES, 129-131 .
Meuselius, Le Long, 129.
ESSAYS ON THE STUDY OF HISTORY, AND UNIVERSAL
HISTORIES, 130-131,
Du Fresnoy's, Du Pin's, Bolingbroke's,
Boone's, 130.
Ancient and Modern Universal History,
Calmet's, 131 .
Millot's, Anquetil's, 132.
Grecian, 131-135.
Ancient Writers, 131-135.
Herodotus, 132.
Thucydides, 133.
Pausanias, Xenophon, 134.
Diodorus Siculus, 135.
Modern Writers, 135, 136.
Barthelemy's Anacharsis, 135.
Mitford, Potter, Gronovius, 136.
Roman, 136-139.
Ancient Writers, 136-138.
Dion Cassius, Dionysius Halicarnassensis,
Livy, 136.
Appian, Polybius, Tacitus, Cæsar, Sallust,
Velleius Paterculus, Haurisius' Collection, Grævius, 137.
OF SUBJECTS AND AUTHORS. xxxiii
HISTORY. -ROMAN.
Byzantine and Turkish Histories, 138.
Modern Writers, 138, 139.
Muratori's Scriptores, and Italian Collections, 139.
OF GREAT BRITAIN, 140-288.
Historians contained in the Recueil des
Historiens des Gaules, 140, 141 .
Saxon Chronicle, 141 .
Asserius, Walsingham, 142.
Archbishop Parker, 143.
Geoffrey of Monmouth, 144.
Gildas, William of Newbury, 145.
Sir Henry Savile's Scriptores, 146.
William of Malmesbury, 147.
Henry of Huntingdon, Ingulphus, 148.
Camden's Anglica, &c. , Duchesne's Scriptores, 150.
Maseres' Selections from Duchesne, 151 .
Twysden's Scriptores, 152.
Gale's Scriptores, 153.
Annals of Waverley, 154.
Sparke's Scriptores, 155.
Bertram's Scriptores, 156.
Eadmer, 157.
Matthew of Westminster, Florence of Worcester, Matthew Paris, 158.
Froissart's Chronicles, 160, 166, 832.
Monstrelet's ditto, 166.
Bouchard, Comines, 167.
Caxton's Chronicle, 169.
Polychronicon, 172.
Arnold's Chronicle, 174.
Fabian's Chronicle, 175.
Rastell's Pastime of People, 178.
Godet's Chronicle, 179.
Hardyng's Chronicle, 180.
Kelton's Chronicle, Languett's Ditto, Chronicle of Kings, 181 .
1
xxxiv SYNOPTICAL TABLE
HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN.
Carion's Chronicle, Grafton's Abridgement,
Stowe's Summarie, Jaggard's Chronicle,
182.
Hall's Chronicle, Grafton's ditto, 184.
Hollinshed's Chronicle, 185.
Stowe's and Howe's Chronicles, 186, 187.
Vicçars's Parliamentary Chronicle, 188.
Heath's Chronicle, 189.
Baker's Chronicle, 190.
Strutt's Chronicle, 194 .
History of England, 195–237.
Polydore Vergil's, 195.
Speed's, 196.
Martyn's, Slatyer's, 198.
Daniel's, 199.
Duchesne's, Larry's, 200.
Milton's, Whitelock's Memorials, 201 .
Brady's, 202.
Tyrrell's, 203.
Bishop Kennet's, 205.
(North's Examen of, 206.
Echard's, 207.
Sandford's Genealogical History, 208.
Lord Clarendon's, 209.
Rapin's, 212, 832.
Hearne's Historical Works, 214 , 232.
Vide General Index.
Sammes's Britannia, 232.
Lewis's History, Carte's ditto , 233.
Ralph's, Hume's, 234.
Smollet's, Dr. Henry's, 235.
J. P. Andrews, Sharon Turner's, 236.
Lingard's, Bertrand de Moleville's, 237.
History of Ireland, 238, 260,
Lives of St. Patrick, 238.
of St. Brandon and St. Rumold, 239.
Messingham's Florilegium, Colgaris Triadis
Thaumaturgæ, 240,
OF SUBJECTS AND AUTHORS. XXXV
HISTORY. OF IRELAND.
Vallega's Lives of Saints, Giraldus Cambrensis , Stanihurst's, 241 .
O'Sullivan's, Paraineticorum, &c. Analecta
Sacra, &c. 242.
Lombardus's, Hanmer's, Campion's, Spenser's, Stafford's Hib. Pacata, 243 .
Carve's Works, 244.
Lynch's Works, 245.
Caron, Walsh, 246.
Sirinius, Belin, 247.
Camden, Baxter, Lord Castlehaven, Sir John
Davis, 248.
Unkind Deserter, Cox, Capell, O'Flaherty,
249.
Keating, Macmation, Ware, 250.
Musgrave, De Burgo, O'Halloran, Colonel
De Vallancey, 251 , 833.
Leland, Plowden, Gordon, Wakefield, Barnabe Riche, 252.
Ireland's Jubilee, Teares of Ireland, 253,
833.
Massacres in Savoy and Ireland, 254, 255.
Dr. O'Connor's Scriptores, 258, 260.
History of Scotland, 261-273.
Chronicles of Holy- Rood and Mailros, Barbour's Bruce, Fordun, 262.
Andrew of Wyntown, Hector Boece, 263.
Scotish Black Acts, 264.
Buchanan, Paten, 265, 834.
Tracts relating to Queen Mary, 266.
Lesley, Monipennie, 268.
Hume, Melvil, Spotiswood, Middleton,
Drumond, 269.
Mackenzie's, Dr. Abercromby, 270.
Anderson, Lindesay, Maitland's, Robertson,
Guthrie, Dalrymple, 271 .
Pinkerton, Laing, M‘Crie, 272.
Dr. Cook, G. Chalmers, 273.
xxxvi SYNOPTICAL TABLE
HELPS TO BRITISH HISTORY, 274–288.
Wales, 274, 275.
Lloyd, Enderbie, Warrington, 274.
Robert, Dr. Meyrick, Pennant, 275.
Acts of Parliament, 275-277.
Caxton's, W. de Worde's, Pynson's, 275.
Rotuli Parliamentorum, Parliamentary Debates and Trials, Taxatio Ecclesiastica,
Valor Ecclesiasticus, Rotuli et Acta Parliamentorum Scotiae, 276.
Domesday Book, Statutes at large, 277.
Records and State Papers, 277-284.
Prynne's Collection, 277-280.
May's History of the Long Parliament, 280.
Rushworth, 281 .
Rymer's Fœdera, 282.
Spelman, Digges, D'Ewes, Nalson, Bishop
Burnet, 283 .
Somers's Tracts , 284.
Miscellaneous, 285, 288.
Harleian Miscellany, 285 .
Harrington's Nugæ, Madox, 286.
Winwood, Forbes, Thurloe's Papers, Strafforde ditto, Burghley ditto, Clarendon
ditto, Sydney ditto, 287.
Hardwicke ditto, Carlton's ditto, Macpherson's ditto, Lodge's Illustrations, 288.
HISTORY OF FRANCE, 289–299. See also p. 834.
Bouquet's Recueil, 289 .
Duchesne's Scriptores, Collection Universelle des Mémoires, De Breguigny, Dupleix, 290.
Mezerai, 291 .
Daniel, Lombard, Henault , 293.
Velly,Villaret, Garnier, David, Montfaucon,
294.
Anquetil, Desodoards, Millot, Collection.
Universelle des Mémoires, 295.
Castlenau, De Thou, 296.
OF SUBJECTS AND AUTHORS. xxxvii
HISTORY-OF FRANCE.
Le Long, Davila, 297.
Sismondi 298.
Meuselius, Fontetæ, (Catalogues), 299.
HISTORY OF SPAIN, 300-312. See also p. 835.
Antonio, Casirio, Rodericus Sanctius, 301.
Belus, Schott, 302.
Chronicles, 302-306.
Guzman's, De Ayala's, 302.
Rey Pedro's, Rey Rodrigo's, the Cid's, Juan
II.'s, Alonzo and Sancho's, Alonzo XI.
303.
Hernandez de Cordova's, G. de Mendoza's,
M. Silva, D. de Valera's, 304.
Chronica de los Reyes Hernando y Ysabel,
Carbonell's, Beuter's, Marineo, 305.
F. de O Campo's, M. de Cordova's, Vasæus,
Garibay's, J. de Bleda's, 306.
D. H. De Mendoza, 307.
Mariana, 308.
J. de Ferreras, 309.
Masdeu, Murphy, 310.
Bourke, Townsend, Southey, 311.
Captain Batty, E. H. Locker, 312.
HISTORY OF PORTUGAL, 313-317.
Southey, Machado, 313 .
See also p. 836.
De Brito, A. and F. Brandaō, 314, 315.
R. de Jesus, E dos Santos, 315.
De la Clede, A. C. de Souza, 316.
J. C. de Serra, 317.
HISTORY OF ITALY, 318-327.
Muratori's Scriptores, 319.
Machiavelli, 322.
Guicciardini, 323.
Fenton's Translation of ditto, Shepherd's
Poggio, Histories of Florence, 324.
Bossi, Sismondi, Ginguené, Denina, Desodoards, 325.
Eustace, Forsyth, Hakewill, Capt. Batty,
xxxviii SYNOPTICAL TABLE
Houel, Laborde, 326.
HISTORY OF GERMANY, 328-337.
Dr. Robertson, Views on the Rhine, 329.
Schardius, Meibomius, Freyherus, Struvius,
Pistorius, Schoettgenius, Menckenius,
Reuberus, 331 .
Barre, de Laveaux, Schmidt, Haeberlin,
Senkenberg, Fréron, Pez, Bell, Pray,
332.
Calles, Kraft, Archdeacon Coxe, Kollarius,
333.
Gerbert, 334.
Bavarian Monuments, Offelius, Raderus,
Aldzreiter, Brunner, Wagelinus, 335 .
Serrarius, Leibnitz' Scriptores, Gibbon, 336.
Additions and Revisions, 337.
NORTHERN HISTORIES, 338-364. See also p . 836 .
Iceland, 338,
Mackenzie, 338.
Greenland, 338.
Gambold's Translation of Crantz, 338.
Arctic Regions, 339–341.
Franklin, Parry, 340.
Scoresby, Barrow, Ross, 341 .
General History, 341 , 344.
Olaus Magnus, Snorro, 342.
Krantzius, Gaguinus, Prætorius, Bullett, 343 .
Modern Universal History, Stritterus , Schilter, Massenius , 344.
Denmark, 344-348.
Saxo Grammaticus, 344 .
Olaus Wormius, Torfæus, 345.
Bartholin, 346.
Randulfus, Resenius, Mallet, Langebeck, 347 .
Dr. Thorkelin, 348.
Norway, 348-350.
Capell Brooke, Von Buch, Snorro Sturleson, 349.
C. Calleville, Pontoppidan, 350.
OF SUBJECTS AND AUTHORS. xxxix
NORTHERN HISTORIES.
Sweden, 350-356.
Regnorum Suecia, Suecia Antiqua, Messenius, Loccenius, Eric Olaus, 351 .
Erlandus, Scheffer, Verelius, Saga, 352.
Peringskiold, Lives of Queen Christine,
Ditto of Gustavus, Puffendorff, 353.
Vertot, Voltaire, Nordberg, 354.
Rudbeck, 355.
Russia, 357-364.
Baron Herberstein, Muscovitarum Rerum
Scriptores, Lasitzki, Ulfeldius, 357.
D'Anville, Castelnau, LeClerc , Korbius, 358.
Lord Whitworth, General Manstein, Bell,
Archdeacon Coxe, Dr. Clarke, Raymond,
Vsevolojskys, 359.
Voltaire, Sunnanois, De Halem, Castera,
Masson, Tooke, 362.
Pallas, David, Breton, Hempel, Houbigant,
363, 364.
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS, 365-478.
CATALOGUES, 368, 369.
Murray, 368.
Bekman, B. de la Richarderie, 369.
COLLECTIONS, 389, 390.
Portuguese Voyages, Columbus, Americus
Vesputius, 369.
Ramusio, 370.
De Bry's, 371 , 375, 836.
Hakluyt's, 377.
Coryate, 380.
Purchas' , 381.
Linschoten's, 383 .
Smith's, 384.
Thevenot's, 386.
Gottfried's (Adelinus' ) , 387 .
Churchill's, Harris's, IIarleian , Astley's, 388.
Bibliothèque Port. des Voyages, Pinkerton's,
Sir R. K. Porter's, Kerr's, 389, 390.
xl SYNOPTICAL TABLE
CIRCUMNAVIGATIONS, 391 , 400.
Drake's, 391 .
Dampier's 392.
Anson's, 393.
Byron's, Cook's, 395, 397.
Vancouver's, 396.
O. de Cevallos' , Pigafetta's, Carreri's, 398.
Perouse's, Labillardiere, D'Entrecasteaux,
Marchand, 399.
Krusenstern, Burney, 400.
ASIA, 401-436.
Minor Greek Geographers, 401.
Tudela, 402.
Marco Polo, 403.
Sir John Mandeville, 404.
Mendez Pinto, 405.
Pyrard, 406.
Barros, 407.
De Sousa, Castanheda, Guzman, Hawkins,
Roe, 408.
Bernier, Tavernier, Thevenot, Chardin, 409,
Hindoostan, 410-414.
Raynal, 410.
Acten der Dænischen Mission, Dapper, R.
de Hooge, Tiefenthaler, 411 .
Valentyn, Asiatic Researches , 412.
Sir W. Jones, Dr. Buchanan, Malcolm,
413.
Thibet, 414-415 .
Turner, Davies, and Saunders.
Nepaul, 415, 416.
Colonel Kirkpatrick, 415.
Caubul, 416.
Elphinstone, 416.
Persia, 416-419.
Viaggi fatti da Vinetia, Sherley, 416.
Herbert, Chardin, Jonas Hanway, 417.
Morier, Malcolm, Ouseley, Porter, 4 8.
D'Anville, Major Rennell, 419.
OF SUBJECTS AND AUTHORS. xli
CIRCUMNAVIGATIONS-ASIA.
Holy Land and Turkey, 420-424.
Breydenbach, N. Huen, Chateaubriand,
Mariti, 420.
Sandys, Pococke, 421 .
Wood, Chandler, Kinneir, Burckhardt, De
la Mottraye, D'Arevieux, Russell, 422.
Volney, Maundrell, Lebrun, 423.
Tournefort, D'Ohsson, 424.
Arabia, 424.
Niebuhr, 424.
East Indies, China, Japan, 425–429.
Major Symes, 425.
Barrow, Staunton, Lord Amherst, Captain
Hall, Du Halde, 426.
Mailla, De Guignes, Sonnerat, Kæmpfer, 427.
Charlevoix, Nieuhoff, Van Braam, 428.
Dalrymple, Lithgow, L. de Goux, Stokove, 429.
Jesuits Voyages, 430.
Borneo, New Guinea, New Holland, &c. 430.
Knox, Dr. Davy, Capt. Flinders, 431 .
European Route to England, 431–436.
Nicolay, 431 ,
Knolles, 432.
F. Moryson, Lord Mountjoy, 433-435.
Messrs.Kingsbury's Oriental Catalogue, 435.
AFRICA, 437-454.
Gibbon, Edrisi, Abulfeda, Abdollatiph, 438.
Leo Africanus, Marmol, Cadamosto, 439.
Gosselin, 440.
Egypt, 441-444.
Pococke, Norden, 441.
Savary, Denon, 442.
Description d'Egypte, Sonnini, Hamilton,
Legh, Belzoni, 443.
Ethiopia (Nubia, Abissinia) , 444-446.
Ludolfus, 444.
Tellez and Almeida, Burckhardt, Father
xlii SYNOPTICAL TABLE
CIRCUMNAVIGATIONS-AFRICA.
Lobo, Bruce, 445.
Salt, 447.
Barbary States, 446-449.
Waddington and Hanbury, Torrez, Hoeda,
447.
Mendezes, Dr Shaw, De la Chenier, Porret,
Jackson, Ali Bey, Capt, Lyon, 448.
M. Park, Browne, 449.
Horneman, J. Riley, Adams, the African
Association, 450.
Southern Africa, 450-454.
Odoardo Lopez, Capt. Tuckey, 450,
Cavazzi, Labat, Lindsay, Matthews, Winterbottom, Beaver, Meredith, 451
Bowdich, Vaillant, Sparrmann, Percival,
Lichtenstein, Barrow, 452.
Burchell, 453, 454.
AMERICA, 455-478.
Kennett's American Library, 455.
American Atlas, 456.
Ancient Travellers, &c. 457-459. See p. 837.
Algerius, G. H. Oviedo, L. de Gomara, 457.
Las Casas, 458.
J. G. de Sepulveda, A. de Herrera, 459.
General Historians, 460-464 .
Torquemada, Ogilby, Coreal, Lafiteau, 460.
Charlevoix, Wilson, Ulloa, Dr. Robertson,
461 .
Account of the Amazon River, Nodal, 462.
FernandoCortez, Barcias's Historiadores, 463 .
Frampton, Tracts on Virginia, 464.
North America, 462-467.
Kalm, 464.
Rogers, Wynne, Adair, 465.
Capt. Carver, G. Chalmers, RochefoucaultLiancourt, 466.
Bryan Edwards, Sir Hans Sloane, Long, 467.
South America, 468-478.
OF SUBJECTS AND AUTHORS. xliii
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS -AMERICA.
Ulloa, 468.
Hans Staden, J. de Lery, Barlæus, 469.
Rocha Pitta, Lindley, 470.
Southey, 471 .
Mawe, Humboldt, 472-475.
Peruvian Chronicles, 475, 476.
F. de Kerez, P. C. de Leon's, 475.
Antwerp, Historie, Zaratez, Fernandez' , G.
de la Vega's, 476.
Losano, Tears of the Indians, 477.
World in Miniature, 478.
BIOGRAPHY, 479–562.
MEMOIRS AND ANECDOTES, 479-557.
Biographical Dictionaries, 482-488.
Hoffman's, Moreri's Dictionnaire de TreVoux , 483.
Bayle's, 484.
Chaufepie's, P. Marchand's, 485.
Brucker's, Ladvocat's, Chaudon's, and Delandine's , 486.
Biographie Universelle, Jocher's, Adelung's,
and Rotermund's General, Historical, and
Critical Dictionary, 487.
British Biography, Biographia Britannica,
Chalmers's General Biography, 488.
Greek and Roman Biographers, 489-491 .
Plutarch, 489.
D. Laertius, C. Nepos, Suetonius, 491 .
General Collections ofLives, 492-505.
Theod. Beza, Boissard, 492.
Vasari, 493.
Holland, 494.
Fugger Fuggerorum , 495.
Thevet, 496.
Bullart, Perault, 497.
Foppens, Dr. Birch, Freher, 498.
T. Hoffmann, 500.
The Holbein Portraits, 501, 502.
xliv SYNOPTICAL TABLE
BIOGRAPHY.
Lodge's Illustrious Personages, 502, 503.
Bodies ofNational Biography, 505-509.
Leland, Bale, 505 .
Pits, Fuller, Nicolson, 506.
Dr. Mackenzie, Anthony a Wood, 507.
Tanner, Berkenhout, Granger, 508.
Separate Memoirs or Classes, 509-538.
Grove's Wolsey, Johnson's Poets, Macdiarmid's Statesmen, 509, 837.
Roper's Sir T. More, 513.
Bacon's Henry VII. , Herbert's Henry VIII.
I. Walton's Lives, 515.
Strype's Lives, Knight's Colet and Erasmus,
517.
Jortin's Erasmus, Lewis's Lives, 518.
Fiddes's Cardinal Wolsey, 519.
Middleton's Cicero, North's Lives, 520.
Collins's Collection, Harris's Regal Biographies, 521 .
Lowth's Wykeham, 522.
Warton's Sir T. Pope, Robertson's Charles
V., 523.
Boswell's Johnson, 524.
Roscoe's Lives, 525-528.
Shepherd's Poggio, Greswell's Lives, Berington's Literary History, Gibbon's Autobiography, 529.
Archdeacon Coxe's Lives, 531 .
Hayley's Cowper, 532.
Chandler'sWaynflete, 534.
Churton's Dean Nowell, 535.
Do. Founders of Brazen Nose, 536.
Zouche's Sir Philip Sydney, Black's Tasso,
Southey's Nelson, 536.
Southey's Wesley, 537.
Memoirs and Anecdotes of Distinguished Persons and
their Times, 538-557.
French, 538-548.
OF SUBJECTS AND AUTHORS.
xlv
Brantome's, 538.
MEMOIRS AND ANECDOTES.
Sully's, 540,
Cardinals Richelieu, Retz, and Mazarine,
541.
Mesdames Motteville, Montpensier, de Mazarin, de Maintenon, 542.
Duchesne de Longueville, Mad. de Caylus,
Queen Margaret, Louis XIII . XIV. XV.
Duc d'Orleans, Henry IV. 543.
Bassompierre, D'Estrades, Condé, Lomenie,
Villeroy, Berwick, Rochefoucault, 544.
Mémoires Particuliers, Grammont's, 545.
Niceron, Mémoires Historiques, 547.
Madame D'Espignay, 548.
English, 549-557.
Colonel Hutchinson, Evelyn, 549.
Ballard, Memoirs of Learned Ladies, 552.
Watson's Earls of Warren and Surrey, 553,
554.
Anderson's House of Yvery, 555.
Hollis and Disney, Nichols's Bowyer, 555.
Additions, 557, 562.
Péréfixe's Henri IV. , Margaret de Valois,
557.
Cibber's Apology, Wren's Parentalia, 558.
Life ofLord Herbert of Cherbury, 559.
Life of Cellini, Mason's Life of Gray, Life
of Gilbert Wakefield, 560.
Spence's Anecdotes, 562.
PHILOLOGY AND BELLES LETTRES, 563, 612.
GRAMMARIANS, 563, 571 .
English, ibid.
Stanbridge, I. de Garlandia, Whittinton, 564 .
Lillye, 565.
Eleven Grammars, Linacre, 566.
Bishop Tonstall, 567.
Horman, Palsgrave, 568.
Minor Grammatical Works, 569.
xlvi SYNOPTICAL TABLE.
PHILOLOGY AND BELLES LETTRES.
Ortus Vocabulorum, Promptorius Puerorum ,
Book for Travellers, 570.
GRECIAN PHILOLOGISTS, 571–577.
Plato, 572.
Aristotle, 573.
Xenophon, 574.
Plutarch, 575.
Æsop, 576.
Athenæus, 577.
Lucian, 837.
ROMAN PHILOLOGISTS, 578-580.
Cicero, 578.
Seneca, Boetius, 580.
Apuleius, Aulus Gellius, Pliny, 581 .
Petronius Arbiter, Quintilian, 582.
Plautus and Terence, $38.
ENGLISH PHILOLOGISTS , 581 .
Bartholomæus, 583.
Reynard the Fox, 584.
Alain Chartier, Cato, Sir T. Elyot, 585 .
Roger Ascham, Sir A. Fitzherbert, 587.
Sir T. Wilson, 588.
William Thomas, Abraham Fraunce, 589.
Robert Greene, 591.
Thomas Nash, 593.
Gabriel Harvey, Thomas Dekker, 594 .
George Whetstone, 595.
Stubbes, Braithwait, Peacham, 596.
Merriments, 598.
Markham, Burton, 599.
Cornwallyes, Howell, 601 .
Sir William Temple, 602.
Dryden, Addison, 603.
Swift, 605. Steele, British Essayists, 606.
De Foe, 607.
Dr. Johnson, 608 .
Bacon, Boyle, Locke, 610.
Newton, Milton, 611 .
OF SUBJECTS AND AUTHORS. xlvii
POETRY, 613-773.
GREEK POETS, 614-624.
Homer, 614-619.
Hesiod, 618.
Theocritus, 620.
Pindar, 621.
Anacreon, 622.
Callimachus, 623.
Apollonius Rhodius, Bion, Moschus, 626.
Eschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, 839.
LATIN POETS, 625-643.
Classification, 625.
First Class, 626-635.
Virgil, 626-628.
Lucretius, Ovid, 629.
Juvenal and Persius, 631.
Martial, 633.
Horace, 634-635.
Second Class, 636–643.
Lucan, 636.
Statius, 637.
Silius Italicus, 639.
Claudian, 640.
Catullus, Tibullus, Propertius, 641 .
Tibullus, 642.
Valerius Flaccus, Manilius, 643.
ENGLISH POETS, 644-749.
Ancient, 644-726.
Old English Poetry and prices at Mr. Bindley's sale, 644-648. At Sir Mark Sykes's,
841 .
Castell of Labour, Prophecye of Merlin,
kynge Apollyn of Thyre, Mirrour of the
Churche, Lover and Jaye, 649.
Spectacle of Louers, Complaynte of a
Lover's Life, Chaunce of the Dolourous
Lover, Conusaunce d'Amours, 650.
Four Leaves of True love, Hearte throughe
xlviii SYNOPTICAL TABLE
ENGLISH POets.
perced, Ould facioned Love, Too soon
Maryed, Too late Maryed, Evyll Maryage,
651 .
Fyftene Joyes of Maryage, Skelton, 652.
Lydgate, Castle ofPleasure, Temple of Bras,
654.
Treatyse ofa Galaunt, 655.
W. Walter, Robyn Hode, 656.
Friar and Boye, Cryste Cros me Spede, 657.
Life of S. Werburge, J. Splynter, 658.
Christmas Carols, 659, 661.
Toye's Ballads, 662.
Governayle of Helthe, 663.
Poetry printed by W. de Worde, 665.
Chaucer, 668, 677.
Poetry printed by Caxton, 669.
Lydgate, 677.
Skelton, 678, 681.
S. Hawes, 679, 681.
Earl of Surrey and Sir T. Wyatt, 682, 683.
Mirrour of Magistrates, 685.
Churchyard, 686.
Tubervile, Googe, 688.
Paradise of Dainty Devices, 690.
Breton, Kendall, Robinson, The Phoenix
Nest, 691 .
England's Parnassus, England's Helicon,
Belvidere, 692.
Spenser, 693-695.
Shakspeare's Sonnets, 695.
Gascoigne, 696.
Fulwell, 697.
Bishop Hall, Breton, 698.
Dr. Lodge, Marlow, 699.
Munday, 700.
Chester, Chute, Herbert, 701 .
Herrick, 702.
Rowlands, 703 .
OF SUBJECTS AND AUTHORS.
xlix
ENGLISH POETS.
Southwell, Du Bartas, 704.
Milton, 697, 710..
Davies, 710.
Wither, Lovelace, 711.
Crashaw, Jordan, 712.
Carew, 713.
Daniel, Drayton, 715.
罩
Randolph, Cartwright, 717.
Drummond, Taylor, 719.
Delia, Dolarney, Chute, Hannay, Davison,
Heath, Massacre of Money, Scourge of
Venus, Bold, 720.
Cowley, 715, 721.
Denham, 721 , 722.
Donne, Butler, 722, 724.
Waller, 723, 724.
Fugitive Poetry, 725.
Dryden, 726.
Modern Authors, 797-736.
Prior, 727.
Pope, 728-731 .
Gray, Thomson, 732.
Collins, Churchill, 733.
Young, 734.
Akenside, Beattie, Goldsmith, Cowper, 735.
Living Authors, 737—747.
Southey, 737.
Wordsworth, Rogers, 738.
Sir Walter Scott, 739.
Moore, 741.
Crabbe, Milman, 742.
Lord Byron, 743–746. {
Sotheby, Bowles, Montgomery, 747.
Collections of Poets, 747-749.
Dr. Aikin's, A. Chalmers' , 747.
Davenport's, Cook's, Bell's, Barbauld's Novelists, 749.
ITALIAN POETS, 750 763.
1 SYNOPTICAL TABLE
ITALIAN POETS.
Foscolo's expected edition of, 750.
Dante, 751–754.
Petrarch, 755.
Ariosto, 756..
Tasso, 760.
Translations of ditto, 761-763.
FRENCH POETS, 764-773.
Analyses and Collections, 764, 765.
Brunet's, Goujet's, La Croix du Maine's,
764.
Raynouard's, Barbazan's, D'Aussy's, 765.
De Meun, Marot, Malherbe, 765.
La Fontaine, 766.
Corneille, Racine, 767.
Moliere, 767, 768.
Boileau, 768, 769.
Voltaire, 770.
I. B. Rousseau, Gresset, Delille, 773.
THE ENGLISH Drama, 774–824.
MYSTERIES, 775-779.
Mr. Lang's French Mysteries, 775.
Mr. Markland's Chester, ditto, 778.
Mr. Sharp's Coventry ditto, 778, 779.
COLLECTIONS, &c. OF OLD PLAYS, 780-782.
Hawkins', Dodsley's, Baldwin's, 780.
Roxburghe Reprints, 781 .
Miller's Collection, 781.
Baker's Biographia Dramatica, 782.
ANCIENT DRAMATISTS, 782-823.
Bale, 782.
Sackville, Still, Gascoigne, Peele, 783.
Old Plays in the Malone library, 784-790.
Lyly, 788.
Marlow, 789.
Shakspeare, 791 , 818.
Ben Jonson, 819.
Beaumont and Fletcher, Ford, 820, 821
Massinger, Shirley, 821 , 822.
OF SUBJECTS AND AUTHORS. li
ANCIENT DRAMATISTS.
Otway, 822, 823.
MODERN DRAMATISTS, 823.
Sheridan, 823.
Inchbald's Theatre, 824.
SUPPLEMENT, 827.
Preparing for Publication, A new Edition ofan
INTRODUCTION
TO THE KNOWLEDGE OF
RARE AND VALUABLE EDITIONS
OF THE
GREEK AND LATIN CLASSICS,
BY THE
REV. THOMAS FROGNALL DIBDIN,
F.R.S. F.A.S.
The Fourth Edition.
The new Matter acquired by the accession of Materials during
the period of Sixteen Years, since the Work was last printed, will
extend it to Two large octavo volumes.
Afew Copies will be struck off upon LARGE PAPER to arrange with
the other Works of the Author ; and, in consequence of the claims for
Large Paper Copies of the LIBRARY COMPANION having greatly exceeded
the number printed, to the consequent disappointment of such as have
neglected to make early application, the Publishers earnestly request those
Persons who wish to possess Large Paper Copies of the INTRODUCTION TO
THE CLASSICS, to signify the same to them in writing, and to take an
Acknowledgment of the receipt of the Order, without which they will not
hold themselves engaged to supply any claims that may be made at the time
of Publication.
Finsbury-square,
August 7, 1824.
INTRODUCTION.
Ir is upwards of four years, since, on quitting the ancient city
of Ratisbon, (in the way to Nuremberg) I paused upon the
summit of a high hill, about a short English mile from thence,
which commands a beautiful view of the course of the Danube.
As the traveller quits this hill, in the same route, he takes a final
leave of the same river : but if he have any sensibilities which
are likely to be awakened by a view of Nature, in one of her most
interesting forms, he will not fail to cast a fond and frequent look
upon the view in question : which is at once fertile, varied, and
picturesque.
I spent a short twenty minutes upon the summit of this hill ;
and requested the postillion to make me acquainted with the
names ofthe different little villages and chateaus with which the
banks of the Danube are, in this neighbourhood, so plentifully
studded : while, to the right, the massive fragments of antiquity,
together with the turrets and towers, of RATISBON, rose with a
grand and contrasting effect. I seemed to rejoice in the prospect
before me; and wished for a farm upon this sweep of meadow,
or a villa upon that undulating summit. The grapes were now
ripening apace ; and the joys of the coming vintage seemed to
give to every object a ruddier hue, and to animate every Rustic
with a livelier flow of spirits. I was revelling in the picture of
abundance which my fancy readily drew, when the explanation
of the postillion, conveyed through the servant who attended
me, cast a melancholy tone of colouring over this scene of prosB
2 INTRODUCTION.
pective happiness. " The River, Sir," (observed the interpreter)
"frequently overflows its banks, and destroys the labours of the
husbandman: the houses are sometimes swept away in the course
ofthe inundation : the cattle perish ; and the vine is rooted up by
the rushing waters. Yonder scene, now so pleasing from the
certain prospect of an abundant harvest, is frequently visited by
desolation and affliction while the walls and ramparts of the
CITY protect the inhabitants from the wide waste of deluge by
which the country is overwhelmed. "
-
This brief but impressive dialogue had nearly escaped my
recollection .. till, of late, and especially at the PRESENT MOMENT,
it presented itself to me in a variety of ways. In sitting down to
the composition of this Work, in which my principal object is to
be of USE to my countrymen-if not to the readers of other
countries, I could not but reflect how forcibly the picture of
nature, as seen at Ratisbon, was emblematical of that of HUMAN
EXISTENCE. For, first, we may consider the principles, passions,
and prejudices of mankind as represented by the course of the
Danube. When kept within bounds, that river brings fertility
and abundance ; when it overflows its banks, ruin and desolation
too frequently ensue. The inference is obvious. Secondly, as
the strong walls and ramparts of Ratisbon protect its inhabitants
from the ill effects of the flooding of the river, so the sound
instruction and good advice, instilled into the minds of young
people-and not lost sight of by such as are " of riper years ”—
generally protect them from that most dreadful of all human
visitations, the inundation of vicious thoughts and immoral
habits. As are the walls of Ratisbon against the evil effects of
the overflowing Danube, so are GOOD BOOKS against the influence
of pernicious writings.
THE
Library Companion.
DIVINITY.
THE Source of all moral excellence must be sought
for in the truths and consolations of RELIGION.
Hence I devote the first chapter of this Library Companion to a brief account of such works, as, among
others, may be of service to the Young, and of comfort
to the Old, in their choice of publications relating
to the INSPIRED WRITINGS.
A word or two, however, by way of preliminary
observation. I must suppose my " Young Collector "
to have received a classical, or competent education ;
whether followed up by " University Instruction, " is
a matter upon which I cannot venture to speak decidedly although, questionless, ifit be so, the better
for himself. Yet it may be observed that several
of our famous Collectors have never heard the echo of
their footsteps within the cloisters of a college. Preferable to either a classical education, or the instruc-
----
4 DIVINITY
-
tions of a University, is the possession of a sound
conscience and right judgment in all things ; and
though this latter observation may be considered as
begging the question, yet it cannot be denied that we
frequently witness their good effects, without stopping to enquire how they were attained, and without
disbelieving that they may be easy of attainment. It is
fitting, however, that I should caution such Collector,
in the very outset of his book-career, not to be led
away by any of those meteor-like manias which sometimes possess very intelligent men, and bring disgrace
upon the good old cause ofBIBLIOPHILISM. Especially
let him beware of confining himself exclusively, or
imperatively-of sacrificing all his time and attention
-his rest, and as it were, comfort of mind to one
distinguishing, or capricious, branch of collection more
than another because the most prudent of men can
scarcely refrain from committing many errors in the
indulgence of such a passion . All violent impulses, of
whatever kind, are necessarily short-lived. Let both
the student and collector regulate his passions as
soberly as possible ; but such regulation by no means
implies coldness or indifference. Let zeal never
slacken - but let judgment always step in to modify
it : and when a very choice, or curious, or supposed
unique, article presents itself, let the courage only be
screwed to its sticking place, so as not to fear even
the competitorship of * in the acquisition of it ! I am the more anxious respecting this
branch of the subject, because, as on the one hand I
do not like to see a generous young character on a
sudden frozen into parsimony, bordering upon avarice ;
so, on the other, I am exceedingly desirous that all
book- pursuits should have a consistent and satisfac-
PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS. 5
tory result that there should be no shifting and
changing, and " bringing to market " those fruits
which are only, as it were, of yesterday's gathering.
―
There is nothing that brings down heavier and
juster censure upon a Young Collector, than this early
and precipitate separation from such companions of
his private hours ; who appear to have been invited
into his study to-day, for no other purpose than to be
turned out of doors to-morrow. Consider well-and
weigh the probable advantages and disadvantages of
your choice, maturely before you purchase ; but,
having purchased, as the result of such conviction, be
kind and courteous towards those whom you have
thus admitted to be your Cabinet Counsellors : for,
(as old Richard de Bury says) " they will instruct
you without harshness, and correct you without
stripes."* I have known many instances of extreme
folly on this score ; and have seen shelves covered, this
season, with CHRONICLES, -which, during the next,
have been filled by DEKKERS, GREENES, and HARVEYS; and, still more ruthless act ! have found old
-
* Concerning this favourite author, consult the Bibliomania and
Bibliographical Decameron. A pleasing and instructive picture of
LIBRARY COMFORTS is drawn in Mr. D' Israeli's Literary Character,
vol. ii. ch. xxi. If I could envy any man, or men, their past lives,
it were GROLIER, PEIRESC, and DE THOU.
To which add, the works of TOM NASH. These were celebrated
writers in the reign of Elizabeth ; and wrote pieces of drollery, satire,
and lampoon. Harvey was the bitter opponent of Nash. At the
sales of Pearson, Steevens, Reed and Bindley, some of these pieces
brought inordinate prices ; but at that of the late Mr. Perry, these
prices were considerably diminished . Respecting the authors, consult Berkenhout's Biographica Literaria, Beloe's Anecdotes of Literature, D'Israeli's Calamities of Authors ; and, for the editions of some
of their works, the British Bibliographer, and Watt's Biographia
Britannica. Several very uncommon pieces of Dekker will be found
6
DIVINITY.
Roger Ascham's prophecy abundantly fulfilled -by
the dispersion of BIBLES for the admission of RoMANCES. * These are mischievous results, and should
be avoided.
Without further preface, therefore, I proceed to the
recommendation of those books in which the WORD of
GOD, or the Sacred Text, is contained with every possible advantage bestowed upon it from the piety,
learning, and research of man. Of course, I speak of
Editions of the BIBLE. And first of
POLYGLOT BIBLES.
These have been always considered as the foundation stones of a theological collection ; but the ordinary Collector will do well to rest satisfied with the
possession of two, out of thefour, of such publications
of Holy Writ : namely, with the first Polyglot Bible,
published at Alcala, in 1514-22 ; 6 vols. folio ; and
with the fourth, published at London in 1657, in the
in the " Catalogue of the singular and curious Library of Sir Robert
Gordon, ofGordonstoun, " sold by auction by Mr. Cochrane in 1816 :
see nos. 771-777. Mr. Heber possesses, I believe, the most complete collection of the works of this coarse, but clever, writer.
*Ascham's words are these :- " I know when God's Bible was
banished the court, and La Morte d'Arthure received into the Prince's
chamber." The worthy Ascham is most vehement against this
Romance, which has lately been twice reprinted in a duodecimo
form, with cuts. Of this reprint, all the exceptionable passages
are omitted in one edition ; in the other they are retained : — and,
shame to say ! this latter is the more saleable impression. A little
before, Ascham says, "Ten Sermons at Paule's Crosse do not so
much good for moving men to true doctrine, as one of those books
do harm, with inticing men to ill living." Schoolmaster ; by Bennett,
4to. p. 253-4.
POLYGLOT BIBLES. 7
same number of volumes, of which the famous BRIAN
WALTON was the principal editor. * The Lexicon of
*Of the Polyglot of CARDINAL XIMENES, there are three copies
printed UPON VELLUM : one is in the Vatican, and one was formerly in
the library of the Capuchins of Montefiascone : the third, formerly
belonging to the Cardinal himself, and which was more recently in
the collections of Pinelli and Count Macarthy, is now in the library
of George Hibbert, Esq. of Portland Place. Mr. Hibbert has dispossessed it of the comparatively unappropriate binding in which it
was clothed by De Rome, when in possession of the Count, and has
clad it in a magnificent vestment of dark blue morocco, under the
skilful hands of C. Lewis. It is barely possible to view these
volumes without feeling ajustifiable pride that they are the property
of an Englishman. I should apprehend that the finest paper copy in
the world, is that in the Royal Library at Paris. It had belonged to
Henri II. and Diane de Poictiers
Of the Polyglot of WALTON, the LARGE PAPER copies are so rare,
that I have no recollection of the sale of one within the last twenty
or even thirty years. But yet scarcer than these, is the large paper of
the Lexicon of Castell. The history of the rise and progress of this
matchless work is ably given by my friend the Rev. Mr. Todd, in
his Memoirs of the Life and Writings of the Right Rev. Brian Walton.
1821. 8vo. 2 vols. It is scarcely a twelvemonth ago, since I saw, at
Mr. Lawford's, in Squibb's passage, a copy of the ordinary paper of
Walton's Polyglot, with two or three extra heads, containing an
original, circular Letter, prefixed, exhorting the public to an encouragement of the work, (see Todd's Mem. of Walton, vol. i . p. 49.)
and signed by Walton, and other learned men. I think five guineas
were demanded for this particular, and not incurious, document ;
and thirty guineas for the copy of the work exclusively. Mr.
Payne in his last catalogue marks a fine copy at the same price.
So does Mr. Bohn. Messrs. Longman and Co. mark a copy at
£21 .: Cat. 1822, no. 5777. Messrs. Rivington and Cochran, at the
moment of penning this, justly boast of possessing not fewer than
eight copies of this Polyglot of Walton; a thing perhaps unparallelled in the annals of bibliopolism. Mr. Thorpe, in a recent catalogue, marks acopy, containing BOTH THE PREFACES† (the royal and
↑ A copy, more than perfect, necessarily supposes another copy less than perfect.
8 DIVINITY.
Castellis an indispensable accompaniment of the latter work.
And let him, if this cannot be obtained in its original
and entire form, content himself with Michaelis's
improved edition of the Syriac and Hebrew portions
of it, put forth in 1788, in 2 folio volumes, which may
be procured for somewhere about £2. Yet if, from
motives of economy, or a want of opportunity, or of
the republican) , at £45: " aremarkably fine copy, very strong, and
neatly bound in russia." But such a copy is not unique. Mr. Hibbert
has a similar one, with the Original Dedication, and the rare addition
ofthe " original Advertisement ; " as copied by Mr. Todd, vol. i. p. 68.
The rage for republican copies has a good deal, if not entirely, subsided ; and I suspect that copies of this description are as common
as those called royal copies. Even in the solitude of Worlingham ,
(the seat of the late Thomas Sparrow, Esq. in Suffolk) I discovered a
republican copy, bound in blue morocco, and ruled with red lines ;
which had once belonged to " P. de Cardonnel." The DEDICATION
to King Charles II . is the really rare thing to possess ; and yet, what
will be the surprise of the reader to learn, that this bibliographical
keimelion, wanting in most ofthe large paper copies, is to be found in a
copy, on small paper, in the library of Bamburgh Castle in Northumberland ? * I am indebted to my young and ardent book- loving
friend Mr. W. C. Trevelyan (of University College, Oxford) for this,
and many other curious pieces of bibliographical- intelligence. I discovered, abroad, two copies with this original Dedication : one at
Stuttgart, and the other in the library of the Arsenal at Paris.
Nor is it probable that the imperfect copy should be also the property of the Owner
of the perfect copy-for who, in the possession of his senses, would inflict such punishment upon so valuable a work as that of the Polyglot of Walton, for the mere capricious purpose of having another copy more than perfect ? Be this as it may, it
is certain that, in the library of Salisbury Cathedral, there is a copy of this very
Polyglot, with the portrait, frontispiece, preface, and prolegomena, CLEAN CUT AWAY.
Such a frightful act of book-spoliation is, fortunately, rarely to be witnessed. It seems
however not to have been of recent perpetration.
This library, a most curious and valuable one, and of which there is a printed
catalogue in 4to. was bequeathed to the Castle by the late Dr. John Sharp, a prebendary of Durham, Archdeacon of Northumberland, &c. &c. He died in 1792.
Hewas a magnificent character in every thing he did. But of him, hereafter.
POLYGLOT BIBLES. 9
curiosity, neither of the foregoing Polyglot Bibles be
attainable, * I esteem him neither an incurious nor an
unhappy Collector who shall have possessed himself
* Of course I pass by the Polyglot Bibles of PLANTIN, HUTTER,
LE JAY, &c. , as these are now considered to be purely secondary, if
not almost entirely useless . But it may not be unacceptable to learn,
that there did exist, and yet does exist, a copy of Plantin's exquisitely
printed Polyglot, UPON VELLUM, in the library of the Duke of Savoy,
at Turin. This copy was described by the Marquis Scipio Maffei,
in his account of that library, in a letter to Apostolo Zeno. He
described it as in eleven volumes ; with the following inscription, in
letters of gold, upon the cover of the first volume : " Emanueli
Sabaud. Duci. Biblior . exemplar purum xi. tom. in Membr. Philippus
II. Hispan. Rex Cognato ac Fratri chariss. sacrum munus. MDLXXIII .”
Mem. of Literature, vol. v. p. 393. Another vellum copy is mentioned in the Bibliog. Decameron, vol. ii . 154. The Polyglot of Hutter,
published in 1599, in six folio volumes, demands a more particular
detail. I have already ( Introd. to the Classics, vol. i . p. 31-3 ) noticed
the contents, and the rarity, of a perfect copy of this singular work ;
and Mr. Bohn, the bookseller, availing himself of the authorities I
before referred to, naturally and pardonably, exults in the possession
of " an uncommonly beautiful copy, elegantly bound in vellum
complete in every particular " -which, in his last catalogue of 1820,
no. 4397, he marks at £35 . As an apparent justification, Mr. Bohn
adds that " there does not appear to exist a single complete copy in
any of the foreign public libraries ; and in England, the one now
submitted is decidedly UNIQUE. " These are rather bold words to
make public. No one, nor one score of men, can know what is,
or is not, in all the foreign public libraries ; and I make little doubt
that Passau, Bamberg, Wurtzberg, and Nuremberg each contains
a perfect copy of old Elias Hutter's many- tongued labours. In one
of the places (I think it was at Bamberg or Wurtzberg) I was told,
on quitting Nuremberg, that there was a church (of course not applied to purposes of divine worship) WHOLLY FILLED WITH BOOKS—
even to within a few feet of the roof ; and was not Hutter's Polyglot
in all probability among them?
Nor can it with safety be said what is, or is not, in the numerous
and richly stored libraries of England. When Hutter put forth his
Polyglot, it was the dawn of biblical criticism in our country ; and
10 DIVINITY.
of thefour- tongued Bible* of Reineccius, published at
Leipsic in 1750, in 3 folio volumes. But it is due to
the enterpising spirit of Mr. Bagster, the bookseller,
as well as to that of his learned coadjutors, to notice
the commodious and highly useful Polyglot Bible,
which has been recently published by him-in a variety
of forms--in the Hebrew, Hebrew- Samaritan, Greek,
Latin Vulgate, Syriac, and English texts .†
Of Bibles published in a separate language, I shall
proceed to give a list, in the order in which they
appeared in print.
many would have been eager to possess his work. We had mighty
men, in every way, even at that time, engaged in the study and dissemination of the SACRED TEXT. The mid- day effulgence of such
labours appeared in the Polyglot of Brian Walton. Mr. Bohn
marks a copy of the Paris Polyglot of 1649, at £21 . Let " the
young " and " the old " beware how they purchase a copy at Paris,
either in the Boulevards or Quai des Augustins, for one half of that
sum-if it be to be imported into England !
* Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and German : the Hebrew has Schmid's
Latin version-the Greek is from Grabe's edition of the Alexandrine
MS. and the German is from the last revision of Luther's text by
Luther himself in 1544-5 .
-
† A great number of copies of this Bible-printed with stereotype
plates, was destroyed in a fire which consumed the whole of Mr.
Bagster's premises in Paternoster- row in the year 1822. The plates,
however, were preserved. A good account of the plan of this Polyglot may be seen in Mr. Todd's Biography of Walton, vol. i . 335-9 .
At the same time was published the Liturgy of the Church of England, in eight languages, to be sold and bound up with this Polyglot :
in the same variety of forms.
11ཌ
BIBLES IN THE LATIN
AND OTHER LANGUAGES.
I must begin by advising, upon this and every other
department of literature, whether sacred or profane,
that the Collector always procure, when practicable,
the FIRST EDITION of every work of importance and
popularity. But it will frequently happen that, of
some works, even of the highest importance, there will
be strong doubts about its first appearance in print ;
and when, in the absence of a positive date, we are
compelled to judge of its priority from collateral circumstances. Thus, in the very department at present
under consideration , we have only collateral, but most
indisputable, evidence of the earliest edition of the
SACRED TEXT-not only in the Latin, but in any other,
language. That first edition is assuredly the impression printed in a large, square, gothic type, of which
I have already published a fac- simile, * and which
distinguishes this Bible, vulgarly called the Mazarine
Bible,† on account of a copy of it being found by De
Bure in the library of the famous Cardinal Mazarin,
better known as the Bibliothèque des Quatre Nations
attached to the Institute of France. The " collateral
but indisputable evidence " is this. The edition is
destitute of a printed date. Some, in consequence,
supposed it to be as old as the year 1440 ; and others,
* Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. i . p. 3-6.
+ The bibliographical history of this Bible may be said to be well
nigh exhausted in a Disquisition published upon it in Mr. Valpy's
Classical Journal, vol. iv. p . 471-484.
See this identical copy described in the Bibliographical Tour,
vol. ii, p. 364-5.
12 DIVINITY.
1450. At length two copies were found in the Royal
Library of France ; one upon paper, the other UPON
VELLUM : * upon the margin of the paper copy was an
inscription, in the hand writing of the time, purporting
that copy to have been " illuminated, bound, and perfected by Henry Cremer, vicar of the Collegiate
Church of St. Stephen ofMentz, in the year 1456, on
the feast ofthe Assumption of the glorious Virgin
Mary."
From this evidence, it is clear that the Bible in
question was printed in the year 1456 ; and it is probable that it was printed in the preceding year. It is
possible even that it may have been printed in 1450.
Indeed, from the testimony of Ulric Zel, detailed in
the Cologne Chronicle of 1499, † it is most probable
that this was the very Bible which they began to print
"in the Jubilee year of 1450." At least, there is no
other ancient Bible which so completely answers to
the description therein given, as the present. It follows, therefore, that this is not only the first edition of
the Sacred Text, in ANY language, but that it is the
VERY FIRST BOOK printed with metal types. Those,
who have not seen it, can form little notion of the
beauty and regularity of the press work, and of the
magnificent appearance of the volumes. They exhibit
a masterpiece of art, and a miracle in their way ;
shewing that the infancy and maturity of the art of
printing were almost simultaneous. I am both prompt
and proud to record, that no country in the world
* Both these copies are noticed in the Tour, vol. ii. p. 253-5.
† This is a very uncommon book—even in Germany. An accouut
of it, together with a translation of the passage relating to theabove
Bible, will be found in the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol . iii . p . 281-4.
LATIN BIBLES. 13
contains more, if so many copies, of it —as our own :
while that, UPON VELLUM, in the possession of Mr.
George Nicol, bookseller to his late Majesty, is the
admiration and envy of Collectors. *
In purchasing this impression, the Collector is quite
sure to have the Editio Princeps of the Sacred Text
in the Latin tongue. The version is the VULGAte , or
that of which St. Jerom is allowed to be the author.
Ofthe most ancient, or Italic version, this is not the
place to say any thing. A fine copy of this first impression of the Vulgate Text may be worth a hundred
guineas ; but it has been recently pushed to sixty
guineas beyond that sum.† A yet rarer Bible than the
Mazarine -and published indisputably before that
with the printed date of 1462-is the one, executed
in a yet larger character than the preceding, which is
supposed to have been printed by PFISTER at Bamberg
about the year 1460. I have before entered so fully
into the bibliographical history ofthis exceedingly rare
impression, adding a fac- simile of the commence-
* It maysurprise foreigners, and even Mr. Ebert, of Dresden, himself, that I should call this book by no means of the first degree of
rarity. A copy, upon paper, will be found in the Bodleian library ;
and in the private collections of the King, the Duke of Sussex, the
Duke of Devonshire, Earl Spencer, Sir G. Shuckboro' , Sir M. M.
Sykes, Mr. G. Hibbert, Mr. Fuller, and Mr. John Lloyd : UPON
VELLUM, it will be found in the library of the Rt. Hon. T. Grenville
(from the Macarthy collection) and in that of Mr. G. Nicol. But
none ofthese copies, to the best of my recollection, contain the two
leaves of a table, or rubrics, which are noticed in the Public Library
at Munich see Tour, vol. iii . p. 287. It is rather surprising to find
no copy of this important edition in the British Museum. The facsimiles of the type of this Bible, in Masch, scarcely deserve that designation.
† The copy belonging to the late Mr. James Perry was purchased
by His R. H. the Duke of Sussex for 160 guineas.
Bibl. Spenceriana, vol . i. p . 7-10 . With the exception of a second
14 DIVINITY.
ment of the first chapter of Genesis, that nothing
further upon the subject is necessary to be here advanced except that, we may be quite confident of
the date of this Bible being 1461 , at latest--from a
coeval inscription, in the same numbers, in a copy of
it which belonged to Lord Oxford, and which is now
in the Royal Library at Paris. *
I now come to the mention of the favourite early
impression of the Bible, among collectors, with the
first PRINTED DATE subjoined. I mean, the edition
put forth by Fust and Schoiffher at Mentz, in the year
1462. This edition exhibits a matchless effort of the
art of printing ; and is, with one slight exception, the
earliest specimen of those printers' largest secretary
gothic type. It is usually found UPON VELLUM ; and I
think I may venture to say that I have seen, abroad
and at home, nearer thirty than twenty copies of
it. Upon paper, it is of rarer occurrence ; but a fine
copy upon vellum is worth at least double one upon
paper. The Collector may fearlessly advance a hundred guineas for a fine and perfect membranaceous
copy. From the year 1462 to the end of the Fif
copy, in the Royal Library, I know of no other copy of this very
rare impression in the country.
* Tour, vol. ii, p. 255.
† Among the finest copies of this celebrated Bible UPON VELLUM
-I speak only of such as I have seen-are those in the Cracherode,
Spencer, Cassano (the Spencer- duplicate) , Sykes, Hibbert, Lloyd,
and Watson Taylor Collections. The Cracherode copy is in the
British Museum . Lord Spencer's is very large, but not so white
as was the Duke di Cassano's copy-purchased by his Lordship, and
sold at the memorable sale of his duplicates in 1821. Messrs. Payne
and Foss were the purchasers of this copy, and I find it marked by
them at the reasonable sum of £130. in their catalogue of 1822, no.
4708. Mr. John Lloyd is in possession of Mr. Edwards's copy, and
LATIN BIBLES. 15
teenth Century, the editions of the Latin Bible may be
considered, literally, as innumerable ; and, generally
speaking, only a repetition of the same text. I therefore do not recommend a useless and interminable
labour in collecting editions merely because they
happen to be printed before the year 1470 or 1480 :
but two exceptions may be made in a pursuit of this
kind. First, although these earlier editions are entirely divested of critical annotations, and the text of
one year seems to be only a reimpression of that of
the preceding year, yet it may be as well to collect
such impressions of the same text as first appeared in
the several countries in Europe. * And, secondly, it
is almost essential to the character of a well-chosen
biblical collection to have the first Latin version from
the Hebrew Text-and a first similar version from
the Greek Text ; each in contradistinction to the
Latin Vulgate. These impressions are called " Fontibus ex Græcis " and " Fontibus ex Hebræis. " The
former first appeared in 1479 ; the latter in 1696.
To give an account of the various critical editions
of the Latin Vulgate in the Sixteenth and following
centuries, would alone fill a large octavo volume.
Passing by the editions of Pagninus and Servetus
(the latter under the name of Villanovanus ) I shall
introduce the biblical Collector at once to those of
Mr. Watson Taylor may well rejoice in being the owner of that
which had belonged to Gaignat, and afterwards to Count Macarthy.
All these BIBLICAL GEMS, as well as those in the Marlborough and
Pembroke libraries, are upon vellum. The Duke of Devonshire
possesses a copy, which had belonged to the late Bishop of Ely, upon
paper. A similar copy is in the Bodleian Library, and another in
that at Blickling in Suffolk. This latter was Marchand's.
* As thus : at Mentz, 1455 ; at Bamberg, 1461 ; at Rome, 1471 ;
Venice, 1476 ; Naples, 1476 ; in. Bohemia, 1488 ; in Poland, 1563 ;
16 DIVINITY.
Vatable, and the Aldine editions of 1590 and 1592 ; the
admirable critical labours of Le Clerc, in the edition
of 1735, 7 vols. folio ; and the yet more curious and
probably more important impression of Sabatier, in
1743, 3 volumes folio. * In our own country, we have
in Iceland, 1551 ; in Russia, 1581 ; in France, 1475 ; in Holland,
1477 ; in England, 1535 ; in Spain, 1477.
* See the Ædes Althorpianæ, vol. i. p. 49. Lord Spencer possesses
a copy of the first edition of the version of Pagninus (from the Hebrew
and Greekoriginal texts) ofthe date of 1528, 4to. , which had belonged
to Melanchthon, and which has a passage, in the fly- leaf, (from
Gregory Nazianzen) —inthe hand writing of that celebrated reformer,
thus : “ Παντὸ κατορθοῦμενον παρὰ θεοῦ ἐςὶ , δεδοται δὲ τοις καλουμένοις
nai ¿lw VEÚOUσi : scriptū manu Philippi." The reader may consult
Mr. Townley's Illustrations of Biblical Literature, vol. ii . p. 215,
&c. Of the Bible of Servetus, a "fine copy in blue turkey " is
marked at £4. 4s. in Mr. Triphook's Catalogue of 1817. But see
Old Memoirs of Literature, vol . iv. p. 329. The Aldine editions of
1590 and 1592, in folio, are called after the name of Pope Sixtus V.
and were supposed to exhibit the STANDARD VULGATE TEXT. They
are chiefly estimable on large paper ; in which state they still lift up
their heads. At the sale of the library of the Marquis of Lansdown,
in 1806, a copy of this kind was omitted to be so designated ; and the
late Dr. Gosset bought it, for his friend (the late) Mr. Taylor, for
about 10s. 6d. The Doctor had too keen an eye to let such a treasure
escape. On the death of Mr. Taylor, in 1821 , his books were sold
by auction, and this very copy was again described as of the ordinary paper. In consequence, it was purchased for a comparative
trifle by Mr. I. Payne, and now adorns the library of Sir M. M. Sykes,
at a price about sixty times beyond the first purchase. The Duke of
Grafton's copy, of the same kind, properly designated, was sold for
£38. At Chatsworth, the Bible of 1590 is upon small paper, and
rather an indifferent copy : but of that of 1592 there is a fine large
paper copy, bound in blue morocco. At Althorp , there is a fine copy
of each upon large paper : see Edes Althorp. vol. i . p. 52 ; —and
consult p. 55 for an account of Sabatier's edition , above lauded.
+ Melanchthon appears to have quoted from memory-as he has omitted the article
Tois before OUTW. The passage occurs in the xxxist Oration. Ed. 1609 ; vol. i .
p. 504.
LATIN BIBLES. 17
no edition which mayvie with the beautiful one printed
by Didot in 1785, 2 vols. 4to. , and dedicated to the
French Church. I have purposely avoided the mention
of very many curious, beautiful, and much soughtafter impressions of the Latin Vulgate, in various
forms, and various types which have been put forth
by the Stephens, Gryphii, Elzevirs,* and other continental printers ; nor will I stop to enquire whether, or
not, there be a copy of what is called Cardinal Richlieu's Bible (of 1656, 8vo. ) printed UPON VELLUM—as
there would be no limits to the notices, and anecdotes
which might be engrafted upon this fruitful branch of
our enquiries. It is sufficient that, in what has been
laid down as certain data to act upon, neither the
Reader nor the Collector will find his labour, or his
money, ill bestowed in forming his judgment accordingly.
Father Bukintop published an explanation of ambiguous expressions
and doubtful readings in this Vulgate Bible of 1590 , at Cologne, in
1710, 4to.
* Most of these will be found noticed in the pages of the work last
referred to. It may, however, seem surprising that, in the work
recently published upon the Elzevir press ( Essai Bibliographique sur
les Editions des Elzévirs) at Paris, 1822, 8vo . no notice should be
taken of the magnificent folio impression of the French Bible by
Louis and Daniel Elzevir, in 1669, 2 vols. folio . Perhaps the finest
copy ofthis book in the world, is in the Althorp Library. It is on
large paper, and had been Lamoignon's. But it is not very rare upon
large paper; and a copy of this kind will be found in the library at
Worlingham, (see p 8, ) very fair, and fine. Abroad, it is rather of
common occurrence, in most public libraries.
+ I may here however remark, that the Edinburgh edition of the
English Bible, of 1811 , 12mo. , is, when found upon LARGE PAPER,
a much more beautiful book than the above vaunted diamond letter
Bible of Richlieu. But those will be fortunate who get this Edinburgh edition upon large paper, as only twenty- five copies were
printed. Earl Spencer's copy was obtained of Mr. Triphook.
с
18 DIVINITY.
The earliest printed version of the Scriptures, after
that of the Latin, was the GERMAN version ; of which
the two first editions were published without dates.
Of these, the impression supposed to be by Mentelin
is anterior to the other. They have both been before
particularly described by me. On the possession of
the one or the other of these impressions, let the Collector go immediately to the supposed best edition of
Luther's version, in 1541 ; considering the intermediate impressions as rather curious than necessarynot but what the possession of the FIRST editions* of
such an extraordinary writer as Luther will always
compensate for the trouble or delay that may attend
their acquisition.
After the German versions of the Scriptures, appeared those of the ITALIAN, within probably a very
few years of each other. I am strenuous and earnest
*It is somewhat difficult to ascertain with precision the date of
the first impression of Luther's text ; but I presume that, whatever
be the earliest date of the New Testament, the Old Testament did
not appear before 1524 : see Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. i . p . 58 : and
Bibliog. Decameron, vol . i . p. 164. In the latter authority will be
found some particulars about the earlier Bibles, and of that of 1541 .
Mr. Townley has availed himself of the authorities there referred to ,
and adds (what is singular enough) from Adler's Biblioth . Bibl . p. 12,
that, in a copy of Luther's Bible of 1545 appear some ms. notes of
the same Reformers who had written in the extraordinary copy of the
above edition of 1541 , which now graces the shelves of Mr. G. Hibbert's library. Illustrations of Biblical Literature, vol. ii. p. 282.
Perhaps there is hardly an impression of Luther's version, but of
which some few copies may not be found printed upon vellum. I
observe a copy of the New Testament, printed in this manner at
Augsburg, in 1535, 8vo. 2 vols. , marked at £5. in black morocco
binding, in Mr. Triphook's Catalogue of 1815. This was the copy
which is now in Lord Spencer's collection . Edes Althorp. vol. i.
page 117.
ITALIAN BIBLES. 19
aboutthe recommendation of one or the other of these
early versions ; not so much on account of their rarity,
which is great-especially when in a fine condition—
as that they will afford an additional proof (if any
were wanting) of the suavity and perfection of the
Italian language at the period when these impressions
were executed. The translator was MALHERBI, * who
deserves as well of sacred literature, as Boccaccio
does of the belles-lettres . In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the Collector will rest satisfied with
the best editions of the versions and commentaries of
BRUCCIOLI, 1546, fol. 3 vols. : and DIODATI, 1607, fol .;
* This requires qualification ; for it is, and is not, true. There
were three editions of the Italian version of the Bible put forth in the
same year, viz. in 1471. The version published in October, at Rome,
is not the same as are those which were published in August and
September, at Venice. The text of the two latter was by Nicolo di
Malherbi, or Malermi, a Benedictin Monk, and abbot of St. Michael
de Lemo. The author of the text of the Roman edition is not, I
believe, very accurately known. Consult the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol.
i. p. 63-7 ; where will also be found a specimen of this Roman text.
Ofthe two Venetian editions, that of August is much the rarer. A
copy of it is described in the Ædes Althorpiana, vol. ii . p. 44 .: but
in the collection of Count Melzi, at Milan, there is a magnificent
copy UPON VELLUM which may be ranked among the scarcest and
most desirable books inthe world. And yet, were the paper copy at
Stuttgart perfect, his Majesty of Wirtemberg need not breathe one
sigh for the possession even of this membranaceous treasure . The
praises of Malermi, the translator, are thus chanted at the end of the
colophon ofthis August edition, printed by V. de Spira :
-
O interprete uiril che per diuino
inzegno credo che tu il translatasti
non mai diuiso al testual chamino
Ormai ciaschun aquesti gientil pasti
se po inuitar di la sacra scriptura
per chui il ben sale et gli uicii son guasti
Cosci salendo a la diuina altura.
20 DIVINITY.
and in the eighteenth century, with that of MARTINI,
1776, in 23 vols . 8vo.
Pursuing the chronological order, I must now make
mention of a few impressions of the Bible in the
HEBREW LANGUAGE, of which the earliest of any portion appeared in 1477, in a quarto edition of the
Psalter with the commentary of Kimchi. * About five
years afterwards, an edition of the Pentateuch with
the commentary of Solomon Jarchi, was put forth at
Bologna, in a handsome folio volume ; † and this was
* This is considered to be the FIRST BOOK printed in the Hebrew
language: a specimen of Hebrew characters ( evidently cut in wood)
may be seen, as published two years before, in the work of Petrus
Niger Contra Judæos, printed by Fyner, at Eislingen, on consulting
the Bibl. Spencer. vol . iii. p. 432-3. The only copy of this rare Psalter
noticed by Brunet is that in the Crevenna collection —now, Ibelieve,
in the Auctarium of the Bodleian library. Mr. Horne, in his truly
valuable Introduction to the Study of the Holy Scriptures, vol. ii,
p. 118, appears to borrow his description of this Psalter from Masch,
vol. i . p. 142 : who, in turn, seems to rely upon De Rossi. This
Psalter was reprinted at Naples in 1487 , folio.
† That is, in the year 1482. Lord Spencer, who has recently
enriched his library with many choice specimens of early Hebrew
printing, is in possession of a magnificent copy of this edition of the
Pentateuch, printed UPON VELLUM, and bound in blue morocco by
C. Lewis. It was purchased of Mr. Baynes, bookseller, for £18. 18s ;
but on its being found to be imperfect, from collation with a perfect
copy in the Ratcliffe library at Oxford, the price was diminished ;
and the imperfections (2 leaves) were supplied by a fac- simile, by
Mr. Harris, executed in a manner so completely satisfactory as
almost to deceive the most experienced eye. See the Ædes Althorpianæ, vol. ii . p. 316-8 : where a full description of the volume may
be found. But a tale of bibliomaniacal melancholy belongs to this
sumptuous book. It had been purchased abroad by Sir M. M. Sykes,
Bart.; and was consigned, with many other precious books, so purchased, to the port of Hull, in Yorkshire. The freight was paid.
Unluckily, the direction (upon a card) had been rubbed off. The
HEBREW BIBLES. 21
succeeded by separate impressions of remaining portions of the Sacred Text in 1486 and 1487 ; till at
length the whole Bible appeared in one distinct publication at Soncino in the year 1488.* It is unnecessary to enumerate the remaining impressions in the
fifteenth century ; as Masch and De Rossi haxe exhausted the subject in their several valuable publica.
tions : only it may be permitted me to observe, that,
of all the impressions here briefly noticed, that of
consignee of the case of books being unknown, Government stepped
in and claimed the precious cargo for payment of duties. The books
were in consequence sold by public auction at the Custom House ;
and Mr. Baynes, almost by mere chance, became the purchaser of
this and of several other similar treasures, at comparatively moderate
prices. It would be distressing to make mention, however slightly,
of a few of these " other treasures : " but when Sir Mark Sykes
arrived in London, about a twelvemonth after the sale in question, he
learnt and borethe particulars of this sad story with the heroism of a
true Roxburghe- Club Knight. Note : -I have erroneously said, in the
authority last referred to, that Mr. Ogle was the purchaser from
whom Lord Spencer obtained the copy. It was Mr. Baynes.
* Masch has exhausted the bibliographical history of this wonderfully rare book : of which, I believe, there are only the two copies,
(above mentioned, ) in England : but neither of them are upon vellum .
Two copies are mentioned by Masch as being at Rome, and one in the
Laurentian library at Florence. Tychsenius, in his Tentamen (a sort of
critical reply to the Dissertatio ' of Kennicott) accuses this first
edition of containing many grievous errors of omission and commission—from which Masch judiciously infers that we must maintain a
sort of medium in our judgments upon it : neither to prize it too
highly or too low " for that, like almost all Greek and Latin
books, of early printing, it has its advantages and defects." Bibl.
Sacra, Part I. p. 5-7. This edition seems so have been reprinted at
Brescia, in 8vo. , 1494 ; but " who is the happy man to be congratulated on the acquisition of this reprint ? Masch's account of it
must put the curious, in early Hebrew lore, into a perfect state of
delirium. Well might the late Bishop of Ely often exclaim, " these
early Brescia books are of the extremest rarity and value !"
-
22 DIVINITY.
Soncino is by far the scarcest, and perhaps most valuable. I believe there are only two copies known to
exist in this country ; of which that in the Bodleian
library was the Crevenna copy, as described by Brunet.
The second is in the library of Exeter college, Oxford.
No copy of it is known in France ; so that I saw and
described, with no ordinary sensations of gratification, the copy which adorns the shelves of the Imperial
library at Vienna. *
The great Star of Hebrew printers in the sixteenth
century was Daniel Bomberg, a native of Antwerp,
and resident of Venice. His editions of the Bible,
with the Targums and Rabbinical Commentaries, are
considered to be of great intrinsic value ; especially his
third edition of 1547-9, in four folio volumes. But
let the Stephens come in for their due share of praise ;
and especially the famous R. Stephen, father of the
* See the Tour, vol. iii . p . 486-8. The copy there described “ had
had a journey to Paris, and gained a coat of blue morocco by the
trip." It is a clean and beautiful copy, but rather cropt in the
binding.
+ Mr. Townley, in his Illustrations of Biblical Literature, vol. ii .
p. 467, has given a short but animated and interesting account of
the above early " Star of Hebrew printers. " Bomberg's first edition was in 1518 ; but afterwards, much improved, in 1525 , in four
folio volumes. " A still more ample and complete edition was
printed by him in 1547-9, four vols. folio, under the inspection of
Cornelius Adelkind, another erudite Jew, with a curious preface by
the editor of the edition of 1525 - Jacob ben Chain - of which a
Latin translation is given in Kennicott's Dissertation , on the state of
the printed Hebrew text, 1759, 8vo. pp. 229-244. Dr. Adam Clarke
(Gen. Pref. to Comment. p. iv . ) characterises this edition , of 1547, as
the most useful, the most correct, and the most valuable Hebrew
Bible ever published . " Townley. It seems to have been overlooked
by Brunet. A copy of it is marked in Messrs. Ogle and Duncan's last
catalogue (no. 2189) at 14 l. 14s. , in russia.
HEBREW BIBLES. 23
learned Lexicographer, who, in his quarto and duodecimo impressions of the Hebrew Bible, presented the
theological world with welcome gifts. *
I pass over those impressions of the Hebrew text
which appeared in the several Polyglots of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and conclude this
summary list with the recommendation of three, in
the eighteenth century, which are entitled to distinguished praise : that of Michaelis of 1720, in two vols.
4to.: of Houbigant, of 1753, in four vols. folio ; and
especially that of the immortal Kennicott of 1776, in
two folio volumes, pronounced to be, by one of the
most wary of German critics, " a first rate, and even
unique ornament of a theological collection." But yet
I will not quarrel with that student or collector, be
he young or old, who shall be disposed to add to the
foregoing the quarto impression of the recent labours
of Jahn.t
-
* The dates and forms of the Stephanine Hebrew Bibles, above
alluded to, are these : in 1543, 4to. in two or three volumes with
points and in the following year in seven or eight volumes, sextodecimo. Of the former, or quarto impression, I find a
<< fine copy,
in morocco, gilt leaves, ruled, " marked at 31. 3s. in Mr. Payne's last
catalogue, no. 4803. Of the latter, " a copy in fine condition,
bound by Roger Payne, in blue morocco, with gilt leaves, " is marked
at 41. 16s. by Mr. Triphook, in his catalogue for 1819, no. 1503.
De Bure and Brunet have dwelt with commendable complacency
upon the beautiful execution of these covetable volumes, in both
forms.
↑ I will mention the current prices for which these editions may be
obtained. Michaelis may be bought for about 17. 15s.; but, on large
paper, in 4to. the catalogues of Mr. Payne and Mr. Ogleconcur in affixingdouble that price. A copy ofthe latter kind is described in the Ædes
Althorp. vol. i . p. 41. Houbigant's Hebrew Bible is the dearest of
any. It has been known to bring 12 l. 12s. , even at an auction ;
which should seem to justify Messrs. Payne and Foss in marking " a
new and very neat " copy of it at 14l. 14s.
24 DIVINITY.
Considering the number of Greek works which
appeared towards the latter end of the fifteenth, and
the very commencement of the sixteenth, century, it
may be thought rather a matter of surprise that no
GREEK version of the Scriptures was published till
nearly the lapse of the first twenty years in the latter
century. But so it is. If we except the Greek New
Testament of Erasmus, and of the Complutensian
Polyglot Bible, each in the year 1516, * the Sacred
Of Kennicott's edition, I believe no copy is known to exist upon
large paper. It may be obtained in sound condition, and according
to the binding, from 71. 7s. to 10l . 10s. Whoever chooses to see the
merits and demerits (the latter word, however, hardly deserving of a
place here) of the labours of Kennicott fairly appreciated , may consult Bishop Marsh's XIth Lecture ; but Kennicott's own Dissertation
upon the state of the Hebrew text, with his annual accounts, are a
fund of theological learning. To these may be added the pamphlets of Gifford and King, and the letters of the Abbé de * * *
as well as Kennicott's remarks on Select Passages, &c. , and eight
Sermons, 1787 , 8vo. See Thorpe's cat . 1822, nos 13019-13029.
Of Jahn's edition, in four 8vo. volumes, a sewed copy is marked at
21. 12s. 6d. in the catalogue of Messrs. Ogle, Duncan, and Co.
Lord Spencer possesses it upon large paper. It was edited and republished by Frey in 1812, 8vo. two vol. But do not let me forget
to entice " the young " Collector to give Leusden's beautiful little
edition, in 1701 , crown 8vo . a place in his travelling trunk. Nor,
aspiring to the more solid and essential purposes of information,
should Mr. Boothroyd's cheap and admirable edition of the Hebrew
Bible-without points-and accompanied by critical and explanatory
notes in the English language —in two 4to. volumes, in 1816 - be
omitted to be strongly recommended to the diligent and truth searching student. Mr. Horne has dilated somewhat upon the utility of
this edition . Introduction, &c . vol. ii . p. 130.
It is not often that the New Testament, alone, of Cardinal
Ximenes' Polyglot is found upon sale . I once, however, had a copy
of it, with the edges almost uncut : and in Mr. Payne's last catalogue,
(no. 4719) will be found a very fine copy, in blue morocco binding, gilt leaves, " marked at 10/ . 10s. Such a sum may be worse
66
GREEK BIBLES. 25
text was unknown as printed in the Greek language
till the appearance of the Septuagint of Aldus, or
rather of Andreas Asulanus, in 1518, folio ; a noble
effort of the Aldine press, and a great acquisition to
the cause of sacred literature. There are copies of this
handsome book upon thick paper, but none upon
LARGE paper ; and one copy only, UPON VELLUM, is
recorded by Renouard, which is in the Vatican library.
As to critical editions of the Greek Bible, and more
especially of the Old Testament, I recommend those
ofZanetti, 1586, folio ; Grabe, 1707 , folio ; Bos, 1709,
4to.; and Holmes, 1797 ; -the latter now in the course
of publication. * Of all these, that of the late Dr.
devoted. To the best of my recollection, there is no copy of the
first edition of Erasmus UPON VELLUM : of the second, there are, I
think, three copies of such description . One is at Basle, the other is
in the library of York Minster, and a third ( recently obtained) is the
property of Sir M. M. Sykes, Bart. This third copy wants the second.
volume, which has the Latin annotations ; but the Sacred Text is
complete. It is in pristine binding and pristine condition : quite beautiful. What is singular, it had lain twenty years upon the shelves of
a Leipsic bookseller, unpurchased — till Sir Mark, in his late tour
upon the Continent, secured it for the very moderate sum of 20 l.
This may be considered as a consoling set off against the vexation recorded at page 21 , ante.
The reader may be pleased to consult the Introd. to the Classics,
vol. i. p. 36, for an account of the comparative critical worth of
these editions. Beautiful copies of each will be found in the ALTHORP Collection ; and especially of that truly splendid impression
put forth by Zanetti, under the editorial care of Cardinal Caraffa, in
1586. I may here just make brief mention of the fine Latin Bible,
printed under the same Cardinal's auspices, in 1588, as a companion
to the preceding -if it be only to notice the beautiful copy of it in
the library at Chatsworth, in red morocco, which had belonged to
DE THOU. It is not, however, on large paper, nor do I remember
any copies that are. The edition of Holmes was omitted to be
noticed in the work just referred to. There have been about eighteen parts, at 17. 1s. each part, already published : forming three
26 DIVINITY.
Holmes is doubtless the most critical and valuable, as
well as the most elaborate. But the want of a pocket
Greek Bible, with the text of Bos or of Breitinger, * is
yet a desideratum ; unless we except what has recently
appeared as a portion of Mr. Bagster's Polyglot Bible
-and a yet more recent impression, executed at Glasgow, "Typis Academicis : " a beautiful little churchpew or pocket companion.
The Bible did not appear in the French language
till the year 1530 ; † although, about twenty or thirty
years before, there might have been portions incorporated into a work called La Bible Historiée. But the
first French Protestant Version was not published till
1535, the very year in which appeared our own first
version ofthe Old and NewTestaments. I confess that
I am anxious that a copy of each of these well- printed,
and by no means high priced, volumes may adorn
the shelves of a well-chosen library. As to subsequent
impressions in the same tongue, and with the Roman
Catholic text, the studious may rest well contented
with the excellent edition, in French and Latin, published at Toulouse in 1779, 8vo. in nineteen vols. ; and
of which a beautiful reprint is now in the course of
volumes in folio. See Bishop Marsh's XIIth. Lecture, for a character
of this publication.
-
* Of the edition of Breitinger, which is careful and correct, a copy
was sold at the sale of the late Dr. Gosset's library, ( A. D. 1813, no.
741 ) with the ms. notes of Cæsar de Missy, for 41. 11s.
+ By Martin Lempereur, in folio. I should rather have said, that
the first French edition of the Old Testament appeared in 1523, 12mo.
and of the New, in 1477, or thereabouts. See the authorities in the
Edes Althorp. vol: i . p. 57. Of the above edition , printed at Antwerp, in folio, I find a " neat copy " marked at 21. 2s. in Mr. Triphook's catalogue of 1808 ; and a copy of an edition in the following
year, printed at Lyons, in folio, marked at the same price. I never
saw this latter edition . Martin Lempereur republished his Bible of
ENGLISH BIBLES. 27
publication. * I consider this latter production as
anan almost sine quá non non in aa library more especially
theological.
It is with feelings of no ordinary gratification that
I now come to the mention of our own printed version of the SACRED TEXT ; and if I am here rather
more diffuse than in the enumeration of the foregoing
versions, I hope to be readily pardoned. First and
foremost, let " the Young Man,"—especially if he be
destined for holy orders, -get possession of every authentic piece from the pens of TYNDAL and COVERDALE ; whether they exhibit, or not, the previous
1530, in 1538 ; and if I were called upon to mention, from memory,
the finest copy of this latter Bible ever seen by me, I should say it
was in the library at Worlingham, in Suffolk : see p. 8, ante. This
copy is in fine original stamped calf binding, clean and sound
throughout and is surely upon large paper, if large paper there
be!
:
* I sincerely hope that the day is not far distant, when the quarto
Bible of Drs. D'Oyly and Mant may be reprinted in six or eight
goodly octavo tomes, of respectable execution, to range with the
above mentioned edition, or with similar sized impressions of the
works of our eminent Divines. What a comfort it was to the profession of the LAW, when Bacon and Comyns made their appearance
in royal octavos !
† I am not sure whether the names of FRITH and BARNES ought
not to be added to the above. Indeed the works of Tyndal, Frith,
and Barnes, were published together in one folio volume in 1573 :
see Typog. Antiquities, vol. iv. p. 430. I possess copious MS. extracts from this precious volume ; and once possessed a fresh and
fair copy of it, divided into two parts, and bound in old yellow morocco, which was obtained from Mr. R. Triphook. But from the
extracts which remain, I cannot refrain from giving the reader the
following specimen of BARNES from his " Articles condemned for
Heresie. " The concluding sentence is glorious !
" The Bishop of London, that was then called TUNSTALL, after
my departure out of prison, said unto a substantial man, that I was
28 DIVINITY.
labours of Wicliffe. Champions, as the two former
were, of our early church, during the more critical
period ofher struggles with the see of Rome, they yet
stand out . . as " burning and shining lights".. whose
radiance ought to illuminate our understandings, and
whose warmth ought to penetrate our hearts. But
for THEM and THEIR LABOURS, the examples of Cranmer and Latimer had been unproductive of a glorious issue. The seed, sown by their editions of the
sacred text, was watered with the blood of our first
Martyrs ; and has hence grown up into a goodly tree,
whose boughs have overspread the land, and whose
fruit hath nourished the fainting soul. Let such
names, among ourselves, be held in the same reverence and respect as are those of LUTHER and MELANCHTHON among our neighbours !
To come to particulars. The New Testament was
not dead ( for I dare say his conscience did not reckon me such an
heretic that I would have killed myself, as the voice went ; but yet
would he have done it gladly of his charity) but I was ( said he) in
Amsterdam ; where I had never been in my life (as God knoweth,
nor yet in the country this x years)-and certain men did there
speak with me ( said he) —and he fained certain words that they
should say to me, and I to them ; and added thereunto, that my
Lord Cardinal [WOLSEY] would have me again, or it should cost
him a great sum of money- how much, I do not clearly remember. I
have marvel that my Lord is not ashamed, thus shamefully, and thus
lordly, to lye, although he might do it by authority. And when my
Lord Cardinal and he would spend so much money to have me again,
I have great marvel of it . What can they make of me ? I am a simple
poor wretch, and worth no man's money in the world (saving their's)
-not the tenth penny that they will give for me. And to burn me,
or to destroy me, cannot so greatly profit them : for when I am
dead, the sun and the moon, the stars and the elements, water and
fire, yea, and also stones, shall defend this cause against them, rather
than THE VERITY SHOULD PERISH ! " p . 215.
-
The following is from his " Priests may lawfully marry Wives : ” -
ENGLISH BIBLES. 29
first published, without a date, but about the year 1526,
in a duodecimo volume. Having before * described the
most perfect, but not, as hitherto supposed, the only,
copy, of this inestimable volume, it remains to add,
that, about four years afterwards ( 1530) appeared the
Pentateuch in the same form-reprinted in 1534† as
an attempt, or prelude, as it were, to an edition of the
entire sacred text, comprehending both Testaments.
The completion of this arduous task was reserved for
"Upon a day St. Gregory sent unto his ponds for fish, and in the
nets that they fished withall, were brought up above six thousand
young children's heads : the which thing, when St. Gregory saw,
struck him sore to the heart—and he was very heavy of that sightand perceived anon, that his decree that he made for priests chastity, was the occasion of this great murder-in that the priests could
not live sole, nor yet they durst not avow their children, for fear of
the decree. And so for safeguard of their honesty, they fell into a
fearful abominable sin to kill their own children. " p. 328.
* Bibliographical Decameron, vol. i . p. 173-4. Dr. Cotton has
found a portion of a second copy of this first edition , in the library
of St. Paul's cathedral, which was lettered " Lant's Testament ;" and
ofwhich the leaves were misplaced in the binding. This book I have
examined ; and, as the reader will suppose, with no small satisfactionas the copy, although imperfect, (beginning with sign. A v) is fair
and sound. But my satisfaction would have been greater, if the
monitory MS. note, prefixed by Dr. Cotton, had been attended to .
Such a volume should be rebound with every degree of care and
beauty. It is at present in a most sorry state : a state, I will be bound
to say, unknown to the Dean and Chapter. Not many feet from this
precious little volume, there stands a rare impression of the New Testament, translated into Dutch, and printed at Antwerp in 1553,
12mo. with neat little wood cuts, and a fine head of our Saviour in
the frontispiece. As a specimen of printing, this book is peculiarly
beautiful.
In the library of St. Paul's cathedral, there is a beautiful and
genuine copy of this second edition of Tindal's version of the Pentateuch, in original calf binding, with stamped arabesque borders and
beads.
30 DIVINITY.
Miles Coverdale, and the impression appeared in 1535,
in a folio volume, printed in double columns, in a
foreign secretary-gothic type-as, it is supposed, from
the press of a Zurich printer. A perfect copy of this
exceedingly rare, and proportionably estimable, volume, is, I think, yet unknown : as all those, of which
I have any knowledge, are deficient in some one respect or other. *
This holy and most desirable work being accomplished, it wanted not imitators and abettors. Coverdale's
book was reprinted, with more or less trifling corrections and additions, in 1537, 1539, 1540 ; and yet more
magnificently in 1568. The Bibles, of these dates,
* A particular description of this rare and highly valuable book
will be found in the Biblioth . Spencer. vol. 1. p. 78, and in Cotton,
p. 3-111. See also the Edes Althorpianæ, vol. i . p. 61. Imperfect
copies are by no means very uncommon. In that most curious and
magnificent old library at Blickling, in Norfolk, the seat of the Noble
Family of the SUFFIELDS, there are two copies of this description ;
of which one begins with fol. iii . of the Old Testament, having the
remainder apparently perfect-and with fol. ii. to fol. cij . of the
New Test. Inthe other copy all the introductory pieces are wanting ;
but the text, from beginning to end, is quite perfect. A very imperfect copy is in the library of Castle Ashby, in Northamptonshire,
the seat of the Marquis of Northampton. Dr. Cotton's list will
supply notices of other copies.
+ Perfect copies of these Bibles, especially of that of Matthews of
1537, are of the extremest rarity. A perfect copy of the latter was
purchased at a late sale, at Mr. Sotheby's for £17..17s. by Mr.
Triphook, and is now the property of Mr. Heber. The cause of
such rarity, even in an imperfect state, is obvious enough. Many
a copy, which had survived the cupidity of the searchers, during the
reign of Mary, was negligently treated by the posterity of their first
possessors ; placed in dark and damp holes and corners-a prey to
rats and mice—or to perish from rain and mildew. How many copies,
too, ofthese earlier Protestant Bibles were flung into the fires which
consumed the Martyrs in Smithfield ? Perhaps even Cranmer's fune-
ENGLISH BIBLES. 31
are called under the names of those of MATTHEW,
TAVERNER, CRANMER, and the BISHOP's ; and are all
printed in a handsome folio form, but are very difficult to acquire in a clean and perfect state. A careful
perusal of them shews how little is to be gained from
a recasting of the version. There is a strength, simplicity, and perspicuity, about our old version, which
carry a charm and a conviction about it, not to be
easily described.
The earliest impression in Scotland was in 1576-9,
in folio ; but, what may probably surprise the reader,
the language is rather English than Scotch. This is a
ral pile was lighted with the leaves of his own Bible ! There is
always a keen and cutting spirit of sarcasm in religious persecution :
even on both sides of the question.
:
It may be as well to remark, that detailed descriptions of the
above rare Bibles of 1537 , 1539, 1540, and 1568, appear in the
Edes Althorpianæ ; and that all the editions by GRAFTON, WHITCHURCH and DAY-the great typographical triumvirate of the middle
of the sixteenth century-are described in vol. iii . p. 434-498, and
vol. iv. p. 57-65-of the recent edition of our Typographical Antiquities. Lewis and Dr. Cotton have also given detailed accounts of
several but the work of Lewis stands in direful need of revision
and enlargement. Of the Bibles, just mentioned, that of Grafton
of 1540, executed under the patronage of Abp. Cranmer, is one
upon which the greatest typographical luxury appears to have been
bestowed. It should seem that there are two known copies of it
UPON VELLUM : one in the British Museum, and the other in St.
John's College library, Cambridge. In a catalogue of the books of
" William Stewart, Esq. at Spoutwells, " sold at Perth by D. Morison, Jun. bookseller, in 1817, see no. 664- there appears to have been
a copy of Redman's rare edition in folio, of the same year with Grafton's, 1540 : there called " the scarcest of all the old English translations of the Bible : " but (in the usual strain of lamentation ! ) the
copy " unfortunately begins with fol. 2 : but is otherwise perfect
and in fine preservation." Why Mr. M, should say, "the history of
it is unknown," I cannot discover. A particular description of it is
32 DIVINITY.
volume of very rare occurrence in a perfect state. *
Early in the seventeenth century, appeared what is
called our authorised version -under the auspices of
James I. in two stately folio volumes, 1611. A copy
of this impression is almost absolutely necessary for
every Library which has any claim to be curious or
66 given in the Typog. Antiq. vol iii. 309 : and so far from the copy of
it in Emanuel College library, being the only one upon paper of
which we have an account, " Dr. Cotton notices three others—one in
the British Museum, a second in Herbert's collection , and a third in
the library of St. Paul's cathedral. † The King, according to Mr.
Morison, possesses it UPON VELLUM. I doubt if this be the case.
It would only deceive the reader to lay down any thing in the
shape of canons for the prices of these rare old Bibles. They are
seldom or never perfect, and still more seldom in a clean condition.
Like diamonds of a different character, their value increases greatly
in proportion to size and colour. Let no man buy these ancient treasures without ocular demonstration : for here, in particular, is the
truth of Addison's remark abundantly proved.-" Our sight (says
that elegant writer) is the most perfect and most delightful of all our
senses." Spectator, no. 411. Consult also Todd's Vindication of the
Translation ofthe Bible, p. 25, &c.
* A copy of this very rare book is in the Althorp Library, as described in the Ædes Althorp. vol. i . p. 68-70. I have seen another
copy of it, but in an imperfect state, in the possession of Mr. ✶✶✶
at Beccles in Suffolk. In Herbert's interleaved copy of his own
work, now in my possession, there is a brief notice of this Scotch
Bible, in the hand writing of Gough; who had erroneouly supposed
that there was an edition of it in 1576, and another in 1579 : whereas
these dates comprehend one and the same impression. The former
is attached to the New Testament, and the latter to the Old.
+ I have cursorily examined the black letter folio editions of the English Bible in
this Library. They present a sorry appearance, being much after the fashion of a
certain regiment, ofwhich the commander " flatly" refused to march them through Coventry. Doubtless they stand in great need of better clothing. They are about twenty
in number, and the only perfect one is that of Grafton, 1541, but in a loose state.
There is an edition by Hyll and Reynolds, in 1549, folio, being a reprint of Matthew's
of 1537 —which, at first sight, may be mistaken for that rare edition. It is a sound
copy, but wants the frontispiece, &c. Of Tindal's New Testament, in this library, I
have said somewhat in a preceding page.
ENGLISH BIBLES. 33
complete :-not however solely for the reason assigned
below. * A lover of fine books, and in particular of
fine Bibles, will not fail to secure good copies of the
impressions by Field, Hayes, Baskett, and Baskerville: † and if he deals in oddities, or capricious devi-
* There should be an engraved title-page- wanting in the copy
at Althorp. See Dr. Cotton's various editions of the Bible, p . 29.
Upon the merits of the version of 1611 , read the opinions of sundry
learned men quoted in Todd's Mem. of Walton, vol. i . p . 91-2.
+ Fine copies of these Bibles are described in the Ædes Althorpianæ,
vol. i. p. 76, 80, 81. Of these impressions, that of Baskett, 1717,
is the most magnificent. There are two copies of it UPON VELLUM.
Field's great Bible of 1660 was an unrivalled specimen of the press
of the times. It also professed to be very carefully and accurately
printed, in order to counteract the mischievous effects of many of
the errors of preceding editions : and yet it has received a severe
censure from Bishop Wetenhal, in his little treatise, entitled " Scripture authentic and Faith certain , " 1686, p. 19 -inasmuch as the word
YE was substituted for We. The passage is thus ; from Acts vi. 3.
-" Look ye out among you seven men of honest report, full of the
holy ghost and wisdom, whom We may appoint over this business."
Field, the printer of the Bible in question, had inadvertently put
"YE may appoint " &c.: upon which the Bishop remarks, that " it
is not improbable it might be done at first with design, and particularly of those who would establish the people's power, not only in
electing, but even in ordaining their own ministers." " But I think
(says Berriman, very justly) such a heavy charge ought not to be
admitted without clear proof : and I confess I know of none. The
error might easily happen at the press, through negligence ; as it is
certain many others have done." I shall have occasion to speak
again of Berriman at the end of this note.
In the old and not incurious library at Worlingham in Suffolk,
(see p. 8. ante, ) there is a very fine ruled copy, approaching to
large paper, of Hayes's Bible, published at Cambridge in 1674, 2
vols. folio. On the fly leaf of it, is the following memorandum :
N. B. This Bible belonged to K. Charles IId. and [ was] given by him
to Duke Lauderdale and sold by Auction wth y rest of his Books." In
a comparatively modern hand, below, is witten in pencilD
34 DIVINITY.
•
ations from the established texts he will purchase many
a curious, antecedent impression. When he comes
Hark ye, my Friends, that on this Bible look,
Marvel not at the fairness ofthe Book ;
No soil of fingers, nor such ugly things,
Expect to find, Sirs ;-for it was ye King's.
In this same library is also a most beautiful copy, upon large paper,
(not uncommon) of Buck and Daniel's Bible and Prayer Book, 1638,
folio. It is ruled with red lines, with the most elaborate ornament
on the sides of the binding : an extraordinary copy.
Old Tom Fuller, who published his " Mixt Contemplations on these
times," about the same year in which Field's great Bible appeared,
thus notices the errors of many preceding impressions ( above alluded
to in the text) under the quaint title of
"Fyefor Shame.
"Considering with myself the causes of the growth and increase
ofimpiety and profaneness in our Land, amongst others this seemeth
to me not the least, viz. the late manyfalse and erroneous impressions
of the Bible. Now know, what is but carelessness in other books,
is impiety in setting forth of the BIBLE. As Noah in all unclean
creatures preserved but two of a kind, so among some hundreds in
several editions we will insist onely on two instances. In the Bible
printed at London 1653, we read " 1 Cor. vi. 9. Know ye not that
the unrighteous shall inherit the kingdom of God ? " for " not inherit."
"Now when a Reverend Dr. in Divinity did mildly reprove some
Libertines for their licentious life, they did produce this text from the
authority of this corrupt edition, in justification of their vicious and
inordinate conversations.
" The next instance shall be in the Bible printed at London in
quarto, ( forbearing the name of the Printer, because not done wilfully by him) in the singing Psalms , Psal. lxvii. 2.
" That all the Earth may know
The wayto Worldly Wealth," for
Godly wealth."
66
"It is too probable, that too many have perused and practised this
erroneous impression, namely such, who by plundering, oppression,
cosening, force and fraud, have not in our age suddenly advanced
[to] vast estates."
ENGLISH BIBLES. 35
down to the present day, he must exercise his choice
with great discretion ; and must fortify himself, as
much as possible, against the seductive influence
of brilliant types, hot- pressed paper, ample margins,
and embellishments (in the character of Engravings)
of all forms and descriptions.
In selecting what I call a good, critical, edition of
Berriman, (before mentioned) in his " Critical Dissertation, upon
1 Tim. iii . 16, 1741 , 8vo. p. 52-3, also notices several glaring and
unpardonable blunders in the impressions of the Bible during the
XVIIth century of which the chief are these. In a Bible printed
in the reign of Charles I. the word NOT was left out in the viith
commandment. Selden, in his Table Talk, art. Bible, sect. XI. says,
" a thousand copies " were printed with the omission of the " not."
And Heylen, in his Life of Laud, Book iii. p. 228, fixes it in the
year 1632. “ His Majesty (Charles I. ) being made acquainted with
it, bythe Bishop of London, order was given for calling the Printers into the High Commission ; where, upon evidence of the fact,
the whole impression was called in, and the Printers deeply fined,
as they justly merited." In this same reign, an edition of the Bible
was printed in which the text ran ( Ps. xiv. 1.) " The fool hath
said in his heart THERE IS A GOD." Mr. Nye (in his defence of the
canon of the New Testament) tells us that, in consequence " the
Printers were fined £3000. and all the copies were suppressed by
the King's order. " If the fact be thus, the punishment seems to
have been frightfully disproportionate : for the error might have
been committed, through inadvertency, by the most respectable
Printers. The wonder is, even in this our day, not that errors very
frequently occur (which they do) but that more errors are not discernible considering the millions of Bibles which perhaps half a
dozen years bring forth . It were well, however, if a little more attention were sometimes paid to the texts of our PRAYER Books.
The most careful clergyman may commit more than one error in the
course of his perusal of some impressions ; among which it pains a
dutiful son of Alma Mater, to declare, that in an Oxford edition of the
Liturgy, of 1813, 4to. the second line " O Lamb of God that takest
away the sins of the world, " is printed (at the end) " the sins of the
Lord " a very gross, and scarcely venial, fault.
36 DIVINITY.
the English Bible, with explanatory notes, let the
united labours of Patrick, Lowth, and Whitby, in
seven folio volumes, ( 1731 ) suffice ; but if destitute of
these aids, let the recent labours of Doctors D'Oyly
and Mant satisfy abundantly both the anxious and
enlightened reader. The notes in this edition , every
one of which is taken from the annotations of some
Divine of established reputation, contain an admirable
body of Christian theology. He, however, who shall
want the means, rather than the inclination, to purchase Patrick, and his fellow commentators or the
biblical labours of Doctors D'Oyly and Mant - need
not hesitate to secure a neatly bound copy of Bishop
Wilson's Bible ; which, till lately, was the usual parlour companion of orthodox families. Whatever that
excellent prelate did, he did, literally and truly, " to
the glory of God : " and if ever an English Bishop may
be said to have been primitive, and almost apostolical,
it was WILSON: who presided over the See of Sodor
and Man. His Bible is now depreciated in pecuniary
value, not because its intrinsic worth is not as highly
respected as ever, but because the more extended
labours of subsequent Commenators have greatly
superseded its utility. There was a time, scarcely
seven years ago, when Collectors went melancholy, or
raving mad, if they possessed not the large paper of
Bishop Wilson's Bible ! * That time is past .. pro-
* It should be observed, that to Bishop Wilson's Bible there is,
prefixed, a list of English Bibles, taken chiefly from the privately
printed list of Dr. Ducarel, in 1778, 8vo. ; and which is very creditably executed by Mr. Cruttwell of Bath, where the work was published . There are also various readings from our older Bibles,
tween the text and notes, throughout. Upon the whole, this publication of the Sacred Text will be yet found to have its uses.
be-
ENGLISH BIBLES. 37
bably never to return . Let it not, however be said
that I wish to exclude, from the cabinets of the curious or pious, those impressions of the Sacred Text
which were put forth in the dissenting school of Divinity. Far indeed be it from me to question the good
to be derived from the pious exertions of Henry, Gill,
Dr. Adam Clarke, and similar Annotators. *
Among the highest prices given for a morocco-coated copy of this
Bible upon LARGE PAPER, was that of 581. 16s.—at the sale of the late
Colonel Stanley's books, when it was purchased by Messrs . Arch for
Sir M. M. Sykes, Bart. On the appearance of the OXFORD BIBLE
(I speak of that of Drs. D'Oyly and Mant) the price, both of large and
small paper copies, fell sensibly and rapidly ; and I find that the same
booksellers who purchased the Stanley copy, became purchasers also
of the large paper copy at the sale of the library of the late Queen
Charlotte. This copy was bound in blue morocco, and is introduced in their Catalogue for 1821 ( no . 706) at the diminished
price of 261. 5s. At the time of penning this note, there is probably the finest known copy of Patrick and Whitby's, &c . on sale, at Mr. Thorpe's, in seven volumes, bound in russia. It was once the
property of Mr. Ormerod, the late Vicar of Kensington ; who purchased it for 12l. 12s. , and who, on several occasions, was wont to
expatiate upon its beauty and completeness .
*It may be worth while to state the best editions of the works of
these eminent dissenting Divines ; that is to say, the best editions of
their labours, or annotations, upon the Bible. HENRY'S Exposition of
the Old and New Testaments first appeared, collectively, in 1710, five
vols. folio ; but the recent edition of 1810, in six vols. 4to . , is the
best-as the last volume contains additional matter from the author's
MSS. left at his decease. Henry was a truly pious and excellent
man, and his annotations (evincing, however, less learning and
acumen than are to be found in Gill) are still the delight of that particular sect called " Evangelical. " Dr. GILL'S Exposition ofthe New
Testament was published in 1746, &c . three vols. folio : of the Old,
in 1748, &c. nine vols. folio : but the work, advancing in reputation
and price, became rare-so as to induce Mr. Bagster to put forth a
new edition of the whole, in ten vols . 4to. I recommend the annotations of Gill to every theological collector ; and thosewho have the
38 DIVINITY.
And thus much for Bibles in the Latin, German,
Italian, French, and English languages, in the chronological order in which they appear to have been
published. A word-and but little more than a word
-respecting
GREEK TESTAMENTS.
The choice of editions of these precious volumes is
perplexing, and the number of them almost countless. Yet I venture upon the recommendation of
the following ; from which two or three may be selected. I deem the Complutensian impression, and
the first two of Erasmus, 1516-1519, indispensable
in a professedly biblical collection : as I do the parent
texts of Stephen, 1550, folio, and the Elzevir, 1624,
12mo. To these let the critical editions of Bengel,
1734, 4to. Wetstein, 1751 , folio, Griesbach, 1796,
8vo. * Matthei, 1782, 8vo. and ALTER, 1786, 8vo.
quarto edition will probably feel disposed to purchase Gill's Body of
Practical Divinity, containing some account of his Life, Writings,
and Character, in two vols . quarto, 1773. These two volumes are
worth about 17. 15s . The labours of Dr. Adam Clarke upon the
Bible " with a commentary, and critical notes, designed as a help to
the better understanding of the Sacred Writings, " are yet in a course
of publication ; but three volumes, in 4to. may be had entire. They
appear in numbers or parts, and have met with an extensive and
prosperous sale. The learning (especially in the Hebrew and
Oriental languages) of the Editor, and the respectability of his character, render his performance an acceptable acquisition to the libraries of Christians of every denomination.
Consult Bishop Marsh's Seventh Lecture, ( 1810, part 11, ) upon
the merits of WETSTEIN and GRIESBACH ; of the former, he says
" he alone contributed more to advance the criticism of the Greek
Testament, than all who had gone before him : and this task he performed, not only without support, either public or private, but during a series of severe trials, under which a mind of less energy than
GREEK TESTAMENTS. 39
be added. Again, if a selection only from the preceding
be requisite, I should recommend the editions of Stephen, Wetstein, and Griesbach. Happy, and more
than thrice happy, is that " Young Man," who,
" with
means, and appurtenances to boot," has the taste and
zeal to indulge himself in a collection of the INSPIRED
WRITINGS, far beyond the narrowed limits (prescribed
from necessity) which the foregoing pages disclose :
who, in all the turnings and windings of the Bookmania, casts an anxious eye upon many a stately folio,
and many a beautiful duodecimo, of which the merits
have not been here sufficiently appreciated, or the
beauty sufficiently depicted : - which have escaped
the researches of Masch, and eluded the vigilance of
Adler. Here, (in the department of the New Testament alone) the ten folios of Erasmus stand, in
one compact body of russia binding ; there, the ornate
Stephanine text - coated in old French morocco,
Wetstein's would infallibly have sunk. In short, he gave a new turn
to the criticism of the Greek Testament, and laid the foundation on
which later editors have built, " p. 23. Yet is Griesbach's, on very
many accounts, the preferable edition : not so much for philological
notes, as for the establishment of the text on the purest critical principles . " The days are gone" when Wetstein's two closely printed
folios are to be obtained (as I once obtained them, about sixteen
years ago) for £2. 10s. half bound, uncut ! Wetstein, clad in goodly
calf or russia, is worth £5. 5s. even at an auction. The late unfortunate Mr. Lunn, the bookseller, (one of the best natured, and
most kindly disposed creatures in the world, ) had a passion for purchasing all the copies of Wetstein upon which he could lay his hands,
in Holland : and told me, that, in consequence, there was scarcely a
copy obtainable uponthe Continent. He was doubtless smitten with
a Wetstein mania. Griesbach is commonin 8vo. but the large paper
copies in 4to. will sometimes bring £12. 12s. The late Duke of Grafton had these large paper printed at his own expense,
but my vision
is too obtuse, or my taste too uncultivated, to call them handsome.
40 DIVINITY.
with mellow gilt tooling-from the duodecimo O mirificam to the reprint of the last folio edition —
catches and comforts his rejoicing eye ! Yonder, are
all the Elzevirs, uncut, in primitive state of vellum
binding ; terminated by the diminitive Sedan✶ and
incomparable Bleau ! Beneath, are the lusty folios of
Gregory, Mill, and Kuster-all in good old Oxford
bindings, upon LARGE and lovely paper : such as we
must almost despair to see revived " in these degenerate days !"
LITURGY.
It may be expected that I should say something
about the editions ofourLITURGY-as the next volume,
in the estimation of the orthodox reader, to that of the
Bible. But in truth, there is little, bibliographically
speaking, which can be advanced upon the subject.
The origin of our Prayers must be sought for in the
devotional volumes belonging to ancient CATHEDRAL
SERVICES- and of these, again, in the compositions
* In the fine library at Blickling, ( see page 30, ante) is an extraordinary and perhaps unique copy of this diminutive volume : it
is uncut, having every other leaf upon large paper.
† The ancient Services of Salisbury, York, and Hereford cathedrals and especially that of the former- have been chiefly consulted.
Upon these, the reader may examine the notes in the Bibliog. ' Decameron, vol. i. p. 9-12 ; and particularly the work of Gough, to which
they frequently refer. I am however enabled to add a remark or
two, which may be worth intruding in this place. The first edition
of the YORK MISSAL is allowed to be in 1516 ; but the Breviary was
printed in 1493, and the MANUAL in 1509, 4to. by Wynkyn de Worde.
Of this latter volume, I was wholly ignorant, (both in the Decameron and Typog. Antiq. ) till recently furnished, by the kindness of
Earl Spencer, with a description of a very fine copy of it, having
many rough leaves, in old calf binding, with the Wentworth arms,
—
PRAYER BOOKS. 41
of the FATHERS OF THE CHURCH. The whole is a
goodly tree, springing out of the soil of Scripture, and
in the library of Earl Fitzwilliam, at Wentworth House, in Yorkshire.
After the date, it has these verses :
Sane hoc volumen digessit arte magister
Wynandus de Worde incola londonii.
It contains a to m, in eights, and n with six leaves . They preserve
in the Cathedral library at Salisbury, a beautiful copy of the SALISBURY MISSAL, of 1527, folio, printed by Prevost : to which, from
sundry ms. notes prefixed, a great importance seems to be attached ;
but, in truth, this very edition has passed through my hands (though
not in such really beautiful condition) more than once, and a moderate price has been paid for it. The story, belonging to its acquisisition, at Salisbury, is briefly this . The copy in question was once
Bishop Burnett's, whose arms are pasted on the reverse of the first
leaf, and who is said to have given 17 l . for it. From the Bishop, it
went into the hands of Tom Rawlinson, of celebrated bibliomaniacal
memory, whose characteristic C and P ( Collated and Perfect) are on
the frontispiece. After him, James West became its owner : and,
more recently, it was obtained by the late Mr. Brande. It hence
became the property of a Mr. Hurley-whose real name, according
to a letter of the present Bishop of Salisbury, inserted, was Wilcocks
-and it was placed in its present situation by the said Mr. Hurley.
Thelast ms. note, purporting it to be printed " upon vellum," is incorrect it has only the burial service, of four leaves, beginning " Te
igitur clementissime pater ” —so printed : which is generally the case.
The value of such a copy may be 51. 5s.
But it is also in the editions of the LIBER FESTIVALIS, DIRECTORIUM SACERDOTUM, and books of this sort, that the origin of our
Prayer Book may be traced. Caxton printed both these books, and
W. de Worde and Pynson frequently reprinted them. From the
former, of the date of 1483 , I present the reader with thefirst printed
English version of the LORD'S PRAYER. " Father our that art in
heavens, hlalowed be thy name : thy kingdom come to us : thy will be
done in earth as is in heaven : our every day's bread give us to day ; and
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us;
and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from all evil sin, amen."
See the Typ. Antiq. vol. i . p. 164. The Lord's Prayer, Creed, Ave
42 DIVINITY.
•
bearing fruit of various hues and qualities . We presume that, among the varieties of this tree, that which
throws its branches round the Church of England
and which has not only yielded shelter from the storm ,
and shade from the heat, to countless generations,
but has invigorated both young and old with the
flavour and nutrition of its fruit -in other words, the
Liturgy of the Church of England-is eminently entitled to distinction and commendation. Stripped of
the mummery of idle forms, and communicating
directly with the heart, our Rationale of public prayers
has been seldom criticised (even by the bitterest of its
assailants) without respect, or meditated upon without
advantage.
I can, however, do little more than make brief
mention of editions of PRAYER BOOKS, beginning with
the first impression in 1549, in folio, published in the
reign of Edward VI.: but which of these three impressions, of the same dominical year, and sometimes
Imonth, is to be considered as the parent text, I will
not pretend to determine. Certain it is, that Mr.
Heber, whose marvellous collection is rich almost to
overflowing, in every department, is yet undetermined
upon the point. *
Maria, &c. were sometimes printed separately, in a small 4to. form :
and a very rare edition of this kind, printed by W. de Worde, is in
the Public library at Cambridge, among Bishop Moore's books.
When such a man as Mr. Heber doubts, such a man as he, who
records his doubting, must not attempt to ascertain and establish any
very decisive particulars upon the subject. However, if any one will
take the trouble to wade through the quantity of detail respecting
this point, in the Typog. Antiq. vol . iii . p . 463-6— he may endeavour
to come to some conclusion thereupon. Oswen, a provincial printer
at Worcester, published Grafton's text the same year, in May, in 4to.
See Bibliog. Decameron, vol. i . p. vii . , note. Lord Spencer not only
PRAYER BOOKS. 43
From the time of this edition to that of the more
recent publications, the number, character, and form,
of Prayer Books is without end. At last Baskerville,
whose Bible has just been the theme ofour admiration,
put forth four editions of the Book of Common Prayer,
three in octavo, and one in duodecimo : each of which
still maintains a certain distinction in price. They
are all lovely specimens of press- work ; * and I cannot
possesses Oswen's impression, but three copies of that of Grafton,
differing in several particulars from each other. Mr. Heber has,
I believe, three times three copies of the latter, but Oswen is yet a
stranger to him. I recommend the acquisition of a copy of Whitchurch's edition, of 1552, folio, collated with that of Grafton's, and his
own of1549-(for they printed their edition of 1549 separately, and
conjointly) and also withthe Communion, printed by Grafton, and the
Form of Consecrating Bishops, of the same date-interleaved : which
had belonged to Bentley, and afterwards to Ruding. This copy is
marked in Mr. Payne's last catalogue at 61. 6s. but is now, I apprehend, safely lodged in the choice cabinet of some curious Divine.
Mr. G. Hibbert has a copy of Marbecke's curious 4to. volume ofthe
Prayer Book, in 1550, with scored music, of which an account appears in the Typog. Antiq. vol. iii. p. 469. Messrs. Ogle and Co. had
a unique collection of the earlier Prayer Books, from 1549 to 1662,
in seven folio volumes, " neat and uniformly bound. " Without (but
not beyond) price.
* Inthe authority, last referred to, p. viii. , note, it should have been
specified that there are two octavo editions, one with a border, and the
other without each in long lines. The one in double columns, to
which the Oxfordshire Squire ( above mentioned) was so much
attached, has no border. The duodecimo is in double columns,
without a border. There is a fine clean copy (in ordinary calfbinding,
of the bordered long line copy in the library at Strawberry Hill .
Respecting the PRAYER BOOKS of BASKERVILLE, the late Mr. Smart,
bookseller at Worcester, (who died a very old man) told me, about
ten or twelve years ago, that on the death of that printer he made the
In the old library at Blickling, there is a fair and clean copy of the June impression of 1549- in noticing which, I find, among my MSS. the following memorandum ;
" Look at the marriage service, about paying down money."
44 DIVINITY.
bring myself to blame the custom of a most respectable country Squire, in the vicinity of Oxford, who
would never read the service and make the responses
at church, out of any other edition but that of the
double- columned octavo Baskerville, nor carry any
other devotional Manual with him to the altar than
that of the duodecimo Baskerville. Next to the
impression of the Prayer Books by this last mentioned
printer, the curious covet that of Jarvis, executed in
a small but clear and distinct type, in double columns,
in 1791 , 8vo. And, more recently, Mr. Bulmer has
tried the efforts of his matchless press, not only in a
portion of the Bible of Mr. John Reeves, but ofthe
Prayer Book also. This latter is printed in the 8vo.
and 12mo. forms ; and for the sake of its prolegomena, or introductory remarks, may well find a place
upon the shelf of every pew. * The Prayer Books
printed at Oxford and Cambridge, are chiefly of a folio,
or quarto, or a large octavo form. They have also a
noble and comforting appearance ; and most disconbest of his way to Birmingham, and purchased of his widow all the
copies of the Prayer Books which remained, together with a considerable number of the Horace of 1762. He further told me, that he
believed he once had the largest collection of them in England ; but
that, at the time of mentioning it, not a single copy remained upon
his shelves.
The date of this work is 1801. Of the Bible, edited by Mr.
Reeves, there was one copy only struck off UPON VELLUM. At the
present moment, this membranaceous treasure, " superbly bound in
dark blue morocco, with joints, borders of gold, " &c. by C. Lewis,
in nine quarto volumes, reposes upon the shelves of Messrs. Payne
and Foss ; but he who shall give fifty-two sovereigns for the same,
shall cause it to rouse from its present slumber. Nor let such a price
be considered as having any affinity to extravagance. In regard to
the general accuracy of the text of the privileged Prayer Books,
consult the end of the note at p . 35 , ante.
PRAYER BOOKS. 45
solate will be that day for the Church of England,
which witnesses an Abridgement of the contents of
this volume. *
The late Marquis of Bute once shewed me, at Petersham, a
privately printed volume, in 1773, 8vo. called An Abridgement ofthe
Book ofCommon Prayer. It was printed at the expense of the late
Lord Le Despencer, at West Wycombe, Bucks ; and the Abridgement was the performance of the late Sir Francis Dashwood, Bart.
In the annexed sub- note‡ is an extract from the Preface ; and here
follows a specimen or two of the Abridgement itself.
"Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.-
Psalm. li . 9. Dearly beloved brethren, the Scripture moveth us in
sundry places to acknowledge our manifold sins and wickedness :
Wherefore I pray and beseech you, to accompany me with a pure
heart and humble voice, saying, after me," &c.
The Te Deum is thus abridged : " We praise thee, O God, we acknowledge Thee to be the Lord. All the earth doth worship thee :
the Father everlasting. To thee all Angels cry aloud : the Heavens,
and all the Powers therein : We worship thy name : without end :
Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this day without sin. O Lord, have
mercy upon us ; have mercy upon us. Amen."
The Apostles Creed.
"I believe in God, the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and
"The Editor ofthe following Abridgement of the Liturgy ofthe Church of England
thinks it but decent and respectful to all (more particularly to the reverend body of
Clergy who adorn the Protestant religion by their good works, preaching and example)
that he should humbly offer some reasons for such an undertaking. He addresses
himself to the serious and discerning. He professes himself to be a Protestant of the
Church of England, and holds in the highest veneration the doctrines of Jesus Christ.
Heis asincere lover of social worship, deeply sensible of its usefulness to society ; and
be aims at doing some service to religion, by proposing such abbreviations and omissions in the forms of our Liturgy, retaining every thing he thinks essential as might,
ifadopted, procure a more general attendance. For, besides the differing sentiments
ofmany pious and well disposed persons in some speculative points, who in general
have a good opinion of our church, it has often been observed, and complained of, that
the Morning and Evening Services as practised in the Church of England, and elsewhere, are so long, and filled with so many repetitions, that the continued attention
suitable to so serious a duty becomes impracticable, the mind wanders, and the fervency ofdevotion is slackened. Also, the propriety of saying the same prayer more
than once in the same service, is doubted, &c.
46 DIVINITY.
From treasures like these, the enthusiastic Collector and the well informed Student will extract
what is most curious, and be benefitted by what is
most essential to the salvation of his soul. He will
dig deep ; and the deeper he, digs, the richer he will
find the soil. The seasons will roll along, and there
shall be the chilling blast and the barren desert without ; but, within, there shall be one perennial verdure
and one inexhaustible harvest.
FATHERS AND COMMENTATORS.
Nor let human aid be wanting to give effect to
Divine wisdom. Let there be a choice edition or two
of the FATHERS, and of the more celebrated ancient
COMMENTATORS ; * and passing cautiously through the
Earth. And in Jesus Christ, his Son, our Lord. I believe in the
Holy Ghost ; the forgiveness of sins ; andthe life everlasting. Amen.
The Litany is reduced to elven sentences. The Collects are uniformly omitted, but the Epistles and Gospels retained, with a slight
variation from the present translation. The Commandments are
omitted ; and the Sacrament service is reduced to two pages and a
half. Matrimony has only the same number of pages ; and the
Burial of the Dead is compressed within one page and half. Surely
this is no very encouraging specimen for a SECOND attempt to abridge
our Liturgy ! It is not likely to have either admirers or imitators .
* It is a goodly sign of the times that the FATHERS and ancient
COMMENTATORS are bought and read with some degree of avidity.
No reasonable man can doubt the importance of the labours of these
elder Christian sages, who has examined, with a critical eye and an
unprejudiced spirit, the Reliquiæ Sacra, lately put forth by the very
learned President of Magdalen College, Oxford, Dr. Routh. These
" sacred relics" -contain " fragments of Authors ofthe Second and
Third centuries which were well nigh lost" -relating to the earliest
transactions and opinions of the church of Christ. Some of these
fragments are here given, for the first time, from uncollated MSS.:
ANCIENT COMMENTATORS. 47
stormy period of the sixteenth century — when the
works of Luther, Melanchthon, Eckius, Calvin, Staothers, from MSS. not sufficiently collated : the whole in a manner
to render the work of essential importance in a theological library.
It was published at Oxford in 1814-20, in four 8vo . volumes. The
only heresy cleaving to the publication, is, that no large paper copies
were struck off for the gratification of the curious.
The work of Dr. Routh, having at once quickened the appetite
and strengthened the digestive powers of " the Young " and " the
Old " in the way of reading the ancient Fathers-and Schoenemann,
in his Bibliotheca Patrum, 1792, 8vo. supplying him with a list of
the early and best editions of the Latin Fathers-it only remains for
me to point out a few of these Fathers, whether their writings be in
the Greek or Latin language, of which the perusal may be productive of advantage. I give the best editions, with prices, from
catalogues of good authority. Origenis Opera, Gr. and Lat. Paris,
1718, folio, four volumes, 81. 8s. Chrysostomi Opera, Gr. and Lat.
Paris, 1708, folio, thirteen vols. 261. 5s.: to which add the collection
of the Greek Apostolical Fathers by Cotelerius in 1724, folio, two
vols. 31. 13s. 6d. The preceding may suffice, to the ordinary collector, for GREEK FATHERS. Let him, as Latin Fathers, purchase
the works of Tertullian, Lactantius, and St. Austin : of the first, the
Paris edition of 1644 , folio ; of the second, that of Rome, 1754, 8vo.
fourteen vols -or Paris 1748, folio, two vols . 21. 12s. 6d. ; and of
the third, the Paris edition of 1679, eleven vols. , folio. 147. The
foregoing, for an ordinary theological collection, will be surely considered sufficient. Perhaps the Appendix Augustiniana, Antv. 1703,
folio, may be a desirable supplement to the works of St. Austin. But
as no performance of this Father has made half the noise in the
world which his " CITY OF GOD " has done, possible it is that the
admirers of that work might like to possess the first edition of it,
(being the second book printed in Italy) executed at the press ofthe
Soubiaco monastery in 1467. I doubt whether such another copy of
it, as that in Lord Spencer's collection, be to be found in England.
It is a miracle of the art of printing, considering it as the second
essay of the printers In the catalogue of Messrs . Longman and Co.
A. D. 1822, no. 5764, I observe a copy of it, in the " original binding" marked at the moderate sum of 121.
--
Of COMMENTATORS and CRITICS, in the Latin language, the list
48 DIVINITY.
pleton, and others, seemed to agitate the religious
world to its very centre-advance with a more certain
is infinite. As a Body of these, procure the well known work
entitled Critici Sacri, first published at London in 1660, in nine folio
volumes, with a tenth vol. in 1661 , of " Tena's Commentaries upon St.
Paul's Epistle to the Hebrews. " This voluminous work was reprinted
at Amsterdam in 1698, in nine folio volumes. The London edition
is the favourite ; and of this I remember to have seen, two or three
years ago, a magnificent copy, ruled with red lines, in old red
morocco binding, upon LARGE PAPER, in the possession of Mr. R.
Triphook, and valued at about twenty guineas. This is not the only
copy which I have seen, and described , in the same condition . And
I beseech the theological collector not to let a fine copy of good old
Matthew Poole's " Synopsis Criticorum, " Lond. 1669, folio, five
volumes-especially if it be such a one as Mr. Payne now possesses
-Utr. 1684 ed. opt.- slip through his fingers without becoming
master of it ; for it is obtainable at a reasonable price. I say nothing
of its reprints in 1694, Franc. five vols. 4to . , and at Amst. in 1712,
five vols. folio. It may be worth while to consult Granger ( Hist. of
Engl. vol. iii. p. 311 , edit . 1804 ) for a brief but good account of the
merits of Poole's Synopsis ; and from which, no person, in want of
the work, can rise, without running to some of our principal booksellers for a copy. What Granger says, in a note, bears rather hard
upon the Commentators in the English language. " This book
[Poole's Synopsis] is of late much sunk in its price, though intrinsically as good as ever. The truth is, Latin Commentaries on the
Scripture are little regarded ; but we have English ones as often as
we have new almanacks. I have myself known about twenty published within the last twenty years." Those, however, destined to
be the ornaments of our church and the champions of our faith,
should never lose sight of the Thesaurus Antiquitatum Sacrarum collected and published by Blasius Ugolinus, at Venice, in 1744-69, in
thirty-four folio volumes - of which the contents are so temptingly
set forth by Mr. Harris in his valuable Catalogue of the Library of
the Royal Institution, from a copy in the same collection. Another
copy is in the British Museum , What Grævius and Gronovius are
to PROFANE, Ugolinus is to SACRED, history.
Messrs. Ogle, Duncan, and Co. who seem to have a peculiar predilection for dissenting divinity, have marshalled out some miscella-
OLD ENGLISH DIVINES. 49
-
step through the seventeenth-when Grotius abroad,
and Taylor, Chillingworth, Mede, Barrow, Pearson,
and Usher at home to mention no others - gave
a softer tone to controversy, and struck out more
brilliant truths (if I may so speak) from the oracles
of God. Logic, fancy, eloquence, and persuasion
are combined in the greater part of the writings
of these incomparable Divines. There was more courtesy in the age ; and, in consequence, a more courteous strain is observable even in the vehemence
of invective. The Divines of the sixteenth century, with perfect honesty of intention, frequently
worked themselves up into a whirlwind ofindignation
in what they conceived to be the conscientious
discharge of their duties. The very leaves of their
pamphlets seemed to smell of fire. But the capacious intellect of Grotius, who was at once a lawyer, philosopher, and divine, gave a different character to theological controversy ; * and the heavenlymindedness of Jeremy Taylor threw such a charm
over his diction-exhibited such proofs of genius and
ofpiety that that great man may be considered as
the founder of a school, (even of the opposite persua-
- -
-
―
neous COMMENTATORS of this, their favourite, school, in twenty-two
folio volumes, marked at 311. 10s. ― "" very neat, and uniformly
bound." A set of Commentators in 4to. bring up the rear in fifteen vols. -marked at 10l. 10s. " neat, in calf gilt," of the same
persuasion.
-
* In the first Law lecture delivered by Sir James Mackintosh at
Lincoln's Inn, several years ago, and since published, a character is
drawn of Grotius, which I wish every enlightened Englishman to
peruse-more than once. Grotius has been accused of a leaning
towards Socinianism ; but I want a peculiarly-constructed pair of
mental spectacles to discover this bias in his annotations upon Holy
Writ.
E
50 DIVINITY.
sion, *) in which enthusiasm was mistaken for inspiration, and where there was an equal glow of piety,
* Amongthe chief, if not the very chief, of those writers of " an
opposition persuasion, " was RICHARD BAXTER ; a divine of a most
capricious, yet powerful and original mind. What Prynne was in
law and history, Baxter was in theology : as the similarity, in point
of quaintness, of the titles of their respective works, testifies . To
possess all the separate pieces , or tracts, of each of these Writers, is,
I believe, equally hopeless. One or two of the homely titles of
Baxter, would startle the unsuspecting and serious reader. But
these were adopted rather in compliance with the fashion of the
times for Baxter was a man of great gravity of demeanor and great
piety of soul. He was acute and learned withal, and an air of originality pervades most of his writings. He was a stubborn champion
for non-conformity, although he had the honour (when young) of
preaching before Charles II . in the first year of his reign ; and in the
year 1689 he published a Tract entitled " The English Non- conformity under Charles II. and James II truly stated. " One of his
chief antagonists-and one which proved more than a match for him
-was Bishop Stillingfleet. Baxter's Works, consisting principally of
his Discourses, were collected and published in 1707, folio, in four
vols. —and I find a copy of them " new, in calf, gilt, " marked at
117. 11s. in the catalogue of Mr. Laing of Edinburgh, for the year
1822 but in Mr. Baynes's Cat. of the same year, no. 52, I perceive
" a very fine copy, in original binding, sides gilt, † very rare, " to be
marked at 14l. 14s . THIS is the way to get OLD Baxter upon our
shelves . He comes in no questionable shape" when arrayed in
the goodly garb of primitive binding.
―
When young, I remember to have read Baxter's " Concordant
Discord of a broken healed heart, sorrowing, rejoicing, jearing, hoping,
dying, living," 1681 and his " Cure of melancholy and over much
sorrow, by faith and physic, " 1683 : -but thought them, as I should
probably yet think them, desultory and unargumentative performances. Gleams of piety, and flashes of an ardent spirit, are discoverable in almost every thing which he wrote ; but he wanted that
+ This is a " various reading " from Mr. Baynes's preceding catalogue of 1821 , no.
6332 : there, the copy is described to be " rolled with a border of gold . " Each descrip
tion has its peculiar temptation.
OLD ENGLISH DIVINES. 51
is the school of acute
but unsupported by such flights of genius and such.
demonstrations of learning. The school of CHILLINGWORTH, MEDE, and BARROW —
perception and close reasoning. Yet Barrow was per
haps the most able of the three : not in power of conception or of language-but in the systematic division,
and masterly elucidation, of the various subjects of
which he treats . He pushes his enquiries to the
very verge, or confines, of which they are capable of being pushed ; and his works afford a sort of
logical Encyclopædia. He had the clearest head with
which mathematics ever endowed an individual, and
one ofthe purest and most unsophisticated hearts that
ever beat in the human breast. He is to be studied
with profit, rather than read with delight.
-
PEARSON and USHER were profound scholars. The
"Exposition of the Creed" of the former, has nothing
superior to it in any language. Metaphysics, logic,
classical and theological erudition, are all brought to
bear upon that momentous subject in a manner so
happy and so natural, that the depth of research
and variety of knowledge are almost concealed bythe
felicitous manner of their adaptation . Well might
the great Bentley say of this yet greater man - that
his " VERY DUST WAS GOLD." The Annals of Usher are
admirable for sobriety of investigation and profoundness of learning. His Bodyof Divinity may be supsweetness of temper which is the charm of the practical works of
HAMMOND, and that brilliancy of imagery which stamps the effusions
of JEREMY TAYLOR with the mark of an original, excursive, and
powerful mind. It is right to add, that Baxter's works are daily
becoming rare and sought after ; so much so, that we may probably
soon see a reprint of them in quarto from the enterprising Mr.
Bagster, of Paternoster-row.
52 DIVINITY.
posed to be tinctured with his peculiar (and somewhat
Calvinistic) bias, but it is full of profound thought
and pious feeling. His Antiquities of the British
Church are purely historical ; while his notes upon the
Epistles ofIgnatius, Barnabas, and Polycarp (Fathers
of the first century) prove the extensiveness of his
reading, and the depth of his theological knowledge. *
Aword, now, as to Editions of the foregoing luminaries. I own, I am for the ancient and genuine
*The names of these and of other THEOLOGICAL WORTHIES, are
thus hooked into hexameters and pentameters, by Master William
Nicols, A. M. in his Libri VI. De Literis Inventis, Lond. 1711 , 8vo. :
Occubuit FELLUS, fato concessit acerbo
LAUDUS, et HAMMONDUM flebilis urna tenet.
Et CHILLINGWORTHUS, Babylonis maximus horror,
BARLOVIUSque senex, hi potuere mori.
Non tua te doctrina, O SANDERSONE, nec illa
Te potuit pietas eripuisse neci.
Ante diem nobis ereptus et ille BAROUS,
Cui grates multas dia Mathesis habet.
Atque valedixit mundo PEARSONIUS ingens,
(Ille animata quidem Bibliotheca fuit :)
Et STILLINGFLEETUS patrium repetivit Olympum,
&c. &c. &c.
Beveridge, Dodwell, Tenison, and More, (with respectable mention of the library of the latter, now in the Public Library at Cambridge) follow in the same strain.
+ The best edition of Grotius's theological works is that of Amst.
1679, four vol. folio, of which a copy, bound in russia, is marked at
41. 48 in Mr. Payne's last catalogue ; and a fine copy, upon large
paper, in vellum binding, at 81. 8s. in the same catalogue. The best
edition of Chillingworth's works is that of 1724, folio, worth about
11. 8s . in good condition ; of Mede's, that of 1672, folio, worth about
the same sum of Barrow's, 1741, folio, two vols., running hard
upon 41.
But the young Collector will lose no opportunity of
securing the Glasgow edition of Barrow's work, by Foulis, 1757,
12mo. six vols . : which forms an admirable companion to Tonson's
edition of Tillotson's works, 1748, twelve vols. 12mo. Or he may
OLD ENGLISH DIVINES. 53
impressions : the good old folios : published, either
during the lives, or at no long period after the deaths,
of the authors. During the seventeenth century, the
Art of Printing was making rapid improvements in
our country ; and though inferior, upon the whole, to
what it produced during the first half of the eighteenth century, it cannot be denied that we sometimes
meet with sets, or copies, of JEREMYTAYLOR, and his
Contemporaries, which delight us by the beauty of
their condition within and without. In such a state,
their pecuniary value rises in a double ratio : nor was
it without sensations of considerable bibliographical
happiness, that, on entering the third and principal
room of the Royal Library at Paris, I recognised the
Ductor Dubitantium or the Polemical Discourses of
rest well contented with the Oxford reprint, recently put forth : but
with a portrait prefixed, which is scarcely worthy of being attached
to the first edition of Tom Hickathrift. The University owes it to
itself not to continue the propagation of such unworthy resemblances
of such glorious Originals. They are liberal, but their liberality has
not met with a kindred return. Pearson on the Creed is in every
form, from folio to duodecimo. The late Dr. C. Burney made an
abridgement of it in small octavo. Among the folio editions, that of
1715 may be as good as any. As there is no uniform edition of
Archbishop Usher's works, I give the following list of the principal
portions of them : Body of Divinity, 1677, folio : Chronology, (in
Latin) with a Life of the Author, by Smith, Geneva, 1722, folio :
Annals, 1678, folio : Sermons, 1677, folio : Letters, 1688, folio :
Antiquities of the British Church, (in Latin) 1687 , folio. These volumes
may be had from twelve shillings to a pound a piece : according to
their condition. I am aware that, for old and choice copies, in
morocco, or calf bindings, covered with rich gilt tooling, double the
foregoing prices, for every work here enumerated, are frequently
and cheerfully given. It is on the dispersion of old family libraries
that treasures of this kind must be sought for : and, when found,
gallantly contended for . Who would not give 14l. 14s. for the copy
of " Old Baxter," mentioned in the note at page 50 ?
54 DIVINITY.
our Jeremy, clad in the genuine morocco garment of
nearly the time of the author. On the other hand, it
must be allowed that, however assiduous either the
Young or the Old Collector may be, in the pursuit of
fine and genuine copies of this same author, he must
not dare to hope for the acquisition of such copies as
those which grace the shelves of the CRACHErode
COLLECTION. Meanwhile, it may be consolation sufficient to know, that, baffled in all his attempts for
choice folio copies, the " Young Man " may possess
himself of the octavo reprint, which has the advantage
of exhibiting many references verified, many errors
corrected, and several lacunæ supplied : together with
a Life of the Author, written with all the glow of
poetical feeling, and all the elegance of refined scholarship . The uniform appearance of this respectably printed, and carefully superintended edition, of
which not fewer than 800 copies were subscribed
for, has probably already rendered it a scarce workAs Taylor has been long called " the SHAKSPEARE of
DIVINES," this impression will not want buyers of
more classes than one.
* The copies in question are of the Church of England Defended,
1674, folio : Polemical Discourses, 1674, folio ; Ductor Dubitantium,
1696, folio ; Life of Christ, 1703, folio . In this latter work, great
stress is laid upon possessing fine impressions of the Plates. In my
poor judgment, the best impressions exhibit but very secondary specimens of art. I observe that Mr. Baynes marks " a fine tall set"
of these four folios, " very neat, " at 81. 8s. ; but not in all probability coated à la Cracherode. Messrs . Ogle, Duncan, and Co. affix
12. 12s. to four similar volumes, " best editions, elegantly bound
in russia."
↑ Critically and soberly speaking, it is the only edition worth possessing for the purpose of careful reading or frequent consultation.
My neighbour and friend the Rev. Mr. Pitman, who superintended
OLD ENGLISH DIVINES. 55
Why have I travelled thus far on the road of DIVINITY Without mentioning the Contemplations of Bishop
Hall? a prelate and poet of very distinguished attainments. A vein of piety, and even of an original cast
of observation, runs through the greater part of his
performances : and his "Contemplations, " in particular,
breathe the fire of poetry as well as of devotion. His
works have been long and justly held in very general
esteem ; and we are indebted to the Rev. Mr. Pratt
for a reprint of them in ten octavo volumes in 1808.*
the correction of the press, and detected the errors of the old editions, throughout, informs us, at p. ccclxx. of the first volume, that
" former editions of Taylor swarm with mistakes : the punctuation
and state of the text are very defective : verse is printed without any
regard to metre, and prose often assumes the appearance of verse. "
The Life ofJeremy Taylor prefixed to this modern edition is by the
Reverend Reginald Heber, Rector of Hodnet, and preacher of Lincoln's Inn. I sincerely hope that this charming and instructive
piece of biography will be reprinted , in a good handsome octavo
form, and with a larger and more legible type. In regard to the
genuineness of the work called " A Discourse of Artificial Beauty,"
&c. as being a production of Jeremy Taylor- ( see pp . lix . and
cccxxvii of Mr. Heber's Life) -having before (Moore's Utopia, vol .
ii. 152-3) noticed the preface of it as " in every respect worthy of
his high reputation, " may I not ask whether the Preface only be not
the composition of Taylor ? Whoever be the author, it appears to
have been written as a Supplement to " The Loathsomnesse of Long
Hair," &c. by Thomas Hall, B. D. 1654, 12mo.: see p . 288 of the work last referred to.
-
* Joseph Hall was Bishop of Exeter and Norwich, successively ;
and died in 1656. His Satires were published quite at the end of the
XVIth century, and reprinted in 1753 : but there has been recently a
fac-simile reprint (by Constable) of the earlier edition . I recommend
" the Young Man" of taste and talent to read the masterly analysis
of, and criticism upon, Bishop Hall's Satires, in the 4th volume
(alas, only a fragment ! ) of Warton's History of English Poetry. It
is incomparable, of its kind. The best edition of Hall's works, in
folio, is in three volumes, without date-at least, so it appears in
56 DIVINITY.
We approach the eighteenth century ; omitting the
mention of the thousand strange publications, in the
department of divinity, which issued from the fertile
and capricious brains of the authors of the preceding
century-but which, appearing to be nowforgotten by
the great bulk of readers, are picked up and preserved
only by the curious and persevering. Prynne alone
would afford bibliographical gamboling for half a
score of years. Penn however is worthy of a place
in every theological collection. *
―
Baynes's Cat. of 1821 , no. 6426, where a copy is marked at £3. 10.
I once possessed a goodly copy of this edition, in old red morocco
binding, with a delicate sprinkling of gilt tooling-which I have
reason to think is now in the library of Hartleby Palace in Worcestershire the seat of the Bishops of that see ; left, with his library
as an heir- loom, by the late Bishop, Dr. Hurd. The Contemplations
of Hall were separately published by the late Dr. Glasse in 4 duodecimo vols. in 1793. Doddridge has pronounced these Contemplations
to be incomparably valuable for language, criticism, and devotion. "
"
The name of PENN is known and respected chiefly as that of
the founder of the Pensylvanian colony, or author of the Pensylvanian charter. It has indeed, on this score, lasting claims upon the
gratitude of posterity ; but Penn was a pious man, and a lover of
theological authorship. He wrote much and variously ; and always
with a benevolent feeling. His works were first collected and published in 1726, in two folio volumes. I select, almost at random,
from his " No Cross, No Crown, " (written in 1668, and lately reprinted in 1806, 8vo. ) the following characteristic passages : Firstof Christ's Example of Suffering. " And therefore it was that he
was pleased to give us, in his own example, a taste of what his disciples must expect to drink deeply of : namely, the cup of self denial, cruel tryals and most bitter afflictions. He came not to consecrate a way to the eternal rest, through gold and silver, ribbons,
laces, points, perfumes, costly cloaths, curious trims, exact dresses,
rich jewels, pleasant recreations . -Plays, treats, balls, masques, revels, romances, love songs, and the like pastimes of the world : No,
no : Penn's Works, vol. i . P. 360.
OLD ENGLISH DIVINES. 57
There was great cant about this time, (a cant not
peculiar to the period) respecting the luxury and indolence of the CLERGY. The poorer part of them were
treated with contempt ; because poverty and worthlessness seemed to be synonymous terms. In 1670
appeared an octavo volume, under the title of The
Grounds and Occasions ofthe Contempt of the Clergy
and Religion enquired into. " In a Letter written to
66
A little before, (p. 355, ) Penn is thus speaking of the fashionable
habits and amusements of the times-A. D. 1668—when the work
was written :- Their thoughts are otherwise employed : their
mornings are too short for them to wash, to smooth, to paint, to
patch, to braid, to curl, to gum, to powder, and otherwise to attire
and adorn themselves ; whilst their afternoons are as commonly bespoke for visits and for plays-where their usual entertainment is,
some stories fetched from the more approved Romances ; some
strange adventures, some passionate amours, unkind refuses, grand
impediments, importunate addresses, miserable disappointments, wonderful surprises, unexpected encounters, castles surprised, imprisoned
lovers rescued, and meetings of supposed dead ones : bloody duels,
languishing voices echoing from solitary groves, * over heard mournful complaints, deep fetcht sighs sent from wild deserts, intrigues
managed with unheard of subtility : and whilst all things seem at the
greatest distance, then are dead people alive, enemies friends, despair
turned to enjoyment, and all their impossibilities reconciled, " &c.
Further on, he talks about their " giddy fancies " being " intoxicated
with swelling nothings and airy fictions. "
It should seem, from a portion of the first extract, that Penn had
had his eye upon the paraphernalia of a toilet as set forth by Anthony Brewer, in his Play called Lingua, 1607 : and reprinted in
Doddesley's collection of Old Plays.
* This reminds us of the following passage in Thomson's Autumn :
" And voices, through the void deep sounding, seize "Th' enthusiastic ear."
But it is perhaps still more poetical. The " deep-fetcht sighs sent from wild deserts"
is a yet more daring conceit. If Penn would have buckled himself in the strait-laced
vestment ofmetre, he might have been a poet of the second order.
58 DIVINITY.
R. L.:" of which work, Echard is the reputed author.
It exhibits so fair and honest a view ofthe principles of
a Church Establishment, and such a lively picture of
" the poor country Parson" in those days- (no very
unfaithful portrait, by the by, of some few in our
own days) that I make no apology to the reader for
the subjoined extract from it*-long as it may appear.
*"I come now, Sir, to the second part, that was designed, viz . the
poverty of some of the clergy ; by whose mean condition, their sacred profession is much disparaged, and their doctrine undervalued .
What large provisions of old, God was pleased to make for the
priesthood, and upon what reasons, is easily seen to any one that
looks but into the Bible. The Levites, it is true, were left out in
the division of the inheritance, not to their loss, but to their great
temporal advantage : for whereas, had they been common sharers
with the rest, a twelfth part only would have been their just allowance, God was pleased to settle upon them a tenth, and that without
any trouble or charge of tillage : which made their portion much
more considerable than the rest.
" And as this provision was very bountiful, so the reasons, no
question, were very divine and substantial : which seem chiefly
to be these two :
""
First, that the priesthood might be altogether at leisure for the
service of God, and that they of that holy order might not be distracted with the cares of the world, and interrupted by every neighbour's horse or cow, that breaks their hedges, or shackles their
corn : But that living a kind of spiritual life, and being removed a
little from all worldly affairs, they might always be fit to receive holy
inspirations, and always ready to search out the mind of God, and to
advise and direct the people therein. Not, as if this divine exemption of them from the common troubles and cares of this life , was
intended as an opportunity of luxury and laziness ; for certainly there
is a labour besides digging ; and there is a true carefulness without
following the plough, and looking after their cattel. And such was
the employment of those holy men of old ; their care , and business
was to please God, and to charge themselves with the welfare of all
his people which thing he that does with a good and satisfied conscience, i'll assure you he has a task upon him, much beyond them
OLD ENGLISH DIVINES. 59
Our prospects brighten as we step over the threshhold of the seventeenth-or rather gain due admission
that have for their care, their hundreds of oxen, and five hundreds of
sheep .
"Another reason for this large allowance was made to the Priests,
was, that they might be enabled to relieve the poor, to entertain
strangers, and thereby to encourage people in the ways ofgodliness ;
for they being in a peculiar manner the servants of God, God was
pleased to entrust in their hands a portion more than ordinary of the
good things of the land, as the safest storehouse and treasury for
such as were in need . That in all ages, therefore, there should be a
continued tollerable maintenance for the Clergy ; the same reason, as
well as many others, make us think to be very necessary. Unless
they'll count money, and victuals to be only types and shadows, and
so to cease with the Ceremonial Law. For, where the minister is
pinch'd, as to the tollerable conveniences of this life, the chief of his
care and time must be spent not in an impertinent enquiry considering what Text of Scriptures will be most useful for his parish, what
instructions most seasonable, and what authors best to be consulted :
but the chiefof his thoughts, and his main business must be to study
how to live that week : where he shall have bread for his family ?
whose sow has lately pigg'd ? Whence will come the next rejoicing
goose, or the next cheerful basket of apples ? How far to Lammas, or
offerings ? When shall we have another christening, and cakes, and
who is likely to marry, or die ? These are very seasonable considerations, and worthy of a man's thoughts. For, a family cannot be
maintained by texts and contexts : and the child that lies crying in
the cradle, will not be satisfied without a little milk, and perhaps
sugar, though perhaps there be a small German System in the
house.
" But suppose he does get into a little hole over the oven, with a
lock to it, called a study, towards the latter end of the week, (for
you must know, Sir, there is very few texts of Scripture that can
be divided, at soonest, before Friday night ; and some there be
that will never be divided but upon Sunday morning, and that
not very early ; but either a little before they go, or in the
going to church) I say, suppose the gentleman gets thus into his
study, one may very near guess what is his first thought when he
* Qu. The making of sugar candy ?
60 DIVINITY.
into the eighteenth century ; for we are then struck
with the resplendent names of BOYLE, TILLOTSON,
comes there, viz. that the last kilderkin of drink is near departed ;
and that he has but one poor single groat in the house, and there is
judgment and execution ready to come out against it, for milk, and
eggs. Now, Sir, can any man think that one thus racked and tortured, can be seriously intent half an hour to contrive any thing that
might be of real advantage to his people ? Besides, perhaps that
week he has met with some dismal crosses and most undoing misfortunes. There was a scurvy- conditioned mole, that broke up his
pasture, and ploughed up the best part of his glebe : and a little
after that, came a couple of spightful, ill-favoured crows, and trampled down the little remaining grass. Another day, having but four
chickens, sweep comes the kite, and carries away the fattest and
hopefullest of all the brood. Then, after all this, came the Jackdaws, and starlings, (idle birds that they are ! ) and they scattered
and carried away from his thin thatched house forty or fifty of the
best straws and to make him compleatly unhappy, after all these
afflictions, another day, that he had a pair of breeches on, coming
over a perverse stile, he suffered very much in carelessly lifting over
his leg.
"Now what parish can be so inconsiderate and unreasonable, as to
look for any thing from one, whose phansie is thus checked, and whose
understanding is thus ruffled and disordered ? They may as soon expect
comfort and consolation from him that lies racked with the gout and
stone, as from a Divine thus broken and shattered in his fortunes.
But we'll grant, that he meets not with any of these such frightful
disasters, but that he goes into his study with a mind as calm as the
evening for, all that, upon Sunday, we must be content even with
what God shall please to send us. For, as for books, he is (for want of
money) somoderately furnished, that except it be a small Geneva Bible,
so small, as it will not be desired to lie open of itself, together with a
certain concordance thereunto belonging ; as also a book for all kind
ofLatin sentences, called POLYANTHER ; with some exposition upon
the Catechism (a portion of which is to be got by heart, and to be
put off for his own, ) and perhaps Mr. Caryl upon Pineda, Mr. Dod
upon the Commandments, and Mr. Clark's Lives of Famous Men, both
in Church and State ; such as Mr. Carter, of Norwich, that uses to
eat such abundance of pudden ; besides, I say, these, there is scarce
any thing to be found but a boudget of old stitched Sermons, hung
LATE ENGLISH DIVINES. 61
STILLINGFLEET, BULL, and CLARKE ; followed by
those of SHERLOCK, WARBURTON, SECKER, Jortin,
and LowтH ; * nor should the name of LESLIE be
up behind the door, with a few broken girts, two or three yards of
whipcord, and perhaps a saw and a hammer, to prevent dilapidations.
" Now, what may not a Divine do, though but of ordinary parts,
and unhappy education, with such learned helps and assistances as
these ? No vice surely durst stand before him, nor heresie affront
him. And furthermore, Sir, it is to be considered, that he that is but
thus meanly provided for, it is not his own infelicity that he has neither time, mind, nor books, to improve himself for the inward
benefit and satisfaction of his people, but also that he is not capable
of doing that outward good amongst the needy, which is a great
ornament to that holy profession, and a considerable advantage
towards thehaving his doctrine believed and practiced in a degenerate
world. And that which augments the misery, whether he be able or
not, it is expected from him. If there comes a brief to town, for the
minister to cast in his mite, will not satisfie, unless he can create sixpence or a shilling to put into the box, for a state to decoy in the
best of the parish : nay, he that has but twenty or thirty pounds per
annum, ifhe bids not up as high as the best of the parish in all acts
ofcharity, he is counted carnal, and earthly minded, only because he
durst not coin, and cannot work miracles. And let there come never
so many beggars, half of these I'll secure you, shall presently enquire
for the minister's house. For God, say they, certainly dwells there,
and has laid up a sufficient relief." This work was followed by some
observations upon the " Answer to an Enquiry into the Grounds and
Occasions ofthe Contempt of the Clergy, with some Additions. " In a
second Letter, to R. C. 1671, 8vo.
*It were useless to particularise editions of works ofauthors so well
known and so frequently reprinted : but I recommend the earlier editions generally, and especially those which were first published after the
deaths of the authors. In Boyle's works (edit. 1772 , 4to: vol. i . p.
274) I exhort the pious reader to a perusal of the Treatise of " Seraphic Love," as being one ofthe most eloquent and heavenly- minded
productions of its author. There is scarcely any thing more poetical
in Jeremy Taylor, or more logical in Isaac Barrow. No one can
read it seriously, without rising from the perusal a wiser and a better
62 DIVINITY.
omitted ; since it is most conspicuous upon the rolls
of Christianity. A contemporary of Tillotson, but
man. The line between a frantic enthusiast and a cold-blooded
sceptic is most happily drawn. Boyle was the founder of a set of
LECTURES, or Sermons, first published in 1739, folio, in three volumes-comprising the labours of some of our greatest Divines.
Bentley, Clarke, Allestree, Woodward, and others : and of which, the
late Bishop Watson has observed, that, " if all other defences of religion were lost, there is solid reasoning enough in these volumes, to
remove the scruples of most unbelievers. " The work in question has
also the merit of being charmingly printed by Knapton, upon excellent paper. Agood copy is worth 21. 12s. 6d. It is a pleasure to see
Dr. Samuel Clarke's works, alone, in four folio volumes, 1738,
printed bythe same printer, selling at fromfour to five guineas. It is
not quite twenty years ago, since I remember them drooping beneath
the hammer, for somewhere about eighteen to twenty-five shillings.
Clarke's Sermons were separately published in thirteen octavo volumes, and in eleven volumes, small duodecimo, 1749, published by
Knapton. I possess a copy of the latter beautiful little edition, companion meet " for those of Tillotson and Barrow of the same size.
There be those who talk of, and who recommend, POST CHAISE
COMPANIONS" in the form of BOOKS . Let these volumes be of the
number-for they are both exhilarating and instructive. I would be
understood to speak of that " sober mirth " which makes us wise
without gloom, and cheerful without frivolity. The Sermons of
Clarke, Sherlock, and Jortin, contain a rich fund of exposition of
Scriptural texts .
66
66
Of the works of Bishop Bull, one of the soundest and shrewdest of
our older Divines, it is impossible to speak too highly of his Harmonia
Apostolica, Judicium Ecclesiæ Catholicæ, Vindication ofthe Church of
England, and his works concerning the Trinity. The life and labours,
ofthis able man were published by the well known Mr. Nelson in the
English tongue, -and are found in eight octavo volumes, but with
some little difficulty . See Mem. of Literature, vol . vi . p 205, 221,
246. The Life of Bull first appeared, by the same pious editor, in
1713, 8vo. in three vols.; and it is not very unusual to find copies
of it in goodly old blue morocco binding : such as comforts the
heart of a tasteful Bibliomaniac. Grabe published Bishop Bull's
Latin works, in 1703, folio, -to which, as well as to portions of his
--
LATE ENGLISH DIVINES. 63
possessed of greater acumen, and exhibiting a more
condensed and logical style, he was perhaps the
ablest defender of orthodoxy at the close of the seventeenth century. Ever ardent and active in what he
conceived to be the cause of vital religion , his heart
and head were constantly excited to the bringing
forth of those admirable works which appear to bear
the stamp of immortality. No single theological
work has perhaps received so much applause as his
" Short and Easy Method with the Deists, " first published in a small 8vo. volume in 1697 , and of which
the reprints are innumerable. Leslie's theological
works were collected about a year before his death,
and published in 1721 , in two folio volumes.* And
English works, the late Bishop Horsley was more indebted than he
was willing to confess. But there would be no moderate limits to a
note which should give even a brief detail of the peculiar excellenlences of all the ensuing Divines particularised in the text. Let me
say a word only respecting the last ; one of the greatest and one of
the wisest of those who ever filled the See of London. His " Prelections on the Sacred poetry of the Hebrews, " together with his
version of Isaiah, and the preliminary Dissertation, are the principal
monuments which his pen has raised ; but, though few, these monuments are at once solid, beautiful, and perfect. The Church of England may with just pride number LowтH among the most profound
of her scholars, and the most exemplary of her Bishops. If I were
called upon to mention six of the greatest works of our Divines, each
contained in one octavo volume, I should unhesitatingly pronounce
the following : Butler's Analogy, Douglas's Criterion, Lowth's Prelections, Watson's Apologyfor the Bible, Paley's Natural Theology, and
Prettyman's Refutation of Calvinism. I entreat " the Young Collector," especially if he be destined for holy orders, to lose no opportunity of making himself thoroughly acquainted with the contents of
these books. They are as snow-white, speckless, and brilliant
diamondsin the episcopal mitre.
* Agood copy may be worth 21. 2s. Mr. Baynes, in his catalogue
of 1822, not only holds out to us a copy upon large paper, marked
64 DIVINITY.
again, wishing to possess works of equal piety, but
of less learning, and with a leaning to the opposite
faith of that of the Church of England, we may be
well satisfied with the degree of instruction to be derived from those volumes to which the names of
OWEN, LELAND, LARDNER, DODDRIDGE, and WATTS
(not to mention others) are attached. Ofthe three
latter, and especially Doddridge, it is impossible
to rise from a careful perusal of their labours, without
a conviction of being benefitted by their research, and
comforted by their piety. Lardner's works contain a
mine of theological learning ; in which the Student
may toil till he is weary-and from which he cannot
fail to bring away much that is curious and edifying.
The Family Expositor of Doddridge, should find a
place upon the shelf, and upon the table, of every
mansion where the moral duties of a christian are enjoined. Doddridge's heart was made up of all the
kindlier affections of our nature ; and was wholly devoted to the salvation of men's souls. Whatever he
did, he appears to have done " to the glory of God. "
He read, he wrote, he preached-with a zeal, which
knew of no abatement, and with an earnestness, which
left no doubt of the sincerity of his motives. He was
snatched from his flock and the world-both of which
had been enlightened and benefitted by his laboursin the prime of his life, and in the full possession of
at 41. 4s but another, in imperial folio , EXTRA LARGE PAPER, marked
at 61. 6s. " very neat." Mr. Baynes adds that " it is believed that
Leslie's works have converted more individuals to the communion of
the church of England, than the writings of all others on the same
subject :" no. 207. Yet Leslie is not free from the alliterative foppery
of the age, in some of his titles, as thus : " Two Sticks made one ; or
the Devil upon Dun : a parallel between the Jessuits and Dissenters."
LATE ENGLISH DIVINES 65
his faculties : but HE, who has left such fruits behind
him, cannot be said to have immaturely perished . I
hope however not to be accused of having an unsusceptible heart, if I observe, that his famous " Rise and
Progress ofReligion in the Soul," which converted a
very gay Colonel in the army from vice to virtuestruck me as a performance of no extraordinary merit.
To be sure, I might not have stood so much in need
of conversion as the Colonel.
OfWATTS, the companion of our younger and later
years, it is impossible to speak without reverence and
respect. His Hymns are the charm of our early
youth ; his Logic, the well-known theme of schoolboy
study ; and his Sermons, Essays, and other theological
compositions, are a source of never failing gratification,
in the advance, maturity, and decline of life. The man
at fourscore may remember, with gratitude, the advantage of having committed the Hymns of this pious
man to his infantine memory. What Dr. Johnson has
said of him*-merits an inscription in letters of gold.
Nor let the name of MACKNIGHT be forgotten. His
works are indeed the more exclusive property of the
disciplined theological student ; but the general reader
Happy will be that reader, whose mind is disposed, by his
verses or his prose, to imitate him in all but his non- conformity to
copy his benevolence to man, and his reverence to God." Life of
Watts. I do not particularise any editions of the works of the six
authors last above mentioned ; inasmuch as every five or six years ,
new editions, mere reprints, are put forth. I only recommend the
plan, noticed at page 53, ante, upon this and every similar occasion ;
but it may be as well to say of Macknight, that a complete set of the
first 4to. editions of his works, in five vols. may be well worth
10l. 10s. in fine condition. The Epistles have been recently printed
with the Greek text, in six octavo volumes.
F
66 DIVINITY.
will do well to secure his inviting quartos upon the
Gospels and Epistles of the New Testament. In
these, he will find learning without pedantry, and
piety without enthusiasm. In short, no theological
collection can be perfect without them. If any man
maybe said to have exhausted his subject, it is Macknight.
SERMONS.
Ere I descend to more modern times, it may be
expected that I should go back a little, and say a
word or two about SERMONS. Whatever may be my
attachment to those of the Old School,* from the
* It was my original intention to have given a list of our principal
preachers and Sermon- writers, from the time of Henry VIII . down- ·
wards ; but the execution of such a task, as it ought to be executed,
would alone furnish materials for a moderately sized octavo volume.
Indeed, the collection of OLD SERMONS has been long a favourite
pursuit with me-desultorily carried on , I admit —and not likely to
be brought to any satisfactory conclusion . Were it so, I should be
induced to offer the public a small duodecimo volume or two, entitled Specimens of the Sermons of our Ancient Divines, which, with
brief biographies of the Authors, might be placed upon the same
shelf with specimens of our old Poets and Prose Writers. In the
mean time, let the reader have some notion of the probable contents
of such a publication, and of the probability, or improbability of its
success, bywhat he is about to peruse.
There are three old English Protestant Divines who have long
`been the favourite inmates of my study : LATIMER, Fox, and DRAnt.
The Sermons of Latimer are indeed familiar to most readers. They
were frequently reprinted in the sixteenth century ; and lately ( 1788
I think) an octavo edition of them appeared in a very amputated and
imperfect state liberties being taken, not only with the words, but
with the constructions of the sentences. There are also omissions
without number. I happen to possess, if not the first, undoubtedlyvery
nearly the first, impression of any portion of Latimer's Sermons, in a
small 8vo. , or duodecimo volume, of the date of 1548 ; and of which
OLD SERMONS. 67
reign of Henry VIII. , to that of Queen Elizabeth,
—each reign included—I am well aware that, in awork
Mr. Hibbert possesses probably the finest copy in existence. It contains his famous Sermon of The Plough, " preached in ye Shrouds at
paules churche in London" -but which was afterwards much enlarged
by him. These are followed by seven Sermons " preached before
the Kynges Maiestie wythin his gracious palayce at Westmynster,
1549.* From some of these latter I select a few specimens — characteristic ofthe blunt, bold, intrepid , and forcible style of the preacher
-and, to the uninitiated in Latimer lore, calculated perhaps to startle
and provoke a smile. For the better understanding thereof, I have
modernised the orthography, preserving most religiously the original
words. The words between brackets thus, [ ] are added, for the
better understanding of the passage : but these occur very rarely.
" Thus, God conditioned with the Jews that their King should be
such a one as he himself would chuse them. And [ this] was not
much unlike the bargain that I heard of late should be betwixt two
friends for a horse : the owner promised the other should have the
horse if he would the other axed the price : he said xx nobles. The
other would give him but iiii pound. The owner said he should not
have him then. The other claimed the horse, because he said he
should have him if he would. Thus, this bargain became a Westminster matter. The Lawyers got twice the value of the horse, and
when all came to all, two fools made an end of the matter. Howbeit,
the Israelites could not go to law with God, for chusing their king ;
for would they, nyl they, their king should be of his chusing, lest
* The curious in old English Divinity, and especially in the lucubrations of Latimer,
are divided about the existence of an edition ofthe Sermons ofthe latter , in which there
is supposed to be a wood-cut portrait of him, in a pulpit, either shuffling a pack of
cards, or shewing the ace of trumps : by way of illustration, in his peculiar manner.
This is said to have been mentioned by Mr. Hone upon his trial for a parody of a portion ofthe Liturgy, and the copy was said to be in the library of Red Cross-street,
belonging to the body of Dissenters. I have examined that library, and particularly
the two editions of Latimer's Sermons, 1562-1583, which it contains. These are fine
and genuine copies ; and of the former, there are two parts ; but in NEITHER does
there appear to be a PORTRAIT of LATIMER. I have a strong suspicion, not only
that no such cut exists, but that the portrait of him upon copper, in the reprint of 1635,
4to. , may befictitious. It should be here observed, in reference to Mr. Hibbert's copy
abovementioned, that it contains two additional Sermons ofLatimer, of the date of 1550.
This marvellously fine copy had belonged to Bindley.
68 DIVINITY.
of this nature, it will be my duty to notice and recommend those discourses which are useful and popular,
they should walk inordinately, in a deceivable way, unto their utter
loss and destruction . " B. iiii.
Edward the Sixth was then upon the throne of England : -and, a
little further, Latimer (somewhat strangely, if not ungraciously)
adds : " Well, the King's grace hath sisters, my Lady Mary, and my
Lady Elizabeth, which by succession and course are inheritors to the
crown. Who, if they should marry with strangers, what should
ensue God knoweth. But God grant they never come unto coursing
nor succeeding, " &c. What follows, a page or two onwards, is not
a little curious and characteristic . " In a King, God requireth faith,
not excess of horses. Horses for a King be good and necessary, if
they be well used ; but horses are not to be preferred above poor
men. I was once offended with the King's horses, and therefore
took occasion to speak in the presence of the King's Majesty, that
dead is, when Abbeys stood. Abbeys were ordained for the comfort
of the poor. Wherefore, I said, it was not decent that the King's
horses should be kept in them, as many were at that time, the living
of poor men thereby minished and taken away. But afterward, a
certain nobleman said to me, " what hast thou to do with the King's
horses ?" I answered and said " I speak my conscience as God's
word directeth me." He said horses be the maintenances and part
of a King's honour, and also of his realm ; wherefore, in speaking
against them, ye are against the King's honour. I answered, " God
teacheth what honour is decent for the King, and for all other men,
according unto their vocations. God appointeth every king a sufficient living for his state and degree, both by lands and other customs :
and it is lawful for every King to enjoy the same goods and possessions . But to extort and take away the right of the poor, is against
the honour of the king. And you do move the King to do after that
manner, then you speak against the honour of the king : for I full
certify you, extortioners, violent oppressors, ingrossers of tenements
and lands, through whose covetousness villages decay and fall down
[and] the king's liege people, for lack of sustenance, are famished
and decayed. THEY be those which speak against the honour of the
King." C. i. iii.
In this same sermon, Latimer shews his zeal and anxiety about
the YOUNG KING's taking a suitable WIFE. " Let us not impute sin
OLD SERMONS. 69
rather than those which are merely curious and uncommon. But let us not be ungrateful to our foreunto the Jews because they had many wives : for they had a dispensation so to do. Christ limiteth one wife unto us only ; and it is a
great thing for a man to rule one wife rightly and ordinately. For
a woman is frail and proclive unto all evils : a woman is a very weak
vessel, and may soon deceive a man, and bring him unto evil. Many
examples we have in Holy Scripture. Adam had but one wife,
called Eve ; and how soon had she brought him to consent unto
evil, and to come to destruction. How did wicked Jesabel prevent
king Hacab's heart from God and all godliness, and finally unto destruction ! It is a very hard thing for a man to rule well one woman.
Therefore, let our King, what time his Grace shall be so minded to
take a wife, to chose him one which is of God, that is, which is of
the household of faith ." The way in which he introduces the subject,
as connected with the King's shilling, just coined, is ingenious
enough. " We have now (says he) a pretty little shilling : indeed
a very pretty one. I have but one, I think, in my purse : and the
last day I had put it away, almost for an old groat, and so I trust
some will take them. * The fineness of the silver I cannot see : but
therein is printed a fine sentence-that is, " Timor Dei fons vite vel
sapientie." The Fear of the Lord is the fountain of life or wisdom. I
would God this sentence were always printed in the heart of the King
in chosing his wife, and in all his officers . " " Let the King,
therefore, chuse unto him a godly wife, whereby he shall the better
live chaste, and in so living all godliness shall increase and righteousness be maintained. I know hereafter some will come and move your
Grace towards wantonness and to the inclination of the flesh and vain
affections," &c. Sign. C. v.
. . . .
In another part of the Sermon, the worthy Bishop maintains a very
stiff and severe opinion respecting the frequency and lightness of marriages in England, as in the following passage : -" There was never
* It should seem that Latimer got a little into disgrace by this familiar mention of
King Edward's shilling ; for, in a subsequent sermon, he thus observes upon it : " Thus
they burdened me ever with sedition. So this gentleman cometh up now with sedition.
And wot ye what? I chanced, in my last sermon, to speak a merry word of the NEW SHILLING-- to refresh my auditory - how I was like to put away my new
shillingfor an old groat : I was herein noted to speak seditiously.
Yet I comfort myselfin one thing, that I am not alone, and that I have a fellow : for, it is consolatio
miserorum. Itis the comfort of the wretched to have company," Sign. F viij.
70 DIVINITY.
fathers . Let us remember the good old stock upon
which many a comparatively modern graft has been
such marrying in England, as is Now. I hear tell of stealing of wards
to marry their children to . This is a strange kind of stealing, but it is
not the wards, it is the lands that they steal. And some there be that
knit up marriages together not for any love or godliness in the parties, but to get friendship, and make them strong in the realm, to
encrease their possessions and to join land to land . And other there
be that inveigle men's daughters, in the contempt of their fathers,
and go about to marry them without their consent. This marrying
is ungodly. And many parents constrain their sons and daughters
to marry where they love not, and some are beaten and compulsed.
And they that marry thus, marry in a forgetfulness and obliviousness
of God's commandments." Sign. Nviij.
In the foregoing extracts, those specimens have been selected
which may be thought to exhibit the peculiarities of Latimer as connected rather with temporal subjects, or even personal anecdote. I
shall now select a few specimens as exhibiting his opinions rather
upon spiritual subjects : but in which all the quaintness and originality of the preacher are not less discernible. First of Prayer.
" What should it mean that God would have us so diligent and
earnest in prayer? Hath he such pleasure in our works ? Many talk
of prayer, and make it a lip labouring . Praying is not babling, nor
praying is not monkery." "When we pray, we come
unto him in the confidence of Christ's merits, and thus offering up
our prayers , they shall be heard for Christ's sake. Yea, Christ will
offer them up for us, that offered up once his sacrifice to God, which
was acceptable, and he that cometh with any other mean than this,
God knoweth him not. This is not the Missal sacrifice, the Popish
sacrifice to stand at the altar and offer up Christ again. Out upon it
that ever it was used !" Sign. N iiii.
Secondly, of the SACRAMENT ; or, the fitness of the Poor as well
as of the Higher Classes to receive it :
"The sign of a thing hath often times the name of a thing that it
signifieth. As the Supper of the Lord is the sacrament of another
thing, it is a commemoration of his death which suffered once for us,
and because it is a sign of Christ's offering up, therefore he bears the
name thereof. And this sacrifice a woman can offer as well as a
man. Yea, a poor woman in the belfrey hath as good authority to
OLD SERMONS. 71
made. The days of Paul's Cross, and of stone pulpits,
are past, never to be recalled ; but " the divinity which
offer up this sacrifice, as hath the Bishop in his pontificalibus, with
his mitre on his head, his rings on his fingers, and sandals on his
feet. And whosoever cometh, asking the Father remedy in his necessity for Christ's sake, he offereth up as acceptable a sacrifice as any
Bishop can do. And so to make an end." Sign. N iii. rev.
Thirdly, of FAITH : " This faith is a great state, a lady, a Duchess,
a great woman, and she hath ever a great company and train about
her, as a noble estate ought to have. First, she hath a gentleman
usher that goeth before her, and where he is not, there is not LADY
FAITH.
"This gentleman Usher is called Agnitio Peccatorum : “ knowledge
of sin : " when we enter into our hearts and acknowledge our faults,
and stand not about to defend them. He is none of these winkers,
he kicks not when he hears his fault. Now, as the Gentleman
Usher goeth before her, so she hath a train that cometh behind her,
and yet though they come behind, they be all of Faith's company ;
they are all with her ; as Christ, when he counterfeited a state going
to Jerusalem, some went before him, and some after yet all were of
his company. So, all these wait upon Faith. She hath a great train
after her, besides her Gentleman Usher, her whole household ; and
those be the works of our vocation, when every man considereth
what vocation he is in, what calling he is in, and doeth the works of
the same as to be good to his neighbour, to obey God, " & c . ..... . . . . .
" Lady Faith is never without her Gentleman Usher, nor without
her train ; she is no anckres, [ anchores, or anchorite] ; she dwells not
alone ; she is never a private woman ; she is never alone, and yet
many there be that boast themselves that they have faith, and that
when Christ shall come, they shall do well enough. Nay, nay, these
that be faithful shall be so few, that Christ shall scarcely see them.
"Many there be that run, saith St. Paul, but there is but one that
receiveth the reward ; it shall be with the multitude when he shall
come, as it was in the time of Noah, and as it was in the time of
Lot. " N. vj. &c.
35
The fourth touches upon the state of Divinity- Studies : and shall
here speak for itself :
"I told you before of Scala celi, the ladder of heaven : I would you
should not forget it. The steps thereof are set forth in the tenth to
72 DIVINITY.
stirred within " them, is yet felt, and will long animate
the meanest of the true sons of our Church.
the Romans. The first is preaching, then hearing, then believing,
and last of all salvation. Scala celi is a preaching matter I tell
you, and not a massying matter. God's intrument of salvation is
preaching."
" Here I move you my Lords, not to be greedy, and outrageous
in enhansing and raising of your rents, to the minishing of the office
of salvation. It would pity a man's heart to hear that, that I hear of
the state of Cambridge : what it is in Oxford I cannot tell. There
be few do study divinity, but so many as of necessity must furnish the Colleges. For their livings be so small, and victuals so
dear, that they tarry not there, but go other where to seek livings,
and so they go about. Now, there be a few gentlemen and they
study a little divinity. Alas ! what is that ? It will come to pass that
we shall have nothing but a little English divinity : that will bring
the realm into a very barbarousness, and utter decay of learning.
It is not that I wis, that will keep out the supremacy of the Bishop
of Rome." Sign. P vj. rev.
But there must be an end of these extracts, and of such unconscionable demands upon the reader's patience . It is, however, impossible not to feel , and to acknowledge, in the SERMONS of LATIMER,
a familiarity, and yet force of style, upon which Swift, if not Sterne,
in after days, but with occasionally greater coarseness of expression,
might have formed their own. There is, throughout Latimer, a
purity, ease, and perfection of English idiom- to say nothing of the
curious personal and historical anecdotes with which they are mixed
up, and which render his discourses invaluable to the lexicographer
and philologist . At the same time there is, frequently, a good deal
of what may be called gossipping-in the sermons of this worthy old
Bishop for he not only seems to have spoken, more than any other
divine with whom I am acquainted, from the impulses excited by
the evidence of the outward senses, but he also seems to have always
spoken THE TRUTH, even in its most unpalateable form, — although
the Court, with the King at its head, were frequently his auditors.
Latimer possessed the bold spirit of a martyr with the simplicity of
a child. If ever a man mingled among his fellow creatures, with the
desire and with a constant effort to do them good— having, at the
same time, his best thoughts fixed upon a happy eternity —it was
:
- -
OLD SERMONS. 73
Of the Sermons which have survived the earlier- »
part of the Reformation, the greater portion are those
HE. His dying words, at the stake, breathed of heavenly inspiration. While they cheered his fellow sufferer, Ridley, they " lighted
up such a flame as I trust in God will never be extinguished in this
country. One of the finest bursts of modern classical eloquence, in
a Latin speech, was in the convocation house at Oxford, in reference
to the last moments of Latimer and Ridley-by the present Mr. Archdeacon Churton, author of the Life of Dean Nowell . His appeal to
their ashes was an humble but not wholly unhappy imitation of that of
Demosthenes to the manes of the heroes of Marathon and Salamis.
The length of the preceding extracts necessarily contracts the
limits to be assigned to the notice of JOHN Fox - who published his
Sermon of Christ Crucified, at Paules Crosse, on Good Friday, in
1575, in order, amongst other things, " to awake the hearts of Christians in these drowsy days of carnal security, to the contemplation of
the glorious kingdom of Christ. " The following is quite in the characteristic style of the Preacher : -
"Now, take a man in all his abundance of riches, treasures, and
pleasures, flourishing in his most felicity, bravery and prosperity : let
him be, if ye will, an other Polycrates of this world-what is he of
himself but a carcass, a caitiff, a subject of Satan, a prey to death !
rejoicing and laughing in this world, but yet as one that laugheth in
his dream, and waketh in sorrow ! -fraught full of fears and cares of
mind, blind in soul, not knowing to day what will happen to- morrow ;
void of all inward rest, and peace of conscience ; mortal, mutable,
miserable ; wrapped in wretchedness, prone to all wickedness, whose
beginning is in travail, his standing uncertain, his end is corruption :
briefly as one living in death, and dead, being alive." B vij. rev.
I shall next present a more powerful and touching piece of pulpit
eloquence to the earnest perusal of the reader. After the description
of Christ's trial, and that of nailing him to the cross, are the following bold apostrophes of the crucified Redeemer to Satan and Death.
The first address is to the DEVIL :
" First, after my birth thou diddest set Herod to persecute me :
thou temptedst me in the desert. What means afterward diddest
thou seek to trip and snare me : yet mytime was not come.
At
length when the hour came of darkness, thou diddest take and bind
me, and set thy bandogs to bait me, false witnesses to accuse me,
74 DIVINITY.
which were preached by the Protestants ; and among
these, none (as the subjoined running note may tesunjust judges to condemn me, thy ministers to scourge me, thy soldiers with this sharp garland to crown me, thy sycophants to scorn
me, and after thou laiddest this heavy cross upon my shoulders : yet
not content with that, thou hast strained also mypoor body upon the
same, and nailed me fast both hand and foot. In these mytorments,
and bleeding pains, I was dry, requiring a little drink, and thou gavest
me vinegar. All this I take to be thy doing and no man's else . For
this people are but thy instruments, and workmen. Thou art he that
settest them on. Thou art the master of these revels, the ringleader
of this dance, the captain of this crew. And as thou art the arch
enemy to all mankind, so because thou seest me come in similitude
of sinful flesh, thou art mine enemy also, and hast wrought me all
this villainy, bringing me to this cross, and making me a spectacle
here to all the world : and yet not satisfied with all this, after thou
hast thus hailed and nailed me to this contumelious gibbet, now, to
make amends in mockery, thou biddest me come down, if I can, and
save thyself. Yes, Satan, I can come down, and will come down
and save myelf. For that power have I, both to lay down myself,
and to take it again, and therefore, I will save myself, but so as I
may also save all mankind with me : and not at thy pleasure I will
do it, but in such order as the Scriptures require. For, I come,
therefore, to fulfil the Scriptures ." Sign. I. viii . rev.; K. i. rect.
" After this effect of speech, when Jesus had spoken to the devil ,
speaking likewise unto DEATH, he saith to him : and thou terrible tyranny, thou dreadful death, armed with the justice of God,
the mortal enemy to all flesh, whom no man was ever able to resist,
and which art so ready here and so saucy, set up by Satan, to seek
my life, neither shalt thou escape my hands ; for, as thou art the destruction of all other, so will I be thy destruction, thy death. Oh!
Death, thy sting ! Oh Hell ; and as I have overthrown the devil thy
master, and expulsed him from his kingdom, and spoiled him of all
his munitions : so will I also swallow thee up in victory, and throw
thee down headlong for ever. And albeit I need not to suffer thy
force, unless I list, for mine own part, because thou hast no power
upon me, and might, therefore, save myself from thy cruel danger
if I would-yet, for my love to mankind, because their life shall not
perish, whom mydeath may save, and because I will not save myself
OLD SERMONS. 75
tify) were more popular than those of LATIMER. FOX
had also a high name ; but there was a Catholic, of
without them, but will deliver them out ofthy hands- for their sakes,
to pay their debt, and that by my cross undeserved, I may cross them
out of the book of death, which have deserved death, I am content.
Come death, therefore, and do thine office. I willingly here yield my
life to thee. And yet neither will I yield it to thy hands, nor give it
over at thy pleasure. And although thou come here with thine iron
coulter, or brazen maul, to break my bones, as thou doest to these
here by me, yet will I not suffer thee so to do to me : neither shalt
thou break one bone of me. To fulfil the Scripture, I give over my
life : yet not at thy will, but at mine own pleasure ; for be it known
to thee, O death, that I have power to lay down my life, and to
resume it again at mine own will. And thus Jesus, speaking, bowed
down his head, and gave up his spirit to the hands of his Father, and
and so departed.” Sign, K. v. rev.
A word now for Dr. THOMAS DRANT G better known as the first
English metrical translator of Horace, in 1567 : a work of excessive
rarity, when found in a perfect state. Drant is equally bold and
familiar with Latimer- but more quaint, with greater affectation of
learning ; and with less warmth of eloquence than Fox.
We have, however, a bold and powerful effort of Drant's pulpit
eloquence in the two Sermons preached byhim at St. Mary's Spittle,
upon the text of Cant. c. 6.—" Fairest of all women, whither is thy
Beloved gone ? whither is he gone aside ? Tell us, and we will
seek him with thee. My Beloved is gone down into his garden, to
the beds of his spicery, to be fed in gardens, and gather up Lilies ."
This Sermon is levelled chiefly against the Roman Catholics, * and
+ These sermons were preached in 1569-70 : when the bitterness against the Roman
Catholic had not, as is pretty evident, diminished one jot. Drant thus speaks of Sir
Thomas More : " Sir Tho. More is always wrangling and jangling, harping and carping, about No and Nay, Yea and Yes; this word and that word ; an Elder, and an
Elder stick and as Rachell mourned for her children, because she had them not, so Sir
Thomas More might mourn for more divinity, because he had it not. " D v. Edit Day.
Some attacks against Bp. Fisher and Eckius follow. Again, he thus satirises the several
orders of Doctors in the Catholic Universities. " Should we not now strike down, and
sacrifice a great huge forfatted bull to those worthies of learning ? Or, should we not
take a shrill trumpet, and blow up from a lofty theatre, " All hail ! learned Doctors,
venerable Doctors, reverend Doctors, Doctoral Doctors, Doctorly Doctors, irrefragable
76 DIVINITY.
the name of EDGEWORTH, whose Discourses are not
only worth possessing, from being very uncommon, but
"" treats much of the fruits of AN HOLY LIFE. The good life of a
Christian man is spice to God's mouth, and spice to God's nose.
The odour of a sweet field, which is commended in Genesis-the
odour of incense in Numery [Numbers] -the odour of fragrant
waters in Job-the odour of that oil that ran down Aaron's beard
-
-
of that oil that Mary shed upon Christ's head the odour of spike
and vine flowers, commended in the Canticles -the sweet balm in Ecclesiasticus, and the smell of Libanus that Ose [ Hosea] speaketh of—
the smell of Noah's sacrifice-the smell of best burnt sacrifices -is
not like the good smell to God's nose, as the smell of a GOOD LIFE
rising from a GOOD BELIEF ; for that is " Hostia Deo in odorem suavitatis ; "" a sacrifice to God, unto a sweet savour. " Whole grocers
shops of spicery -all the flowers in Priapus garden, all the flowers
that Naiads, and Driads, and Satyrs ; that is , all the flowers in hills,
and flowers in dales, and flowers in many a green forest, are not so
delightful and smelling. The violet hath not the like savour, the rose
hath not the like savour, the lily the like smell, the gilliflower the like
scent, as GOOD LIFE through GOOD FAITH yieldeth to God's nostrils. "
Sign G. iii.
Doctors, impregnable Doctors, seraphical Doctors, angelical Doctors, magistral Doctors, illuminate Doctors, authentical Doctors ! But see the learning of these Doctors,
in the Epistles ofObscure Men, and in a dialogue between Reuchlin and Erasmus. " D. vij.
And yet more pointed and pitiless is the preacher, in what follows :-" The Church of
the Beloved is fair, and fairest of all women : Idolatrous churches are foul and evil
favoured women ; and of all foul and evil favoured, I think the church of Rome to be
one ofthe foulest of women. The evil favouredness of Mahomet's woman, or church,
is in this evil favoured Romish woman. That evil favoured Mahomet's woman, or
church, defendeth many wives : this Romish Church defendeth stews and strumpets,
courtisans, concubines, and boy- harlots. Mahomet's woman dreameth heaven to be a
place goodly of rivers, pleasant apples, young delicate women, and fair fruit. The
Pope's woman doth say and hold, that St. Dorothy made baskets of apples that came
down from heaven. " E. ÿ. This strain continues in an equally coarse and unsparing
manner ; and a little onward we have the following specimen ; " If we ask her [the
Romish Church] of GOOD WORKS, she answereth just like St. Luke's pharisee ; then
again, she deviseth good works to be thus :-to hire certain men for money, to pray
and to mumble up much quantity of Psalms in a covert tongue ; to keep huge troughs
ofling and salt- fish many years ; to wax hoarse with much chaunting ; to wax speechless with seldom speaking ; to wax lame with much sitting ; to use many knots in their
girdles, and many windows in their shows ; to be buried in monkish weeds and nunnish
cowls," &c. F. viij.
OLD SERMONS. 77
from containing much curious and interesting intelligence ; delivered, upon the whole, with considerable
The following is perfectly original, and has great strength ; " If
the whole world, if the whole realm ask me, what sin ? I tell them
that the whole realm and the world trembleth, like the leaf of a tree
of wood, at every war, and buzzing of war, as though God's arm had
lost the length and strength. That sin !? There is much idleness :
that sin ! There is a sleepy oblivion of all God's benefits, and a
great Noah's flood of manifold vanities : that sin , and that sin.
There is cut throat usury, fulness of bread, and drunkennesss in the
day time: that sin , that sin , and that sin . There is flesh lust, eye lust,
life pride, and no bowels of pity that sin, that sin, that sin , and that
sin. Ask me not, ask me not, Oh what Sin ? I lack wit and memory,
sides and strength : I die, I faint, I should famish to stand still, and
hold out in telling the world their particular sins by that sin, and
that sin. Sign. G. vj.
The reader will smile at the following-as it is a confirmation that
"the sin ofgluttony," once imputed to the good CITY of LONDON as
the cause of the dreadful fire in 1666, was not peculiar to the times of
Charles II. -for thus discourseth Drant, in his famous Spittle Sermon :
" Howbeit, I am not ignorant that many a poor minister of these
times, is like Elizas. He had not pen, nor ink, nor table, nor candlestick, but as his hosts allowed him and these poor God's men must
be helped by their host or hosts, or one friend or other, with coat and
cap, and cup and candle, and study and table, or else they shall be
altogether harbourless and helpless . And needs must I further yet
say, that in many a poor scholar of the Universities, Christ himself is
full of hunger and necessity. These be the noble sons of the prophets, and most apt of all others to be builders of God's temple : yet
have I seen many a good wit, many a long day kept low and lean , to
be made broken with hunger, and abject with poverty. I do not
now knowthe liberality of THIS CITY towards both those places ; only
this I can say, that, less than the tenth part of that, which is nothing
but surfeit and sickness to the GREAT EXCESSIVE EATERS OF THIS
-Town, would cherish and cheer up hungry and thirsty Christ, in
those his hunger starved members, right well. " H. i. The good
citizens of London are treated with still less curtesy in the following
passage : " Havoc in their own apparel, their wives, childrens, and
servant's apparel, outragious havoc in their diets, yea too much
78 DIVINITY.
caution, but with the decisive tone of Catholic zeal.
Edgeworth, who died at the commencement of Elizahavoc too many ways. Their horses chew and spew upon gold and
silver, and their mules go under rich velvet. Dogs are dear unto
them, and feed much daintily Courses and kites cost them many a
round pound ... Specially, good Lord, O good Lord, THIS LONDON
PEOPLE, though it draw near thee with lips, and have a name to live,
yet hath it a most flinty and uncircumcised heart, and is indeed a
people of no bowels. Lord, here is the rich glutton to be seen, up
and down, and round about, the town. Here is scarce any thing in
the upper sort, but many a foolish Nabal scraping and scratching,
eating and drinking, and suddenly and unworthily dying. The eyes
of Judah were said to be red with drinking, but much of this people
have their whole faces fire red with continual quaffing and carousing.
Sodom and Gomorra were said to be full of bread, but THESE LONDONERS are more than full-for they are even bursten with banquetting, and sore and sick with surfeiting. Lord, thou whistlest to
them, and they hear thee not ; thou sendest thy plague amongst
them, and they mind thee not. Lord, we are lean ; Lord, we are
faint ; Lord, we are miserable ; Lord, we are thy members. Lord,
therefore thou art lean ; Lord, thou art faint ; Lord, thou art miserable ; rise good Lord, arise, and judge thine own cause." H. ii. ij.
One more, and the last - from this Sermon : although in the
original it precede both the foregoing. The preacher is describing
the beauty of the church. " All the beauty of the daughter of Sion
isfrom within her." This is that woman that is clad with the son
Christ, and therefore must needs shine, and shew trim. This is she
that is married to Christ, in mercies and pities, in faith and justice.
Faith purifieth the heart ; the mercy of God, working by his bloodshed, scowereth all filth, and reformeth all the deformities by sin in
this woman. This woman, therefore, must needs be fair, and fairest
of all women. Oh, fairness of man's face ; of woman's face ! Oh,
treasure for a time ! Oh, fair, foolish vanity ! A little cold doth pinch
thee ; a little heat doth parch thee : a little sickness doth match
thee, and a little of sores doth mar thee ! But the fairness of CHRIST
in this woman, or in his Elect, may be soiled, but it will be washed ;
it may be black, but it will keep a good favour ; may be made red as
scarlet, but it will be renewed wool-white, and snow white," &c.
E.ij.
OLD SERMONS. 79
beth's reign, had a delicate and difficult part to act.
He had witnessed, with no small pain, the demolition
In a sermon preached before the queen and her court at Windsor,
on the 8th of January, 1569, Drant chose the following text : —
They were both naked, Adam and Eve, and blushed not." Singular as such a text maynow appear, before such an audience, it was
in perfect accordance with the bold simplicity of the age ; and, upon
this text, Drant has engrafted some very bosom-searching doctrine,
clothed in language at once striking and original . He thus observes
in the outset of his discourse, " as Adam and Eve were man and
wife together, so shall they be one together for me in this treatise.
Or else, if I should talk both of Adam and of Eve, and be but so large
as I well mought, it would not be very well ; for the season is very
cold, and I most sickly to speak ; and, besides that, our scantling to
preach in the court, is a most short scantling." The frailty and
nothingness, as it were, of human nature, are thus powerfully delineated. " Such base dust, as is driven before the face of the wind,
which the ungodly do lick, which the serpent doth eat, even sucH
DUST IS ADAM : such dust is man, such dust are all men: -and
hearken to it, all men ! Rich men are rich dust ; wise men wise dust ;
worshipful men worshipful dust ; honourable men honourable dust ;
majesty's dust, excellent majesty's excellent dust. Serah, that had a
thousand thousand men, and Xerxes, that made the sea, land-with
ships are both of them dust. Alexander, that called himself God's
son, was dust ; Senacherib, that wrote himself the great king, was
dust. The bishops of Rome, that write themselves Euλabésol, EUσEβεςάτοι , θεοφιλαςάτοι, θεοσεβεςάτοι, ἁγιοτάτοι, ὁσιοτάτοι , all these be
dust. The Latin doctors, that call themselves authentical doctors,
magistrall doctors, seraphical doctors, and irrefragable doctors *,
DUST. He of Rome, that called himself most holy, most blessed,
God's vicar, Christ's pewfellow, more than a mere man, and many
great names, ... DUST. Man is dust : all men are dust. Sign. I. i. ij.
The same train of thinking is visible in the following, which succeeds an elaborate explanation of the word Adam. " And do not
think that, because I say Adam is red earth, and it is said that
Adam is ashes, and shall return into ashes, therefore, none but red
* See page 75, ante.
80 DIVINITY.
of the religious houses in the reign of Henry VIII. ,
and had maintained a prudent silence during that of
earth and red men shall die. Of a truth it is so, that Adam (that is
red earth) Melancthon (that is , black earth) , and Leucthon (that is,
white earth) must die too. They must all learn to tread the way of
all earths yea, Madams, think it to be so as I say. Red earth ,
black earth, and white earth , must go David's way ; yea, verily,
rosiall colours, and crimson cheeks, must go David''s way ; must go
the way of all earths . Think upon your death, and upon the next
life, for ye must die, ye must die, there is no remedy." I. v. rev.
There is something rather poetical in what here ensues.
" Saint
Paul saith, God made meats, and God made the belly ; and that God
will destroy both the meats and the belly. So say I. God made apparel *, and God made the back ; and he will destroy both the one and
the other ; yea, those heads, that are now to be seen for their tall and
bushy plumes, and that other sex, that have fine fresh golden caules
so sheen and glosing-give me but a hundred years, nay, half an hundred years, and the earth will cover all these heads before me, and
mine own too . " K. viij . A little before, Drant describes what he
calls " the condition of all prcachers that speak the truth. "
" And
generally, in kings houses, of the preachers, this is true which Martial, the poet, said of his friends : " My friends , ye will me to speak
the truth, and embolden me to speak the truth : the truth is this, that
you cannot abide to hear the truth."
"In King Herod's house, my lady Herodiada could command half
a realm, for footing and frisking. Amos spake of those in kings
houses, in his 6th chapter, when he spake thus : " ye that sleep in
beds of ivory, and play the wantons on your couches : ye that
warble to the tune of the viol, and quaff of wine by whole goblets
full ye that supple your joints with the best kind of oil, and have no
cark upon the smart ofJoseph, " &c.
Such are the specimens of the pulpit compositions of DRANT ; speIn The preacher is most elaborate respecting apparel, both of men and women.
one place, he describes the latter thus : " Now, in women's apparel, there is much
vanity. The prophet Isaiah reckoneth up their bracelets, and their mufflers, and their
headbands, their tablets, their bonnets, their ear-rings, their nose-jewels, their veils ,
their wimples, their crisping pins, their stomachers, their cambrics, their heads, and
their lawns." K. vij .
OLD SERMONS. 81
Edward VI. but on the accession of Queen Mary, he
took courage, triumphantly avowed his ancient princimens, which may convince us that increase of civilization does not
always bring a proportionate increase of sound sense, close reasoning,
masculine eloquence, and unaffected piety. Of the man, whose head
and heart could urge him to such effusions, it is a pity that all memorials have well nigh perished .
Long, almost beyond precedent, as is this note, it must yet be
lengthened. The name of EDGEWORTH, as that of a catholic divine,
has been mentioned in the text ; and, pursuing the plan adopted in
the immediately preceding pages, it is necessary that such name be
illustrated with a few specimens of his sermons. Referring, therefore, in the first place, to Dr. Bliss's edition of Wood's Athenæ Oxon. ,
vol. i . col. 315 , for a brief account of the author, and noticing that
Wood was indebted to the choice collection of books in Baliol college library for a peep at the volume containing these sermons, I
must observe, in the second place, that I am indebted to the not less
" choice collection " of my neighbour and friend, Mr. Douce, for an
inspection of the volume in question : —which is so rare as to have
been unknown to Herbert, and is superficially described by Ames.
Nor will it diminish the pleasure, in noticing the contents of it, to
inform the reader, that Mr. Douce's copy once belonged to Bishop
Burnet : and that it is not only perfect, but in a clean, crackling, and.
legitimate condition throughout.
This volume was published in 1557, 4to. , during the reign of Mary.
In his preface, Edgeworth (whose christian name was Roger, and who,
at the time, was " canon of the cathedral churches of Salisbury, Wells,
and Bristol, residentiary in the cathedral church of Wells, and chancellor of the same church," -according to the title- page, ) tells
us, that " because these sermons were made in English, and touched
sometimes among such heresies as had troubled English folk, he
thought it best to set them forth in such language as might presently
best edify the multitude . Moreover, pleaseth you to be advertised ,
(continues he, ) that when I should preach in any solemn and learned
audience, 1 , even fearing the liability of my remembrance, used to
pen my sermons much like as I intended to utter them to the
audience : others I scribbled up not so perfectly ; yet sufficiently for
meto perceive my matter and my process. And of these two sorts
I have kept (as grace was) a great multitude, which now helpeth
G
82 DIVINITY.
ciples, and obtained rapid and substantial preferment.
His sermons are among the very few which I have
me in this my enterprise of imprinting a book ofmy said exhortations.
Moreover, I have made innumerable exhortations at my cures, and
in other places where I have dwelled, and in the countries thereabout,
and in my journies, where it hath chanced me to be on Sunday, or
other holy days, of which I have no signs remaining in writing,
although I think, verily, some of them were as fruitful as others in
which I took more labours. I pray God they may be written and
registered in the book of life everlasting." Towards the conclusion
of the preface, he complains of being " interrupted many years "
while he was preaching at Redcliffe- cross, at Bristol , by the confederacy of HUGH LATIMER, then aspiring to a bishopric, and after,
being bishop of Worcester, and ordinary of the greatest part ofthe
said Bristol, and infecting the whole."
Beneath " the contents of this book, " on the opposite page, the
author observes thus : " I have, beside these many sermons, made in
very many solemn audiences, on the dominical epistles and gospels,
some in the university of Oxford, some at Paul's-cross, in London,
some in the court afore my most honourable lord and master, King
Henry the Eighth, some in the cathedral church of Wells, where hath
been, eversith I knew it, a solemn and a well learned audience : which
I purpose (God willing, ) to set forth hereafter, as I may have opportunity. " Edgeworth, I believe, never had this opportunity ; for these
sermons are all that are known to have been published by him. I
now proceed to gratify (as I hope) the reader with a few short specimens from this rare and not incurious volume.
Upon the translation of the Scriptures into the English language, he
thus artfully observes-liking it not in his heart : " But what sayest
thou ? Is not the study of Scripture good ? Is not the knowledge of
the Gospels and of the New Testament, godly, good, and profitable
for a Christian man or woman ? I shall tell you what I think in this
matter. I have ever been of this mind, that I have thought it no
harm, but rather good and profitable, that holy scripture should be
had in the mother tongue, and withholden from no man that were
apt and meet to take it in hand, specially if we could get it well and
truly translated, which will be very hard to be had. But who be
meet and able to take it in hand-THERE IS THE DOUBT. " Fol. xxxii.
I do not know the date of this (the third) sermon, but conclude
OLD SERMONS. 83
seen from a catholic minister, of the sixteenth century,
in the English language.
that it was preached before the English version of the New Testament ( 1526) , the Pentateuch ( 1530) of Tindale, and the Bible of
Coverdale in 1535. It is clear that no notice is taken of the comparative excellence of these versions, either in or out of the pulpit
-although Edgeworth's book was published twenty years after the
Bible of Coverdale.
66 In the fourth sermon, Edgeworth is wrathful respecting the maltreatment ofimages. And, because (says he, ) I spoke even now of
IMAGES and IDOLS, I would you should not ignorantly confound and
abuse those terms, taking an image for an idol, and an idol for an
image, as I have heard many do in this city, as well of the fathers
and mothers (that should be wise) , as of their babies and children
that have learnt foolishness of their parents. Now, at the dissolution of monasteries and friars' houses, many images have been carried abroad, and given to children to play withal, and when the
children have them in their hands, dancing them after their childish
manner, cometh the father, or the mother, and saith, " What, nasse,
what hast thou there ?" the child answereth ( as she is taught) , “ I
have here mine doll. The father laugheth, and maketh a gay game at
it. So saith the mother to another, " Jugge, or Tommy, where hadst
thou that pretty idol ?" " John, our parish clerk, gave it me, " saith
the child. And for that, the clerk must have thanks, and shall lack
no good cheer. But, if this folly were only in the insolent youth,
and in the fond, unlearned fathers and mothers, it might soon be redressed. But your preachers, that you so obstinately follow, more
leaning to the vulgar noise and common error of the people, than to
profound learning, they babble in the pulpits that [what] they hear
the people rejoice in. " Fol. xl. When this sermon was preached,
it is therefore but reasonable to suppose that the doctrine of the Reformation was pretty boldly inculcated.
In the 5th Sermon ( fol . liiii . ) occurs a bold and coarse translation
of Matth. c. xxv. v. 33. " He shall set the shep on his righte hande,
and the rancke and stinckinge goates on the lift hande." In the
homily onthe " Articles of our Christian Faith, " fol. lxxviii, is a very
singular exposition of the " Immaculate Conception " founded upon
At folio ccxxxv, the distinction between an idol and an image is fully and ac
curately gone into.
84 DIVINITY.
MODERN SERMONS.
In coming at once to the notice of Sermons in
the eighteenth century, I shall not be accused of an
the doctrine of St. Austin. In the eleventh Sermon " on St. Peter's
First Epistle, " the dress and ornament of the Ladies are ( as usual, in
these periods- even before Majesty) described and condemned in
rather unsparing terms. " This adulteration, and changing of God's
handy work, by painting woman's hair to make it seem fair and
yellow, or of their leers of their cheeks to make them look ruddy,
or of their forehead, to hide the wrinkles, and to make them look
smooth, is of the devil's invention, and never of God's teaching,"
fol. cc. A little onward he thus notices the luxurious living of
the age : " diversity of exquisite dishes, dashed with spices
and delicate wines, and used for kindred and friends, and such as can
requite [the] like again. If poor people have any thing, it is those
scraps that be next the dog's meat. " Fol. cciii.
In the same sermon occurs the following very curious Illustration
of CONJUGAL CONCORD. " Saint Ambrose, Exameron libro v. cap. vii. ,
reciteth a notable example to move all married folks, as well men as
women, to concord and to agree together. The example is of the
lamprey and a serpent called Vipera, nequissimum genus bestie, a
serpent most mischievous and venemous. If there be any of
them with us, it is the adder. The property of this serpent, is
this. When he list to gender, specially where he breedeth nigh
the sea coast, he cometh to the water side, and there he hisseth after his manner, calling to him his make, the lamprey,
with his continual hissing. The lamprey, as soon as she perceiveth him there, draweth to the shore, and shallow water ; and
when the adder spieth her coming, he vomiteth and breaketh
away out of himself all his poison and venom, " &c. &c. " Here
may THE MAN and THE WOMAN learn to bear and suffer every
one the manners of the other. Here maythe man learn to order his wife with soberness, and the wife to be gentle and obedient . What
thing is worse than venom of a serpent ? And yet, the lamprey
feareth not that not in her make, the adder. She cometh gently at
MODERN SERMONS. 85
unhappy choice in the recommendation of those of
Clarke, Seed, South, Sherlock, Jortin, Porteus, Horsley, Paley, and Gisborne. I admit there are some
slight shades of difference, both doctrinal and practical, in these excellent performances ; but I am sure
there is enough " OF CHRIST, " in all of them , to make
us better men, and to bring us nearer to salvation.
In this department of Divinity, I am aware that
his calling, and lovingly embraceth him. Therefore, good wives, if
your husbands be venemous, crabbed, and cumberous, or (as you
call it) shrew-shaken, you must come at his calling : do as he biddeth
you be gentle unto him ; and so, though his venom hurt others, it
shall not hurt you. " Fol. ccvi-vi . A modern congregation would be
a little surprised at such an exposition of the Apostle's text of " obeying hubands ! " But the preacher does not spare the husband in what
follows ; when he tells him " he mustalways lay away his poison, so
that he use none towards his wife. He must always lay down, as
well all his churlish swelling, as all his lordly and proud fashion : let
her perceive none such in him : remember (concludes he) you be not
her Lord, ye be but her Husband and her Make."
Butone more extract. The following is an artful, and not unhappy,
illustration of the supposed paramount purity and influence of the
ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH. The preacher has been speaking of the
Flood. " And that the water of the said flood saved none that were
out ofthe ship, signifieth that all Heretics, that be out of the common
received faith of the church, although they werein the water, although
they be christened, and glorieth to be called christen men, yet by the
same water, they shall be drowned into hell, by which the ship, the
Catholic Church, was lift and borne up into heaven, and saved ; asthe
material ship of Noah was lift up into the air, above ground, and
saved by water." Fol. ccxxvi. rev. I had purposed to add the
account of Dives and Lazarus, at folio ccxlii, but it is a picture too
much in the Hemskirk style : too minutely coarse and disgusting.
Upon the whole, Edgeworth is less nervous and familiar than Latimer : less eloquent than Fox ; and less learned and logical than Drant.
He is, however, a writer of a fine fancy and an easy and flowing
diction.
86 DIVINITY.
every man will choose according to his particular
bias, or favourite views of Scriptural doctrine ; and he
will find this doctrine more distinctly developed or
illustrated in the Reviews in which such sermons are
criticised . * In the Monthly Review, the Dissenter
will seek for the exposition and recommendation of
his own favourite opinions ; in the British Critic, the
Church of England man will find the strong rays of
orthodoxy concentrated : in the British Review, will
be oft-times found much that is eloquent, and much
that is ingenious, in the exposition of saintly doctrines ;
in the Eclectic, a frequent flow of fine reasoning and
pious persuasion. The principles of the latter are
called those of the Evangelical kind ; but obtuse must
* The name of GISBORNE, the last above mentioned , and the only
one of those Divines so mentioned who are living, shall not be introduced without the commendations of one of the most able and most
popular of our critical Journals. " Of Mr. Gisborne it is impossible
to speak without reverence as a man, or without respect as a writer :
a long life and ample fortune devoted to the best interests of mankind—a series of writings on moral and theological subjects, calm,
rational, intelligent and impressive, contribute to place him in the
number of the best Christians, if not of the best writers ofthe age. "
Quarterly Review, No. XLI. p. 41 .
I am aware that in treading upon this kind of ground the notice
of LIVING preachers and publishers of Sermons-there is great necessity to walk with caution and circumspection. Yet, as all the preceding authors, dead and alive, have been exclusively English, I will not
close this department of the " Library Companion , " without the distinct and commendatory rotice of a few who are Scotch : and when
I mention the names of MONCRIEFF, ALISON , and MUIRHEAD, I hope
to give no offence to any pious reader on either side of the Tweed.
The truth is, these authors form a sort of theological triumvirate, of
which Scotland has just reason to be proud. The strong good sense
and unaffected piety of the first, the beautiful and refined fancy and
melodious style of the second, with the tenderness, simplicity, and
sweetness of the third, render their respective works deserving
MODERN SERMONS 87
be that man's vision, and petrified his heart, who shall
deny ingenuity, strength, and eloquence to the effusions of Hall, Forster, and Jay. * I put the countless
tribe of minor religious Reviews quite out of the
question : as sometimes leading to results, too ludicrous, or too fatal, to describe ; and as only confirming
of a good coat, and a conspicuous place, in every well chosen collection.
* I must here be understood to speak of the works of these gentlemen which are purely and exclusively confined to the exposition of
Holy Writ. When Mr. ROBERT HALL of Leicester talks about contrasting the Little Head which the Church of England has invented,
with the Great Head of the General Church, meaning Christ
methinks he talks as if he would sacrifice alike logic and candour to
the clinquant of an antithesis. See Mr. Norris's Letter to the Earl of
Liverpool, 1822, 8vo. p. 91 , note, b. Mr. Hall is a powerful and
eloquent writer, and his Sermon upon Infidelity has justly won him
many admirers-even among the Benchers of our " Little " Church.
In that most surprising catalogue of Theology, recently put forth by
Messrs. Ogle, Duncan, and Co. in an octavo volume of nearly 500
pages-but without a date- there is the following note, or criticism ,
subjoined to a volume of Mr. Hall's " Sermons on various Occasions"
-"There now exists in this country a man, who, with the lofty tone
of Bossuet and the rich fluency of Massillon, unites the gracefulness
and tenderness of Fenelon, and the brilliance of Poulle." All this
may be very well ; but one wishes to know WHO it is that deals
out such an " oratio parainetica. " The Abbé Poulle's Sermons
were first printed in 1778, in two duodecimo volumes ; and the style
of themjustifies the eulogy of Barbier :-" abondant, élevé, magnifique, coulant comme un fleuve majestueux." Let Mr. Hall assure
himself that I haveno disposition to under-rate his intellectual powers :
but the "Little Church" has, I think, nearly- as good as he."
He shall himself (if it so please him) fill up this hiatus . Mr. FORSTER'S Essays are full of ingenuity and original remark. The style of
them is at once terse and elegant. Mr. JAY's Sermons, though a
little too warmly coloured , upon the whole have great merit, as
honest and impassioned expositions of the several texts which are handled.
88 DIVINITY.
-
the admirable sagacity of Hogarth when he designed his
well-known picture of ENTHUSIASM DISPLAYED. The
twopopular and more portly Reviews-called the Edinburgh and Quarterly-make but incidental notice of
Sermons, or of theological publications ; yet when
they do take up the consideration of them, they evince
frequently all the spirit and eloquence which usually
characterise their other productions. The reviews of
the Sermons of Horsley and Alison are masterly
exhibitions of critical talent in the former. But
while, in the latter, the estimation of Paley's talents
seems to me to be a little unworthy of that great man's
name,* the review of Warburton's Works (supposed
to have been written by the late Rev. Dr. Whittaker)
is perhaps one of the most perfect specimens of acute
analysis, and impassioned eloquence, that the pages of
modern criticism record. Nor can I omit to make
honourable mention of the admirable notice of Dr.
Coplestone's recent work upon Necessity and Predestination, which adorns the pages of the British Critic.
These points are touched upon incidentally without partaking of any thing of an invidious spirit, or
with a wish to institute uncharitable comparisons.
They are noticed merely as they present themselves
from memory. In the mean time, let neither the diffident, nor the uninstructed, feel anxiety or alarm —
* See No. III . in the Review of his posthumous Sermons : but at
the commencement of the article whence the notice of Mr. Gisborne
is taken ( see p. 86) . Paley is justly called an " admirable writer" —
"wherever he turned his eyes , the prospect was illuminated by bright
skies and cloudless sunshine." Paley's HORE PAULINE is perhaps
the most original and ingenious of his productions which may be
called strictly professional ; but his Moral Philosophy, and Natural
Theology, will probably make his name longer known to posterity.
MODERN SERMONS. 89
in these frequently opposite views, or discrepancies,
among those works which explain the WORD OF GOD.
It is the nature of MAN to become frequently agitated
with passion and prejudice, in the treatment even of
the most sacred cause : but that " CAUSE " itself remains pure and unsullied, and has, for its object, the
salvation of immortal souls. If, in some instances,
the labours of frail mortals necessarily partake ofthe
fallible source whence they flow, in other instances,
they seem to be almost purified from earthly grossness,
and to be incorporated with the imperishable elements
which they strive to explain . Hence, those flights of
genius, those depths of research, those effusions of
piety, and that soundness of doctrine, which distinguish the great Divines of the later centuries-whose
names have been but imperfectly registered in the
foregoing pages. Hence, that suavity of manner, and
heavenly- mindedness of temper, which throw such
a charm about the pages ofTaylor, Hammond, Tillotson, Boyle, and Doddridge ; men, who seem to have
disentangled themselves from the strait-laced discipline of the older schools, and to have had the salvation of men's souls, rather than their own exclusive
gratification, steadily in view: who, laying aside
the asperity of disputants, and the ferocity of persecutors, appear to have sought the " PRAISE and GLORY
of GOD," rather than the applause and patronage of
ΜΑΝ.
SUMMARY OF FOREIGN DIVINES,
In foreign schools of Divinity, the same great lights
have appeared to check the fury of human rashness,
and to " shew forth " the cause of Christian redemp-
90 DIVINITY.
tion. Who does not love the amenity of Erasmus, and
the philanthropy of Melanchthon ? each of whom,
in turn, seemed to hold the scales of moderation and
Christian charity, in order to prevent Luther and
Eckius from engaging in more than a " war of words." *
*Most strenuously do I recommend " the Young Man's" intimate
acquaintance with the writings of ERASMUS : full of sweetness of
temper, of playfulness of wit, liberality of sentiment, and variety and
importance of information —clothed, withal, in a style of pure and
fluent latinity such as has never been surpassed by later writers.
Among the more popular and instructive of his minor works, are his
Querela Pacis, Moriæ Encomium, and Colloquia - the latter to be read
again and again. We learn from Jortin's Life of Erasmus, vol. i .
p. 274, 8vo. edit . 1808, that one bookseller at Paris, sold above 24,000
copies of one impression of the Colloquies. But then he gave it
out that the work was prohibited ! To the great joy of the literary
world, Le Clerc put forth an edition of the Entire Works ofErasmus,
at Leyden, in 1703, folio, in ten vols. , sometimes bound as eleven.
This edition is executed with particular attention to accuracy and
external beauty ; and a copy of it should doubtless be found in the
library ofevery man of letters. A good one (but they are all good
copies, usually bound in green sprinkled calf, with spotted edges to
the leaves) is worth about £16. 16s. Od. Copies on LARGE PAPER, in
white vellum binding, are by no means rare ; and should always
adorn the shelves of a magnificent collection. They may be worth
£21 . a copy. I have a strong suspicion that there are copies, in
sheets, yet in existence at the warehouse of the original publisherif such building have not perished. As to the editions ofportions of
the works of Erasmus, they are without number and without end.
You may load a vessel of 250 tons burden with them. -
Perhaps, on the whole, no name was ever so popular in the sixteenth century : a theologian, a scholar, a philologist, a wit, a great
+ Such was the rarity, and consequent price, of the anterior edition of Erasmus's
Works, published at Basil in 1540, in 8 vols . folio, that a copy of it was purchased by
Francis St. John, about the beginning of the eighteenth century, for 11l. 16s. : but then it was a NON PAREIL ofa copy ! in stamped calf binding, gilt leaves, and most delicately ruled. On the sides, " THOME WOTTONI ET AMICORUM." This beautiful set
ofvolumes graces the shelves of the old family library at Worlingham, in Suffolk.
91
FRENCH DIVINES.
And thus, in the later schools of French Divinity, we
cling to the gentle FENELON ; and look , rather with
admiration than affection, upon his doughty opponent
BOSSUET. Massillon stirs up all the gentle cha-
- Epistolographer (in correspondence with some of the most distinguished characters in Europe, and in amity with all) his works meet
us in every form and in every library ; monastic, secular, and theological. To have sat down to a " dinner of herbs " with More,
Melancthon, and Erasmus, were a festival infinitely beyond a banquet
of golden cups between Charles V., Henry VIII . , and Francis I. I
strongly recommend the perusal of the translation of Erasmus's
"Character of More " (from his letters) which appeared in the
Retrospective Review, vol. v. part II . But there is no end to this
theme.
* Bossuet is considered as the glory of the Church and Episcopacy
of France. He was doubtless a very great man : an acute disputant,
an accomplished scholar, a deeply read divine, and a powerful and
eloquent writer. In declamation of the highest order, and in stirring
up the passions ( as in his FUNERAL ORATIONS) he has never perhaps
had his equal in any pulpit in Christendom. The Jesuits adored his
person while alive, and his memory when he died . They put forth
an edition of his WORKS in twenty quarto volumes, in 1743-53 ; which
Brunet tells us are daily getting scarcer, and of which there are some
few copies of the first seventeen volumes upon very large paper ; one
of them selling at the sale of the Soubise library for 300 francs. A
new edition of Bossuet was published in 1772-88, in nineteen vols.
4to. but in an incomplete state, as it was to have extended to thirtysix vols. Yet it contains pieces which are not found in the edition of
the Jesuits. A new edition of the entire works of Bossuet has just
appeared at Versailles, in forty- seven thick 8vo. volumes, marked at
£21 . in boards, in the recent catalogue of Bossange and Co. A good
edition of the sermons and Funeral Orations appeared in 1772, in
nineteen vols. 12mo. It is not without justice that Brunet notices the first volume of a selection from Bossuet's works, printed
92 DIVINITY.
rities of our nature -which he treats with the skill
of a consummate spiritual physician . He makes our
hearts reprove, admonish, and comfort us. This is indeed one of the peculiar charms of his writings : his
style being the most eloquent and mellifluous imaginable. In his Petit- Caréme, in which he seems to have
outdone himself-there is such a tone of tendernessunited with such sublimity of sentiment, clearness of
reasoning, and eloquence of expression-that one
hardly knows what to compare with it, exactly, in the
whole compass of hortatory divinity. *
by Bulmer in 1802, 8vo. as a beautiful book. It was followed by a
second volume in 1804 ; but the work, which was entitled " Le Veritable Genie du Christianisme, " &c. was never completed. The most
popular work of Bossuet, was his Discours sur l'Histoire Universelle, ”†
first published in 1681 , 4to.; of which the reprints, in all forms and
languages, are almost innumerable. I observe, in the catalogue just
referred to, a copy of the original edition, in old French red morocco
binding, gilt leaves, marked at 11. 16s. The reader will do well to
consult the Reflections of Cardinal Maury upon Bossuet, in the
Cardinal's collection of Select Discourses, and to procure Mr. Butler's
pleasing biographical memoir of Bossuet, published in 1812. 8vo.
* The editions of Massillon's sermons, in whole or in part, are
almost innumerable. Those who have not got the well printed duo-
+ A very popular work, but more exclusively theological, was Bossuet's Histoire des
Variations des Eglises Protestantes, to be found in the third vol. of the 4to. edition of his
works, in 1743, and republished separately in 1791 , 12 mo. 5 vols.- now become rare.
This work, was held out by the catholics, as “ a very crabbed bone for the Calvinists
and protestants to pick. " It was preceded by the Exposition de la Doctrine Catholique,
in which the author was said to have converted Turenne to catholicism. However,
there were not wanting protestants, Calvinistic or otherwise, to pick most completely
the catholical " bone, " thrown out to them by Bossuet : and among these the famous
BASNAGE took a very successful lead. His Histoire de la religion des Eglises Reformées, &c., re- published again and again, first appeared in 1690, 8vo. and Bossuet
answered it 1701. 12mo. But the best edition of Basnage's work, is that of 1725.
4to. , two volumes published after his death. Consult Walchius Bibl. Theolog. , vol. iii.
p. 205, 640, 646, -and for a good account of the entire works of Basnage, consult the
New Mem. ofLiterature, vol. v. p. 22-32.
---
FRENCH DIVINES. 93
The style and imagery of BOURDALOUE seem to rush
upon us with the force of a mountain- torrent : he is
the Demosthenes of French divines ; but it cannot be
denied that his art is too apparent ; and that all the
subordinate parts of his composition seem to be purposely kept down, in order to sharpen the force of his
logic, and to aggravate the terror of his invective. In
the higher departments of sermon composition, he is,
doubtless, without a rival ; and our Horsley seems to
have had much in common with that eminent divineas, in the deeper scenes of Christ's sufferings-and in
the delineations of the day of judgment-there was
much about both these preachers which exhibited
all the sublimity of which such subjects are capable.
It was for Bourdaloue * to frighten the reprobate, and
decimo edition of 1745-9, in fifteen volumes, will, of course, not hesitate about the acquisition of M. Renouard's recent, and beautifully
printed edition, in thirteen octavo volumes, 1810 : of which there
were only four copies printed upon LARGE PAPer. One of these
copies is in M. Renouard's own collection ; a second is in that of the
Royal Library at Paris ; a third in Lord Spencer's library at Althorp,
beautifully bound in blue morocco ; and the fourth is the property
of-any one who chooses to purchase it . See Renouard's catalogue
ofhis own library, under the title of Cat. de la Bibliothèque d'un Amateur, vol. i. p. 89. The ordinary copy is worth about 61. 6s.
* The best edition of Bourdaloue's Sermons is that of 1707-34,
in 16 vols. 8vo. , published under the care of Father Bretonneau. It
was printed by Rigaud, at the royal press. Brunet mentions a magnificent copy, upon fine paper, selling at the sale of Le Gendre's
library for 300 francs ; and Renouard notices a similar copy ( in his
own collection) which the late M. Anison picked out of all the copies
which remained at the same press . The binding of M. Renouard's
copy, by the elder Bozerian, is described as at once appropriate and
magnificent. It should seem that, in the numerous re- impressions of
Bourdaloue, by provincial publishers, those of Lyons, Rouen, Toulouse, and Amsterdam, were formed upon the Parisian edition of
94 DIVINITY.
for Massillon to comfort the " desolate and oppressed." They are both among the most shining
luminaries of the French school of divinity.
But SAURIN must not be forgotten. He was a protestant preacher ; and is said to have been gifted with
one of the finest voices and persons that were ever
heard and seen in the pulpit. His prayer before his
sermon kept his congregation in breathless admiration. It could never be forgotten. Nor was it weakened by the discourse which followed ; for there was
a solidity, justness, moderation, and earnestness
throughout the whole, that equally charmed and convinced his auditory. * But it is his noble-minded1709, in 18 duodecimo volumes : an edition always deserving of being
secured, whenever found in good binding. A copy of the reprint at
Versailles, in 1812, 16 vols. 8vo. is marked at £5 . 5s, in the catalogue of Messrs. Bossange and Co., 1821 , no . 94. Mons. Barbier,
in his Bibl. d'un Homme de Gout, vol. ii . p . 451 , notices the testimony of admiration bestowed by Bishop Burnet upon Bourdaloue,
when he heard him preach in France : t-" il fût étonné de l'éloquence de ses sermons, et que ce Jésuite réforma les predicateurs
d'Angleterre comme ceux de France. " Bourdaloue was called the
Corneille of pulpit composition, as Massillon was called the Racine.
This only confirms the comparison between these two great men instituted in the text.
It is said that, the first time the famous ABBADIE heard him, he
cried out " Is it an angel or a man who speaks ? "
+ In a diverting and instructive little work-not of very common occurrence- called,
" Lettres curieuses sur divers sujets." Paris, 1725, 12mo. 2 vols ; there is an animated and vigorously drawn character of Bourdaloue's preaching. I know of few
things better written, and yet I owe my knowledge of it to the English translation in
the New Mem. of Literature, vol . ii . p. 417 ; necessarily inferior to the original. In
this same French work, notice is taken of Burnet's testimony to Bourdaloue's great
talents ; adding, that " Bourdaloue believed that all honest protestants would be
saved. Many other Jesuits are, doubtless, of the same opinion, but they dare not
own it. Aforeign protestant gentleman told me (says the author of these Memoirs, )
that a very learned monk laid his hand upon his shoulder, and said to him---" Let us
give over talking of religion : WE SHALL ALL BE SAVED." Ibid.
FRENCH DIVINES. 95
ness -his christian charity-his goodness of heart-his
thoroughly social feelings-which form the magic of
his life and of his compositions. With a leaning
towards Calvinism, he did not go one- half the lengths
which the gentle Sectarians, of that persuasion, wished
him to go.
Preaching in a Catholic country, he did
not choose to call the Pope, Antichrist ; or his church
the ***** of Babylon. His sermons will be always
read with pleasure and instruction. *
* My friend, M. Barbier, gently designates them, " as not exempt
from the venom of heresy, and says that they might have been written
with greater purity ; " Bibl. d' un Homme de Gout, vol . ii . p. 468. Apart
ofM. Barbier's brief account of Saurin is taken from the well known
Dictionnaire Historique, from which the above account is also taken.
The Sermons of Saurin were published complete at Rotterdam, in
1749, 8vo. in 12 volumes : but there were five volumes published
during his life, from 1708 to 1725. Note : -it was the same Saurin
who published the first two volumes, in folio, of " Discours historiques, critiques, théologiques et moraux &c. sur l'Ancien Testament, ” -
of which the remaining four folio volumes were continued and completed by BEAUSOBRE and ROQUES, in 1728-39. This costly work
is full of fine engravings, and usually finds a place in our more
complete libraries. Brunet may be said to riot in his description of
this magnificent publication, of which he notices sundry varieties of
forms and conditions. The better taste seems to be, the acquisition
of the plates, separately published in one large folio volume, which
exhibit the earlier and finer impressions of them. These plates
were engraved between the years 1705 and 1720, during the lifetime of Saurin, and are 212 in number. They have sometimes a
Dutch title, and are sometimes found in three folio volumes, without
the text, with short descriptions in the Dutch language. The rage
for ILLUSTRATION is sometimes applied, with tremendous force, to the
pages of holy writ : but I will venture to affirm, with no more con❤
fidence, I trust, than the event will warrant, that where a tasteful
collector shall see one GOOD illustrated Bible, he will witness more
than a dozen BAD.
96
DIVINITY
.
ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.
I now come to touch briefly upon a few of the more
celebrated and useful writers in the department of
ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY ; choosing to introduce them
here, (as rendering the theological department more
complete, ) rather than to incorporate them in
the general department of history. I am, indeed,
sufficiently aware, that in this department alone, a
very copious library may be formed, and that ecclesiastical history may be said, in a great degree, to be
civil history also-inasmuch as the church and state
are, in all countries, pretty closely and inseparably
united ; but, having devoted so large a portion of these
pages to practical divinity, it were unfair, and might
be judged unsatisfactory, to dismiss that subject, without something more than an intimation where the histories of those churches, from which so many brilliant
and distinguished characters have risen for the benefit
of their fellow- creatures, may be found and consulted ;
but in which it cannot be dissembled, very much is to
be received with caution, from a consideration of particular tenets and prejudices (and what prejudices are
stronger than those called religious ?) which are inevitably mixed up with the text. Still, the sagacious
and the candid reader may exercise his own ingenuity
to advantage ; and gather, at all events, and in all
seasons, a rich harvest of various and useful information.
It cannot, however, fail to be remarked -and remarked with more than transient regret-that, at the
very outset of our enquiries, the British nation has
less to boast of in the department of ECCLESIASTICAL
ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 97
HISTORY, than its neighbours-and especially the
French. Leaving out of the question what the great
Mabillon hath done for the Benedictins, * let us only
consider the Gallia Christiana, in thirteen folio volumes, and the Histories of the French Church by
Longueval and Le Cointe. And to these, we may
* The Annales Ordinis Sti . Benedicti, which extend only to the
middle of the twelfth century, were published in six folio volumes
at Paris, between the years 1703 and 1739. The Acrs of the Saints
of the same order, were published at the same place in 1668, in
nine folio volumes ; but D'Acher was here a considerable coadjutor
with Mabillon. These Acts were reprinted at Venice in 1733 , in
nine folio volumes. The French edition, which Brunet values at
little more than £3. 3s. , is dearer, because more desirable, than the
reprint. The Annals are still much beneath the Acts in price ;
and both works are briefly noticed and coldly dismissed by Brunet.
I learn, however, that a much livelier interest is taken in them, at the
present day, on both sides the channel.
† I will briefly notice these works in the above order. The first
is called Sammarthanorum fratrum Gallia Christiana, &c. , which was
published at Paris, in 1715, &c. , in thirteen folio volumes, under the
care of Scevola and Louis de Sainte Marthe, and other monks of the
Benedictine order. ‡ It contains a series or catalogue of all the
:
The first and principal projector of this new edition of the Gallia Christiana, was
Father Denys de Sainte Marthe, superior- general of the congregation of St. Maur, and
editor ofthe works of Pope Gregory the Great, in 1699, folio . He died in his seventyfifth year, on Good Friday, in 1725 ; after having witnessed the publication of the first
three volumes of the Gallia Christiana, and having secured the aid of several other religious of the same order, towards the publication of the seven following volumes. His
death, which took place at the abbey of St. Germain des Prez, was very generally
lamented and yet this same father published a book in 1688 (on the revocation
of the edict of Nantes), " to justify the persecution of the French protestants ; one of
the most horrid persecutions that ever was exercised, a persecution, which has made
thousands of people unhappy ; a persecution advised by some clergymen, who, perhaps, were atheists, and carried on by mere political views, without any fear ofGod,
without any respect for the Deity. How could Father Denys de Ste. Marthe justify
such a persecution with a good conscience ? Was he a political priest ? " New Memeirs of Literature, 1725, 8vo. vol . ii . p. 148-9.
H
Bayerische Staatsbibliothek
Munthen
98 DIVINITY.
add the invaluable labours of Fleury and Tillemont,
archbishops, bishops, and abbots of France, and is full of erudition ,
research, and the most curious details ; but this work is yet incomplete, three more volumes being necessary to render it perfect. There
are copies on large paper ; yet both large and small rarely occur for
purchase in this country, owing to the heavy duty attending the importation of such bulky volumes . Longueval published his Histoire
de l'Eglise Gallicane, in conjunction with De Fontenay, Brumoy, and
Berthier (all four being learned Jesuits) , in 1730, in 18 vols . 4to.:
and such was the labour attending the work, that they each, in succession, fell victims to it. Longueval lived to see the first 8 volumes
complete, and Fontenay the ninth and tenth, with a great part of
the eleventh volume. The end of the eleventh, and the whole of
the twelfth, were the achievement of Brumoy. The rest are the
production of Father Berthier-" the worthy successor ofLongueval,
ofwhom he possessed the spirit, the erudition , and the good taste.
" The style of Berthier is everywhere careful without affectation,
and elegant without antithesis. " Bibl. d'un Homme de Gout, vol. iii.
397-8. After this tempting description, I suspect and hope that
some efforts will be made, both by the young and old collector, to
get possession of this work-so creditable to France, and securing
such an immortality to its authors. To the best of my recollection,
I never met with a copy of it on sale. It was reprinted at
Nismes in 1782, in 18 vols . 8vo. ,-but " commend me" to the goodly
and original quarto impression ! The Annales Ecclesiastici Francorum
of Charles Le Cointe, published at Paris in 1665, &c. , in eight folio
volumes, comprehend a period of time from the middle of the third,
to that of the ninth century. It is a work rarely seen, and still more
rarely consulted : but that is not the fault of the author.
".
While upon the subject of French ecclesiastical history, I ought,
perhaps, to mention the GESTA DEI PER FRANCOS, a large folio
volume, published by the Wechels, at Hanover, in 1611 ; having a
thin second volume (sometimes wanting) bound with the first.
Bongars was the editor of this work-aided by Pithoeus and Petavius, & c. , quos nominare sufficit, " says the former. Jortin has
sacrificed his usual good sense and candour, when he says, "the title
of this book would have been better chosen , if it had been “ Gesta
DIABOLI per Francos." Remarks on Eccl. Hist. vol. i . p. 300. He
also says, that " Guibertus, or Gilbertus, a French abbot, wrote the
""
66
ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 99
upon general ecclesiastical history *-through the
pages of which Gibbon so assiduously toiled . While,
account of this holy war : " but he is mistaken. It is the production of several authors ; of whom Robert, a monk, is the firstwho wrote it " in a cell of a monastery of St. Remigius, in the bishopric of Rheims, at the command of Bernard the Abbot. " See the
preface, Sec. II. , Brunet tells us, that copies of this work upon large
paper are uncommon. In all forms it is a sorrily executed volume.
A copy upon large paper is at Althorp. The small may be worth
about £2. 12s. 6d ; but, during the late war, I have known it pushed
to 4. 14s. 6d.
* What Buffon was in natural history, and Bossuet in polemics
and dogmatical divinity, the Abbé Fleury was in ecclesiastical history. He is the just and enviable boast of the French nation ; and
it grieves one to think that, on the authority of Brunet, his history
" is less sought after than it used to be." But, whoever chooses to
read Barbier's animated and excellent account of it, will not hesitate
to become a purchaser upon any reasonable terms. Fleury lived to
execute only twenty, out of the thirty- six volumes, of whichthis history
is composed : the Father Fabre having written the remaining sixteen-and he would have published more, but was forbidden, on
account of the inelegance of his style, and the want of judgment in
the selection of his materials. The first volume of Fleury's own
labours appeared in 1690, and the last in 1719-but it is usually
dated 1722-1737 . It is the DISCOURSES of Fleury which throw such
a charm about his work ; and which are prefixed to most of his
volumes -especially those which accompany the eighth, thirteenth,
sixteenth, seventeenth, eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth volumes. In some of these, are disquisitions upon the fall of literature from the eruption of the Vandals, the establishment of universities, the progress of the crusades, the history of indulgences, and
of several religious orders in the fourteenth century, &c. †
+ It should seem from Rawlinson's New Method of Studying History, vol . ii . p. 39,
that a part of Fleury's work was " translated , and in March 1727, published by the
Rev. Mr. Herbert, who, it was to be hoped, would give the world a faithful and honest translation of his author, without castrations of what is heterodox, but rather apply by his notes an antidote to the poison. ' I never met with a copy of this translation, nor
does it appear to be in the British Museum Catalogue, or in Watt's Bibl. Britannica .
100 DIVINITY.
casting our eyes upon Italy, (so rich in historical publications of another description) we cannot fail to reIn these discourses, Fleury has united the qualities of an historian
anda philosopher, in a style ofgreat neatness and perspicuity, and with
ajudgment free from all ignoble prejudices . These discourses were
collected and published by Boucher d'Argis, in 1763, with several
additional ones, and notes, by Fleury ; together with a discourse of
Goujet, upon the re-establishment of ecclesiastical studies ; but it
should seem from M. Emery, editor of the Nouveaux Opuscules of
Fleury, in five octavo volumes, 1807, that one of Fleury's discourses,
upon the Gallican church, has been interpolated in this edition of
1763. M. Emery founds his criticism upon an inspection of the
author's autograph. Jortin has honoured Fleury by constant references to his history, in his own Remarks on Ecclesiastical History ; and
has yet further honoured him by translating his " Discourse on the
Ecclesiastical History from the year 600 to the year 1100 ”-” on
account (says Jortin, ) of the ingenious and useful remarks, besides
the historical narrations, which it contains. It is drawn up (continues the same authority) , for the most part, with a decency and
moderation rarely to be found in the ecclesiastical writers of his
church, except Du Pin. Fleury, like Du Pin, was a zealous assertor
of the temporal rights of kings ; and hath not scrupled to expose the
crimes and encroachments of the Popes, for which, doubtless, he
was held in execration by the Jesuits and by the See of Rome, "
Remarks, &c. vol. i . p . 296. ButJortin's brief analysis, and as brief
remarks upon this discourse of Fleury, are admirable of their kind,
and quite in the terse and pertinent manner of their author. Jortin
is generally " admirable." He was a ready, off-hand, and dexterous
scholar ; yet his style, even in his sermons, wants what the French
call " onction. " Once, and rarely more than once, he rose to eloquence ; and that was in the preface to his Remarks &c. , which the
late Dr. Gosset told me he regularly read through, every year, with
undiminished delight. In his Life of Erasmus, Jortin shewed himself to be little more than a translator of Le Clerc. A subject of the
greatest, is made by him one of comparatively small, interest. The
work is little better than a dry journal of facts, stitched together.
Above all things, the purchaser of Fleury will not forget the learned
Rondet's Table Générale et Raisonnée des Matières, contained in the
thirty-six volumes of the history. This table was published in
ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 101
cognise, in the Ecclesiastical Annals of Baronius, a
work of such stupendous labour, and of such general
and lasting utility, as to excite the envy, and almost despair, ofother countries. I do not recommend the purchase of all these elaborate and costly works, though I
1758, in a quarto and duodecimo form--the former in one volume,
and the latter in four. This celebrated history has been reprinted at
Caen, in twenty-five volumes in quarto : at Paris, in 1724-48, * forty
volumes, octavo : and at Nismes, in 1778-80, twenty-five volumes,
octavo but beautiful copies, in mellow old calf- gilt binding, of the
first Paris edition, must be the object of the ambition of the Young
Collector. On large paper, it has not been sold for more than one
hundred and seventy francs abroad-but, here, on SMALL paper, let
it not be hoped for under double that sum.
But if Fleury be entitled to such unqualified praise, TILLEMONT is
deserving of scarcely less commendation. His two great labours are
thus called : " Mémoires pour servir à l'histoire ecclésiastique des six
premiers Siècles. Paris, 1693-1712. 16 vols . 4to.: Histoire des
Empereurs et des autres Princes qui ont regné durant les six premiers
Siècles de l'église. Paris, 1700-38 . , 6 vols . in 4to. " It is melancholy to read the following pithy notice of them by Brunet : " These
two works, which usually go together, are esteemed by the learned,
but they sell at a low price. " And then one hundred and forty
francs are stated as the price for which they were bought at the sale
of the President de Cotte ! Mr. Payne, in his last catalogue,
(no. 2334) , marks a neat copy (in calf, ) of the latter work, at
21. 2s. Both works, and especially the former, are full of prodigious learning ; but, after the labour of forty years, Tillemont has
given us only the history of the first six centuries of the church .
Gibbon's obligations to him are constantly and gratefully expressed,
and Jortin seems to have consulted him yet more than Fleury.
* A copy ofthis edition is marked at 81. 8s. in the catalogue of Messrs. Bossange
and Co., 1821 , no. 226. But " thrice and four times happy, " does the Reverend
Dr. Burney, of Greenwich, consider himself to be, in the acquisition of a most beautiful copy, coated in mellow-toned olive morocco, which had belonged to the famous
Madame de Pompadour, and of which that pious lady might have turned over the first
leafof the first volume, once in her life. This copy was obtained from the richlystored repository of Messrs. Payne and Foss.
102 DIVINITY.
would hardly dispense with a copy of Baronius.* I
tremble about the mention of the ACTA SANCTORUM,
""
"Joseph Scaliger, he, who once boasted that there was nothing
for him to learn, confesses, that he never read BARONIUS without
gaining some new light . Rawlinson's New Method of studying
History, 1730. 8vo. vol. ii . p. 36. After this, who shall hesitate
about the preference above given to Baronius ? This work is a body
of ecclesiastical history, comprising also the labours of Raynald,
Laderchi, and Pagi, with one volume of Apparatus, 1646, &c .:
folio, in thirty-one volumes. This is considered to bethe best edition ;
but, according to Brunet, the edition of Lucca, in thirty- eight folio
volumes, 1738-57, ought to be preferred ; inasmuch as the annotations of Pagi are inserted in their proper places, with notes of Mansi,
and three volumes of an Index ; the latter being wanting in the
Roman edition of 1646. At the sale of the Soubise library, a copy
ofthe Lucca edition , on large paper, was sold for two hundred and
ninety francs. Rawlinson says that the first eight volumes of
Raynaldus's compilation, epitomised in one folio volume, and pubbished at Rome in 1668, " is very mean, yet wants it not buyers at
a very high rate. " It was cheering to see, at Messrs. Payne and
Foss's, a fine copy of this Lucca edition of Baronius, just bound out of
sheets, in white glossy vellum, (and sent from the good old house of
Luchtman's, at Utrecht, ) lying upon the floor of their spacious
repository-tempting the curious visitor to become a purchaser.
Nor was it less cheering to learn, a few days after my first sight
of such a treasure, that the Lord Bishop of London had yielded to
the temptation, and carried off the prize. It is now placed where it
will be in every respect properly appreciated. I predict, with no
small degree of confidence, that Fulham will, in the end, more than
rival Hartlebury.
It may here be also observed, on the authority of Rawlinson, that
the Ecclesiastical Annals of Bzovius, published at Colon. Agripp. in
1616, in nine folio volumes, as a continuation to those of Baronius,
are very inaccurate, and rather give a history of the order of St. Dominic, of which the author was a friar, than of the church. " Nevertheless, I should desiderate, as a curious ecclesiastical antiquary, those
Dominican Annals also : but only as a curious ecclesiastical
antiquary. "
ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 103
lest my readers should imagine that I wish to plunge
them in all the mysteries and marvels of monastic and
saintly lore. And yet, I will be free to say that that
Collector, be he young, or be he old, may thank his
happy stars who shall possess thefifty-threefolios, of
which that still unfinished and gigantic work is composed, at the price of so many sovereigns. *
In regard to our own country, the earliest historians
So much has been already said (Bibliograph. Decameron, vol. i .
p. 81-3. ) respecting the history of this work, and such an excellent
specimen of the uses to be derived from it being to be found in
Mr. Southey's famous article on the " Spanish Inquisition, " in the
twelfth number of the Quarterly Review, that I will here only observe, it may be doubtful whether there be more than four complete
copies of it in private collections, and two in public, in England. Of
the former, Lord Spencer, Archdeacon Jebb, Mr. Southey, and Mr.
Petrie (Keeper of the Records in the Tower of London, † ) are possessors of the latter, the Bodleian Library and the British Museum.
I saw Mr. Archdeacon Jebb's copy lying at Messrs. Rivington and
Cochrane's, booksellers, and a most choice and desirable copy it was—
many of the volumes being in original bindings-and all of them in
a good harmonising gilt- tooled condition. It had been obtained of
Messrs . Ogle, Duncan and Co., at the price of one hundred guineas ;
and the public will, in due time, become acquainted with its contents ; the archdeacon being a gentleman addicted to most curious
and profound enquiries in theological lore -as his Sacred Literature
alone attests. Messrs . Ogle and Duncan mark a copy, in fifty- six
volumes, at £105. The price of these " Acts " is daily increasing
upon the continent, and the rarity of a complete set is in proportion
becoming extreme. Although fifty-five volumes form, what is called,
a complete set-yet fifty-three are not less complete-for the original
text and they are usually sold in this latter form. At Munich I
+ A whimsical anecdote is connected with the importation of one of the above mentioned sets of the Acta Sanctorum. They were detained at the custom-house as being
PAPAL and SUPERSTITIOUS ! ---under an old statute of James I. A seasonable explanation, not unattended with a gentle rebuke, soon released the saints from their
bondage,
104 DIVINITY.
of any moment are Bede, Fox, Parker, and Godwin;
and, latterly, Dugdale, Usher, Wharton, Burnet, and
Strype ; although our most popular ecclesiastical history is the version of the work of a foreigner, of the
name of Mosheim. To these names, add Fuller,
Collier, Bingham, Cave, and Jortin. I will be more
particular in the account of the ecclesiastical works of
these authors. And first for Bede ; who, as he died
at the beginning of the eighth century, could have
written of the British church only in a dark and
stormy period. The first edition of his Church History is so scarce, as at present to have escaped the researches of our most diligent collectors ; but the only
edition worth possessing, for safe reading or critical
consultation, is that of Smith, in a handsome folio
volume, published at London in 1722.*
Fox comes next, but with an interval of eight cenfound six sets of these Acts, in desirable white vellum coatings ; and
at Strasbourg, four sets, in good and even handsome calf binding ;
but notwithstanding the Munich copies might have been obtained at
127. a set, yet the thought and fears of the expenses of carriage, and
especially of duty, deterred me from the purchase of a single copy.
In France, however, I learn that complete sets are daily becoming
scarcer and of increased price. To the English historical antiquary,
some portions of these volumes are invaluable. My friend Mr. Petrie,
in his late journey upon the Continent, attempted to discover and
secure the remaining portion of the MS. of this work ; but he could
only trace it as having been conveyed, by its last Owner, across the
Rhine into Germany during the more recent agitation of French
affairs.
-
* First, as to the Editio Princeps : for an account of which I am
exclusively indebted to Panzer, vol. i . p. 83 , No. 445. On the
authority of Strauss, Denis, and Laire, Panzer says it is printed
without date, at Strasbourg, in a small Gothic letter, (apparently
that of Eggesteyn ) , and containing forty lines in a full column :
having ninety-seven leaves in the whole. Laire had erroneously
ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 105
-
turies between. His Book of Martyrs as it is
called-was, and yet is, one of the most extraordinary
and popular church histories in the world. The private history of this elaborate work might be worth
knowing, but it is hopeless to enquire after it :—who
were the author's chief authorities, and what artists
he obtained to make the designs and engravings, are
now, I believe, points upon which no correct information is likely to be obtained . Fox lived to see four
editions of his labours, himself dying in 1587. These
editions were succeeded by five more, of which the
latest was published almost within a century after the
death of the author. Thefirst edition, in 1563, is of
very rare occurrence in a perfect state ; and has also
some particulars which are omitted in the subsequent
editions. * The last, and perhaps the commonest, in
the black letter, is that of 1641 , in three comely folio
attributed the type to Fyner. This book is at present a desideratum
in, perhaps, every public and private library in England ; a copy is
in the Royal Library at Paris. Smith's edition, above mentioned,
is a very handsome folio volume, and not of uncommon occurrence.
Nor are the copies on large paper very rare. Messrs. Longman,
Hurst, and Co. mark a copy of the small paper, containing some
mss. notes of Gale and Gough, at 31. 3s. Mr. Payne affixes an
additional guinea to the value of the work, in the same form . The
name of VENERABLE BEDE is justly dear to the English, even at this
period. During the earlier part of the eighth century, it was as justly
considered to be attached to the greatest living literary ornament
in Europe. Dr. Henry considers Bede as a most wonderful man ;
and as exhibiting, in his works, " all the science with which the
world was then acquainted. " After telling us that it is rather a
reproach to us to have published so few of his works, and that the
Paris and Basil impressions of them are imperfect, he says, that the
only complete edition is that put forth at Cologne, in eight folio
volumes, in 1612 ; of which there is a copy in the library of the
Royal Institution, but none in that of the British Museum.
*In the fourth volume ofthe Typographical Antiquities, pp. 82-94,
106 DIVINITY.
volumes, of which copies upon large paper are by no
means uncommon. The edition of 1684 is in a Roman
letter, and some indifferent copper-plates are introduced. Perhaps the last edition (as well as the first)
in the lifetime of the author, may be worth securing ;
but the impression of 1684, brings, I believe, the
largest price.*
the reader will find a full and particular account of this volume,
together with references to other works, wherein further researches
may be made relating to it. Consult also Chalmers's General Biographical Dictionary, vol. xiv. p. 34, and Dr. Wordsworth's Ecclesiastical Biography, preface. Fox was a sort of LUTHER in his way.
His style is equally bold, and his enmity to the church of Rome
equally bitter, with that of the great German reformer. His " Acts "
are, indeed, an invaluable historical repertory : but, in some particulars, he seems to have gathered information too hastily, and to
have detailed it too loosely. There is an anecdote recorded by
Strype, in his Appendix to the Life of Archbishop Parker, or Cranmer,
(upon which, at this moment, I am unable to lay my finger, )
strongly confirmative of this remark. The earlier black letter editions of Fox were chained to almost every public desk, in libraries
and places of worship, in the kingdom ; where they were usually
suffered to decay by piecemeal, from damp, ill usage, or frequent
consultation. To the best of my recollection, one of the completest specimens of a mutilated Fox, is (or was) to be seen in the little parish
church near Apethorpe (the seat of the Earl of Westmoreland) , in Northamptonshire. In some other rural parish churches, I have met with
Fox, in an old vestry trunk of some three centuries ago manufacture,
almost in a state of pulverisation, from the united attacks of mice
and moths. They preserve at Bamburgh Castle, in Northumberland, a sound copy of the edition of 1583 ; but I know of no copy
of an edition in the sixteenth century equal to that of 1596, in two
volumes, which is in the Duke of Devonshire's library at Chatsworth, in russia binding. A finer copy can be hardly conceived. My
friend, Mr. Douce, has a copy wanting only the last leaf. My own
copy is most cruelly maimed both at the beginning and end : a mere
torso of a copy.
* A copy of this edition, in fair good binding, was purchased at
ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 107
99
While Fox was watching, with a natural and pardonable exultation, the progress of the sales of the first
and second editions of his " Acts, ' the famous
ARCHBISHOP PARKER-a name, never to be pronounced without emotions of pious respect-was
maturing (with the aid of his learned secretary,
Joscelyne) , his celebrated History ofthe Antiquity of
the British Church, in the Latin language, and which
he first published in the year 1572, in folio. Valuable
as is this work, it is hopeless to expect to purchase
it in a perfect state ; and still more forlorn is the
hope to become master of it with the original engraving of the archbishop's PORTRAIT. *
Such a trouvaille
the sale of the library of my late friend, Mr. Neunburg, in the present
year ( 1822) , for 51. 5s. Mr. Baynes marks it at 61. 6s. on large paper,
half-bound, affixing the date of 1686 ; and subjoins a copy, apparently on small paper, with the same date, " with upwards of fifty
additional portraits, neatly bound in brown calf, " valued at 121.
Messrs . Ogle and Co. value a copy, on small paper, (dated correctly,
1684, ) at 7l. 17s. 6d. ; but as it is not upon large paper, I consider
such price too high. The edition of 1610 is marked by them at
31. 38. † and Messrs. Payne and Foss affix the price of 41. 4s. to that
of 1641. The truth is, I believe, that these books are rising yearly in
value ; but I own that the edition of 1684 would be the last I should
purchase. An abridgment of Fox's history appeared in 1589, in the
black letter ; and partial reprints of it, in a greater or lesser form,
have continued to the present day. There are no CUTS like those of
the older editions ; which " are preferred by collectors , some of
them containing portraits, " says Mr. Chalmers : but it seems to me
that the countenances are rather generalised, than indicative of individual resemblances . I have possessed the edition of 1641 , on large
paper, uncut : which is not very rare.
* I may refer with confidence to the full and particular account of
this exceedingly rare book in the Typog. Antiq., vol. iv. p. 126-130,
+ In Mr. Triphook's catalogue of last year, No. 46, I find a copy of this edition of
1610, upon "large paper, very fine, " in two folio volumes, marked at 6l. 6s. , but then
it had been a " presentation copy from King James the First. "
108 DIVINITY.
would make the " old " Collector " young " againin years - but not in experience. However, for the
purposes of consultation, the beautiful and accurate
reprint of it by Dr. Drake, in 1729, folio, and obtainable for about 17. 5s. , is, in every respect, as good
a book.
It is impossible to mention the name of DUGdale
and may here further observe, that Mr. Bindley's copy, noticed in
that account, was purchased at the sale of his library for 45l. It
is also in my power to subjoin, if it were necessary, the minute description of another recently discovered copy, in the library of
Mr. Coke, at Holkham, which Lord Spencer was so obliging as to
furnish me; and which copy not only contains a fine impression of
the ORIGINAL PORTRAIT, but appears, in other respects, to be in the
most beautiful and perfect condition . Lord Spencer's own singular
copy contains the portrait. Perhaps no two copies are found in all
respects alike ; nor does it appear that there are more than four or
five copies which possess the portrait. Ofthese, one is in the library
at Althorp. There are, at least, three copies of the book in Bene't
College library, Cambridge ; two possessing the portrait : one having
it coloured, and the other uncoloured . The coloured one was supposed to have been an original painting ; till the experienced eye of
Mr. Douce detected the fallacy--shewing it to be only Hogenberg's
print coloured.
In the archbishop's own library, at Lambeth, there is preserved
the most precious copy of this book in the world : notwithstanding
it wants the title-page, and the account of the halls and colleges is
not printed upon vellum-as it is in some copies. The worth of this
copy consists in the addition of deeds and instruments, with seals
appended-and letters and memoranda (the greater part printed by
Strype in his biography of Parker, ) of some of the most eminent men
of the day. Among these, is a letter from CECIL, and another from
COVERDALE, (the latter dated March, 1566, and signed, " quondam,
Exon. ") for which more than one hungry autographiser of my acquaintance would give " a good round sum. " This copy appears to
have been made up by Ducarel, who has prefixed an account of the
several MS. pieces contained in it . On turning over and perusing
these pieces, one seems to be living at the period of their compo-
ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 109
without reverence and respect. If that great man had
published nothing more than his Monasticon Anglicanum, he would be justly ranked among those
higher authors whose productions have been long considered as an honour to our country. In this place, I
have nothing to do with him as an Antiquary, Historian, and Topographer ; but it may be fairly stated
sition. The portrait of Parker, pasted at the end of his Life, is a
genuine impression of the old plate ; but I never look at it without
believing that the ORIGINAL must have possessed a countenance of
more intelligence and expression.
The curious must " note well," that there is a copy of Hogenberg's print which sometimes passes for the original ; besides Tyson's
imitation of it in etching ; which latter is coarse and common
enough. Some inadequate notion may be formed of the original, by
the wood- cut fac- simile of it in the Bibliomania, p. 342. The portrait
in the Heroologia, in Boissard, by Vanderwerf, and Vertue, are faithless and feeble performances. Let the handsome folio edition of
Godwin, de Præsulibus Angliæ, Cantab. 1743, satisfy the ordinary Collector for about 11. 8s.: although I am always anxious to consult
the first 4to. edition, of 1601 , in English.
* In De Bure's time, Dugdale's Monasticon Anglicanum was considered to be a work of great rarity and price ; and accordingly he
devotes very many pages of his Bibliographie Instructive to a full and
particular account of it . In our own time, it has brought great prices;
but, for the cause mentioned in the following note, that price is gradually diminishing. The finest small paper copy I ever saw, was
that in the Towneley collection. It had belonged to Pope Pius VI.
Lord Spenserpossesses a copy ofthe edition of 1655, on LARGE PAPER,
which is of prodigious rarity. See Edes Althorp. vol. i . p. 145.†
It should be observed, more particularly for the sake of " the Young
Collector, " that the Monasticon was englished and abridged by
Wright in 1718, folio ; and that Stevens published a Supplement to
+ Thefirst volume is not very uncommon, on large paper and there is a most surprising copy of it, of this kind, in the library at Worlingliam, in Suffolk. The third
volume was never yet, I believe, found upon large paper. In the Althorp copy it is,
as usual, inlaid.
110 DIVINITY.
that, in almost each of these departments, he is considered as the safest model and the surest guide . His
great work of the Monasticon is now under reprint ;
and no Englishman, who wishes well to national and
splendid undertakings, can look upon this reprintIMPROVED in every sense of the word — without a
desire and an effort to promote its success. *
The quaint, and yet clever, Fuller ; the grave Collier ; the erudite Bingham ; the pains-taking Cave ;
and the acute and solid Jortin-may each and all,
as connected with ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY find
the Original Work in two folio volumes, 1722-3 : these latter maybe
obtained for about £12. 12s.; and Wright's volume for £5. 5s.
Stevens and Wright are found on large paper, very rare, a fine
copy," in the last catalogue of Messrs . Payne and Foss, marked at
£36.
* The English are sometimes hardly pardonable for their caprices
and aberrations from good taste . The day is not very far back, when
REPRINTS (with barely fourscore lines of addition or improvement)
were purchased with an avidity scarcely conceivable by those who
had not witnessed it. When the Proposals for the NEW Monasticon
Anglicanum were thrown out, they met with a warm and general
reception. The subscription list was quickly filled ; and those who
wanted to become purchasers, were obliged to wait the will or the
death of such as had been fortunate enough to precede them. There
was sometimes even a struggle or competition to supply the vacuum
occasioned by the removal of a Subscriber. The new edition appeared regularly in numbers, upon beautiful paper, with a beautiful
type executed by one of the most accurate and learned printers of the age and with ornaments, or plates, so far ECLIPSING what had
preceded them, that it is marvellous to me how Mons. Brunet could,
with these plates before his eyes, have the temerity to call them
" inferior to the originals !" The truth is, they are very much superior : first, on the score of accuracy of perspective ; secondly, on
that of the selection of new objects as well as the re- execution of the
old ; and, thirdly, as containing more artist -like execution in the
several subjects selected . Hollar, with all his excellences, is far from
-
ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 111
places in an extensive library ; but, with those who
wish to compress and consolidate, perhaps Burnet,
Strype, Mosheim, and Wordsworth, may be sufficient.
Ofthese four latter authors, I shall say something in
the note below.* I am fully sensible that this notice
being an infallible draftsman ; and King is notoriously faithless.
On the contrary, we have here, in the burin of CONEY, much that
reminds us of the force and even the colouring of Piranesi, and much
that unites the delicacy of Hollar with the freedom of Mechel What
should follow, therefore, but that, on the score of ART alone, these
new volumes should have a manifest superiority. Then again for
MATTER. There is a great additional mass introduced, by Messrs.
Caley and Ellis, as well as the accompanying of Dugdale's text with
numerous and pertinent notes ; so that, to say nothing of the superior beauty ofthe paper and type, this NEW EDITION is the only one
which can be hereafter consulted for information, or quoted for authority, on subjects connected with Church History and Ecclesiastical Property. Of the six volumes, in which this truly splendid and
incomparable work will be completed, nearly five are already in the
hands of the Subscribers ; and the regularity in the publication ofthe
several Parts, ensures the termination of it at no very distant period.
It may be honestly avowed that the annals of the Press, in no country
throughout Europe, can boast of a nobler performance ; whether on
the score of accuracy and fullness of intelligence, or of splendour of
paper, type, and graphic embellishments.
• Before these three latter writers are noticed, it may be as well
briefly to dispatch their predecessors, according to the order in the
text. Fuller's Church History, in 1655, folio, with the University of
Cambridge and Waltham Abbey, may be worth 31. 3s. in good condition . Thelatter pieces are sometimes wanting. They contain plates
by Hollar. Of course old Tom Fuller must be read " cum granis
salis" in matters of ancient history. He was a loose chronicler, but
an admirable and honest relator of what passed under his own eyes. I
never saw Fuller's Church History upon large paper. Collier's Eccle.
siastical History of England, 1708, folio, two vols. , may be now
worth 21. 2s. in good condition ; and Mr. Ogle marks a copy, on
large paper, at 21. 6s. I have seen many a copy sold for little more
than waste paper : but the age of book-vandalism is past. Most
112 DIVINITY.
of authors who have enriched the literature, and
promoted the religion, of our country, is abunstrongly andeven vehemently do I recommend Bingham's Antiquitates
Britannia, or Antiquities ofthe Christian Church, &c. published in two
folio volumes, 1726 of which a fine copy may be worth at least
21. 12s. 6d. at a public sale. The account of the progress of this
erudite labour, together with the anecdotes relating to its author,
in Chalmers's Gen. Biog. History, vol. v. p. 268, make one's heart
almost bleed : so little does the world know of the pains and pe
nance of the STUDY ! I was present, about twenty-two years ago,
(at a book sale in Worcester) when two sets of these ecclesiastical
antiquities were disposed of to Mr. Broster, -the spirited bookseller
and book- auctioneer at Chester-for scarcely more than fifteen shillings. BINGHAM is now justly ranked among our brightest Church
Luminaries. He, who was the early patron of Potter, (afterwards
Archbishop of Canterbury) and whose memory was almost idolized
by Lowth, doubtless fared not in his profession as he ought to have
fared : but his " better part" lives after him. Jortin knew the value
of his labours, and confessed it. has sometimes stolen
from them without the integrity of confession.
translated and reverenced all over the Continent.
Gibbon
Bingham has been
The testimony of
Walchius, (Bibl. Theol. vol. iii . p. 671 , ) is enough to stimulate the
theological student to leave no bookseller's shop unvisited till he have
secured a copy ofthis opus verè egregium. "
66
Cave's " Historia Litteraria Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum, " 1740,
folio, two vols. , best edition-to which " Casimir Oudin's Commentarius de Scriptoribus Antiquis Ecclesia, " 1722, folio, three vols. has
been thought to be a useful, if not necessary, Supplement-should
doubtless have a place in the professedly theological library. A good
copy of the first work may be worth 21. 12s. 6d.; and, upon large
paper, I find it “ new and elegant, in calf, " marked at 51. 5s. in the
last catalogue of Messrs. Ogle and Co. The first edition of Cave
was in 1688 ; but this may be considered as entirely superseded by
the second; and yet he, who shall have the first, and not be able to
procure the second, will find abundance of valuable information to
satisfy his doubts and stimulate him to yet further researches. Oudin's work will scarcely exceed 21. 2s.: even though it be in the first
binding, with marble edged leaves. But Cave must not be thus
briefly dispatched. He was greatly assisted in his labours by the
ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 113
dantly jejune and incomplete ; and that a very limited
knowledge of this portion of Divinity may readily
-
:
famous HENRY WHARTON, known chiefly by his Anglia Sacra, 1692,
folio, 2 vols. -a work, which, with all its inaccuracies, and in spite
of Bishop Burnet's testy notice of some pages, containing as many
errors as lines * will transmit the author's name to posterity
among the brightest of those of his countrymen. The truth is,
Wharton, who died in 1694, at the premature age of thirty- one, was
one of the most extraordinary men of the times and after having
read the account of the controversy between Cave and his young coadjutor, in Mr. Chalmers's Biog. Dict. vol. xxxi. p. 343, &c . and in
Dr. D'Oyly's Life of Archbishop Sancroft, † vol . ii . p. 110, 126, &c.
I incline to the opinion, that, however petulant and presuming
Wharton might have been respecting the full share he had had in
"the History," Cave treated him not only with ingratitude, but with
a palpable want of integrity.
Mr. Chalmers seems to think, on the authority of Burnet, that
Wharton's youth would imply impetuosity and a want of due preparation or of materials ; but what can be said against this wonderful
young man, who, on the Bishops of London and Rochester objecting
to ordain him because he had not completed his TWENTY-THIRD YEAR,
was, at the instigation of the Bishop of Peterborough, not only
examined, but passed through his examination " relating to the
ancient Discipline of the church, the old errors, heresies, and writers,
and especially concerning the opinions of Origen and Arius, with
SUCH SUCCESS that all the Bishops resolved to give him orders ! Life
of Sancroft, vol. ii . p. 116. There be geniuses, who, if they do not
obtain knowledge intuitively, obtain as much in the application of a
* Burnet was smarting under a powerful, but probably coarsely penned, attack which Wharton had made upon his " History of the Reformation," under the assumed
name of Anthony Harmer. It was a sort of heavy- dragoon charge which bore down
every thing before it. See Chalmers, vol. xxxi . p. 341 .
+ From Wharton's own Diary : written in Latin, and preserved in the archiepiscopal library at Lambeth This piece of auto-biography, judiciously republished by Dr.
D'Oyly, at the end ofthe Archbishop's life, is exceedingly interesting-and even
amusing. It is difficult to conceive how the growling between Cave and Wharton,
described at page 126, did not end in a " battle royal "—which I apprehend Wharton
would have described in very good latinity. The growling between Hudson and Hearne,
in the Bodleian library, could scarcely have come up to it.
I
114 DIVINITY.
supply more ample and more valuable details. But,
not only must there be limits, (" sunt certi denique
few days, as others would in that of weeks : and Wharton was one of
them. He was an ecclesiastical antiquary, both by habit and by instinct. He could never keep his fingers from turning over the leaves
of old MSS. , and from noting down, with his pen, what struck him
as more novel, or curious, or instructive . Had he lived twenty years
longer, England would not have envied France her Father Papebroch. Wharton died in consequence of attacking these " old MSS"
before the effects of a severe illness had subsided. He thought the
body was to keep pace with the mind. He is to be numbered with
the most voracious, but most to be lamented, of HELLUONES LIBRORUM. I will just observe that his sensible countenance, or portrait,
engraved by White, ( I think) is prefixed to his Sermons, in 8vo.
So much has been said of the preceding works that I am compelled to be brief upon those which follow them in the text. Burnet's History of the Reformation has been reprinted at Oxford in
six handsome octavo volumes. Of a work, so long considered to be
a standard book, it were perhaps equally vain to say any thing in disparagement or in praise : but I am free to confess, that a new and
vigorously written history of THE REFORMATION, is as much wanted,
as it would be certain of a success even beyond that of Burnet's. Contemporaneous black letter publications, whether in the shape of Sermons or controversial Tracts, should be carefully examined ; and ms.
records(ofwhich several, before unknown, have been lately discovered)
should be more faithfully looked into and copied than they appear to
have been by Burnet-who, with all his talents and integrity, was
sometimes rather hasty than wise. † A style of writing should be
The original edition of Burnet was published in 1679-1715, three vols. folio. The third volume has plates, but it was reprinted in 1753 without them. Of this edition
(which in the ordinary state may be worth 5l. 5s. ) there were some very few copies struck offupon LARGE PAPER. A remarkably fine one, of this kind, is in the curious
old library at Ham, near Richmond, the seat of Lady Dysart. Earl Spencer also possesses it, but not without having waited several years for it- and having paid 100 gui- neas forthe copy of it which had belonged to the late Duke of Grafton. It had, however, some extra plates, by way of illustration.
+ 1 will give an example. The pages of Hume have taught us to respect
the name and memory of JUDGE HALES, during the reigns of Henry VIII.
and Edward VI. When the conspiracy was entered into to raise Lady
ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 115
-
fines ") but a recollection that this work is not an
EXCLUSIVE performance either devoted entirely to
adopted, at once clear, simple, animated, and natural : and a spirit,
or principle, evinced , equally free from the prejudices of party and of
sectarianism . But where is the writer THUS GIFTED ? And yet a
work, upon such a momentous subject, and so executed, would be
the glory of our church, and the admiration of posterity. †
Jane Grey to the throne, in preference to Mary, Hales, although a staunch
Protestant, declined entering into it, and refused to sign the patent for the
elevation of Lady Jane. On the accession of Mary, and the suppression of
the Protestant worship, (and while the Sees were filled by Catholics), Hales,
in his judicial capacity, had pronounced judgment, in some matters relating
to Divine worship, which was construed into a systematic hostility against
the Catholics. When he was called upon to take the oaths of allegiance
and supremacy, by Bishop Gardiner the Chancellor, he maintained the consistency ofhis character by a temperate but resolute refusal to acknowledge
the supremacy of the Pope. He was in consequence committed to prison ;
and, as Hume says, "" was treated with such severity that he fell into frenzy,
and killed himself." Such was the barbarity of the Queen's treatment ofthe man who had been FAITHFUL to her against her Rival. But
the secret key to the imprisonment, and subsequent wretched fate, of the
Judge, have been made known to us in a very small brochure, of three leaves
only, (exclusively of the title) which was published at Roan, at the very
time of the transaction taking place : and the whole of which is given below -conceiving it to be not less important than curious, in contrasting the
subtilty and baseness of Gardiner's character with the simplicity and firmness ofthat of Judge Hales.
" The communication betwene my Lord Chauncelor and IUDGE HALES,
being among other iudges to take his oth in Westminster Hall. Anno .
M. D. Liii. vi. of October.
CHAUNCELOR.
HALES.
Master Hales, ye shall understand that like as the quenes highnes hath
hertofore receuid good opinion of you , especiallie, for that ye stoode both
faithfullie and lawfulli in hir cause of iust succession, refusing to set your
hande to the booke amonge others that were against hir grace in that
behalfe :: so nowe through your owne late desertes, against certain hir highnes dooinges : ye stande not well in hir graces fauour. And therfor,
The mention of an Ecclesiastical History, under the feigned name of DODD, in
three folio volumes, must not be omitted-although it is a book of rare occurrence, and
interesting chiefly to the curious in biography. It was published as an antidoteto
Burnet, and is avowedly written as a defence of the Roman Catholics. The author was a
116 DIVINITY.
theology, or to such as have made great progress in
their biblical studies and collections. I address myJortin's " Remarks on Ecclesiastical History" were first published in
1767 , in four octavo volumes. They are excellent : pithy, learned,
candid, and acute ; presenting us with the marrow of his predecessors.
They have been recently republished, in three volumes.
before ye take anie othe, it shal be necessarie for you to make your purgation. "
HALES.
" I praie you my Lorde, what is the cause ?"
CHAUNCELOR.
"Informatiō is geuen, that ye haue indicted certain pristes in Kent, for
saiing of Masse."
HALES.
"Mi Lorde, it is not so. I indicted none, but indede certaine indictamentes of like matter were brought before me at the laste assises there
holdē, and I gaue order therein as the lawe required. For I haue professed
thelaw, against which, in cases of iustice wil I neuer (God willinge) , procede,
nor in ani wise dissemble ; but with the same shewe forth mi conscience,
and if it were to do againe, I wolde doe no lesse then I did."
66
CHAUNCELOR.
'Yea, Master Hales, your cōsience is knowne wel inough. I know ye
lacke no conscience. "
HALES.
" Mi Lord, ye mai do wel to serch your owne conscience, for mine is
better knowne to mie selfe then to you ; and to be plaine, I did as well use
iustice in your saide Masse case, bi mi cōscience, as bi the law ; wherin I am
fulli bent to stand in trial to the uttermost that can be objected. And if I
have therin done ani iniuri or wrōg : let me be iudged bi the lawe ; for I
will seeke no better defence, considering chiefli that it is mi profession."
66
CHAUNCELOR.
Whi, Master Hales, althoughe ye had the rigour of the law on your
side, yet ye might haue hadde regard to the quenes highnes preset doinges
caustic and not unqualified writer. His love of ridicule is very apparent ; and his reflections upon some of our early Reformers are sometimes both unfounded and severe.
I learn from Mr. Charles Butler's History of the Catholics, that a new edition of this highly priced work is in the press. It will not want purchasers, even amongthe Protestants. " Fas est et AB HOSTE doceri. " Meanwhile, let the anxious collector
peruse what Mr. D'Israeli hath written relating to this work in his Quarrels of Authors,
vol. ii. p. 205, note.
ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 117
self in this, as in every ensuing department, to " the
Young" -who cannot presume to be very competent
Of Strype, it would be impossible to speak too highly. His labours
have supplied us with some of the most necessary, as well as instructive, portions of Church History. But I am here to consider chiefly
his Memorials and Annals. The former were published in 1721 , three
in that case. And further, although ye seme to be more then precise in the
lawe, yet I thinke ye wolde be veri loth to yelde to the extremitie of such
aduantage as mighte be gathered againste your procedinges in the lawe, as
ye haue some time taken uppon you in place of iustice. And if it were wele
tried I beleue ye shuld not be wele able to stand honestli therto. "
HALES.
" Mi Lord, i am not so perfect but i mai erre for lacke of knowledge.
But both in conscience and such knowledge of the law as God hath geue
me, i wil do nothing but i wil maintain and abide in it. And if mi goodes
and all that I haue be not able to counterpaise the case, mi bodie shal be
redi to serue the turne, for thei be all at the quenes highnesse pleasure."
CHAUNCELOR.
" Ah Sir, ye be veri quicke and stoute in your answers. But as it shoulde
seme, that which ye did was more of a wile, fauouring the opinion of your
Religion against the seruice nowe used, then for ani occasiō or zeale of
iustice, seeinge the quenes highnes dooth set it furthe, as yet wishinge all
hir faithful subjectes to imbrace it accordingli : and where ye offer both
bodie and goodes in your triall, there is no such matter required at youre
handes, and ye shall not haue your owne will neither ."
HALES.
" My Lord, I seke not wilful wil, but to shew myself as i am bound in
loue to God, and obedience to the quenes maiestie, in whose cause willigly
for iustice sake (al other respectes set apart) i did of late (as your Lordship
knoeth) aduenture as much as i had. And as for my religion , i trust it to
be suche as pleaseth God, wherin i am redy to aduenture as well my life as
my substance, if i be called thereunto. And so in lacke of mine owne
power and wil, the Lordes wil be fulfilled."
CHAUNCELOR.
" Seeing ye be at this point, Master Hales, i wil presently make an end
with you. The quenes highnes shall be enfourmed of youre opinion and declaration. And as hir Grace shal therupon determine, ye shall haue
knoledge, until whiche tyine ye may depart, as ye came without your oth,
for as it appeareth, ye are scarse worthi the place appointed. "
118 DIVINITY.
judges ; and to " the Old " -who have not made
Divinity the exclusive object of their research. And
volumes, folio ; the latter in 1709-25, 4 vols. , folio . These editions sell
at highprices ; and once, upon large paper, the former was considered to
be worth about 25 guineas, and the latter about 40 guineas. Mr. Grenville has a fine copy of the latter. The Memorials have been reprinted,
as well as Strype's Lives of Archbishops Cranmer, Whitfgift, Grindal,
&c. at Oxford ; and we cannot make too low a bow of thanks to that
University for the absolute good it hath done by exercising the Clarendon Press on such subjects . We are looking for the Annals, and
the other episcopal biographies, by the same excellent Antiquary, from
the same quarter. And yet, let not the possessors of the good old
folios of Strype's Works, throw up their ponderous volumes in despair. It was indeed with singular satisfaction that I heard the triumphant shout of the present Dean of Winchester -- (Dr. Rennell)
when sitting with him beneath the mulberry tree in the vicarage
garden of his son, at Kensington, -that he would stick to his
folios which he had complete ; and for which he had paid only fourteen guineas. No octavo (in his opinion) should drive a folio out of
its entrenchments. " There was, however, a mixture of orthodoxy and
heresy in this speech, such as the Dean is not wont to indulge in.
He was right and he was wrong.
Mosheim's Ecclesiastical History was translated by Dr. Maclaine
from the Latin original- ( of which the first edition appeared in
1755-) and published in 1782, in six vols. 8vo. and recently, with
valuable additions, by Doctors Coote and Gleig, in 1811 , in the
same number of volumes. This latter is very much the better edition
HALES .
" I thancke your Lordship, and as for my vocation being both a burthen
and a charge, more than euer i desired to take upon me, when so euer it
shall please the quenes highnes to ease me therof, i shall moost humbli
with due contentation obei the same." And so departed from the barre.
This curious Tract was pointed out to me by Mr. Evans, among the
books of the library of my late friend Mr. Neunburg, at the sale of which
it produced the sum of 47. 68.- along with two other, but unimportant
tracts. I apprehend it has escaped Burnet and Strype ; and it appears to
have been unknown to Herbert; who, vol. iii . p. 1573, mentions only the
first treatise (" de vera obedientia ") with which it is bound.
ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. 119
yet, I should have a heavy score to clear with my
conscience, if I suffered even this " Guide " and
"Comfort," in theology, to go into the world without
Of this truly excellent work, the least we can say of it is, that it is
every where purchased and every where read : abroad, in the Latin ;
at home, in our own language. It should be in every library which
has any pretensions to a choice selection of books : and may be purchased in neat binding for about twelve shillings a volume. The
author was one of the brightest ornaments of his age and country.
He was a Lutheran, and a native of Lubeck. His Latin version of
Cudworth's Intellectual System is a master piece of erudition in every
respect. Few original Authors have been so fortunate as Cudworth
in their translators.
OfDr. Wordsworth's Ecclesiastical Biography, it should be observed
that it is not meant to be an elaborate, original work ; but only to
supply a deficiency then, and even now, much felt and complained
of in ecclesiastical literature. * The lives of Wolsey and More are
among the most valuable in this performance ; but whatever may be
mypersonal respect for the author (and that is not trivial) I cannot,
in the conscientious discharge of a present duty, dissemble the disappointment with which I perused these anxiously expected volumes.
The Rector of Lambeth, with an unlimited command over the treasures of the archiepiscopal library, taught me to anticipate much that
was new, more that was generally interesting, and a good deal that
betrayed an intimate acquaintance with the black- letter lore of the
period of Henry and Elizabeth.t I may be singular in the avowal
of my disappointment in these particulars ; but not in the wish that
the learned author would speedily give us a new and a third edition,
equally worthy of the subject, and of his own recently exalted situation. The MSS. of Trinity College, Cambridge, of which he is
the present MASTER, must surely be rich in personal ecclesiastical
anecdote ?
"It was no part of my original plan to go in quest of any thing new, but merely
to revive the old : " says the author, in his Preface ; p. xv.
+ Dr. Wordsworth's obligations to Fox's Acts and Monuments are unreservedly and
handsomely expressed : p. xvii-xviii . : and his Defence of that work, against Dr. John Milner's very sweeping and damnatory opinion, is as spirited as it is just. See page xxi.
120 DIVINITY.
the strongest recommendations ofthe Concilia Magna
Britanniæ et Hiberniæ, of which Spelman laid the
foundation, and Wilkins completed the superstructure. 'Tis an excellent and invaluable work ; * but
not, it must be confessed, the study of an every-day
reader.
MANUALS OF DEVOTION.
A word, and scarcely more than a word, about that
species of theological literature which relates to
MANUALS ofDEVOTION-to those unaffected and comforting effusions, written in all the glow of piety, and
with all the warmth of benevolence, which are meant
to be the companions of our pillow in illness, and of
our more private retreats in health : which teach us the
value of occasional abstraction from an ever- agitated
world, and which lead us to more frequent communion with our own hearts, and with HIM who hath
endowed them with motion.
In the following list , I do not wish to be considered
as submitting the works contained in it, to the exclusion
of every other. Far from it . It is frequently with
books as with individuals : we admit some to an
99
* "We have here most decidedly an excellent and splendid work,
exhibiting singular application in the author, in a diligent and careful
investigation of the councils of his country. The first two volumes
are the work of Spelman, but with many and various faults, corrected
&c. &c. WALCHIUS : Bibl. Theolog. vol. iii . p. 835. This work
was published in 1737, in 4 vols. folio ; and a good sound copy is
worth 41. 14s. 6d. I am aware that the Collectio Maxima Conciliorum
of Labbe, 1672, folio, 15 vols. must find a place only in very extensive collections and chiefly in public libraries. A copy is in the
library of the Royal Institution.
MANUALS OF DEVOTION. 121
intimacy, not so much for any peculiar display of
superior ability, as from a favourite feeling or fondness, from causes which it were difficult to explain.
As is the fashion of a countenance, or the character of the conversation, or the peculiar principles,
of one friend- compared with another-so are the
style, the sentiment, the truths, of one religious
Manual compared with another. There be those who
love highly-wrought compositions, consisting of rich
and luxuriant imagery, expressed in impassioned and
even tumultuous language : --there be others, on the
contrary, who love a calm and an even style ; -exhibiting ideas gently conceived, as it were, and gently expressed ; and betraying all the accuracy of logic with
all the emotion of piety. With
Desires composed, affections ever even,
the latter content themselves with those MANUALS of
devotion, which convince their judgments as scholars,
and comfort their hearts as Christians and such
latter, in my humble estimation, are the wiser and the
happier of the two classes of pious readers.
But for the list . More than three centuries have
elapsed, since the Imitation of Christ by THOMAS A
KEMPIS has been considered as the most popular
Manual of Devotion. Fontenelle and Leibnitz, indeed, have extolled it as the most edifying piece of
morality since the publication of the Gospels. On
the continent, not only has the original Latin text
been translated into a diversity of tongues, but a
sharp controversy has been instituted respecting the
true author of the work-whether it were Thomas a
Kempis or John Gerson.* The point is here of no
* The more recent, and the better founded opinion seems to be,
122 DIVINITY.
consequence ; only let the rare and beautiful Elzevir
edition ofthe work in question find a place in the cabinet ofboth " the Young" and " the Old. " * Among our
that GERSON was absolutely the author. The reader may notice the
titles of eighteen works relating to this controversy, in the catalogue
of Ogle and Co.: ' and ` if he possess the Dissertation sur soixante traductions Françoises, of the work itself, of which M. Barbier is the
author, ( Paris, 1812, 8vo. ) he will have some notion of its popularity
in France . As far as I have been able to ascertain , thefirst edition
of it, in the original Latin tongue, was printed between the year
1472 and 1478, as described in the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol . iii , p . 405 .
In England we had a printed translation as early as the year 1504,
by W. de Worde : see the Typog. Antiquities, vol. ii . p . 112, &c.
where some interesting authorities are referred to. I conceive that
the edition of 1502 is doubtful ; and do not indeed remember to
have seen that of 1504. In our earlier translations, Gerson is called
the original author. The present received English translation, is
that of Dean Stanhope.
*It is necessary to observe, that " the rare and beautiful edition ,"
above mentioned, is without date ; containing two hundred and fiftyseven pages. The two other Elzevir editions, the one of 1658, and
the other of 1679, contains, each, two hundred and sixty- one pages.
As to the dateless edition, it was probably executed between the year
1652 and 1655 ; for it was printed by John and Daniel Elzevir-who
commenced partnership in 1652, and who dissolved it in 1655.
This edition is thought to be among the rarest volumes in the Elzevir set-and is probably the chef-d'œuvre of the printers . In France,
where, at this moment, the ELZEVIR MANIA is running very high,
they have pushed the price of this book to an excessive pitch.
Mr. Payne marks a fine copy, " in blue morocco, with joints,
(what would " the young man " desire better ?) at 17. 5s. Messrs.
Ogle and Co., more courageously, put on another five shillings,
although their copy, apparently, be not attired in so costly a garb :
but, in France, a fine copy, about five inches high, was sold at a
public sale for one hundred and fifty francs : -about fourteen years
ago ; consult the Essai Bibliographique sur les Editions des Elzévirs,
1822, 8vo. p. 93-4.
In one of the obscurest booksellers shops at Caen, I was asked two
Napoleons for avery second-rate copy. Mr. Berard, at Paris, who is a
MANUALS OF DEVOTION. 123
own authors, we shall not discover many earlier, or
many more ardent, strains of private devotion, than
those which are to be found in a collection of prayers,
better known by the name of the " Monument of
Matrons, containing seven several Lamps ofDivinity, *
Member of the Club of the Bibliophiles, and who justly boasts of his
probably unrivalled Collection of Elzevirs, seemed to sigh as he
shewed me his Thomas à Kempis, a full eighth of an inch shorter than
it ought to be ! And my friend, Mr. John Lloyd, of our Roxburghe
Club, has yet to traverse many a capital in Europe ( for dare we hope
to meet with such a thing in the three other quarters of the globe ?)
ere he becomes the fortunate owner of an UNCUT copy-that object, at
once, of his affection and ambition ! I am not sure whether the
Elzevir edition of the French translation of one book only, of the original, in 1653, be not full as rare as the preceding Latin edition.
* Thebibliographical account of this volume has been so fully executed by Herbert ( Typ. Antiq. vol. ii . p 954-6) , that I must refer the
readerto it, in order that he may satisfy himself about the possession
of a perfect copy. Here, I shall bring forward a brief specimen or
two of its CONTENTS. The first three Lamps contain, more especially,
the effusions of our Queens and of other learned ladies of rank and
distinction . The fourth Lamp contains " the most pure sacrifice of
evangelical devotion , or an exercise of holie prayers, " &c .: being a
collection from approved authors, by Bentley, the editor or compiler.
The fifth Lamp relates to " all degrees of women in their several
ages and callings, " &c.: the sixth, of the duties and offices of
these women ; and the seventh, " of the acts and histories, ` lives
and deaths, of all manner of women," &c. In the FIRST Lamp, is
" the prayer which Judith made secretly, or mentally in her heart,
when she struck offthe head of the proud Holifernes. "
" O Lord God of all power, behold at this present, and have
respect unto the works of my hands in this hour, for the exaltation of
Jerusalem, that thou mayest set up thy city like as thou hast promised. Strengthen me, O Lord God of Israel, and grant that I may
perform the thing, which, in hope that it may be done by thee, I
have devised. For now is the time to help thine inheritance, and to
execute mine enterprises to the destruction of the enemies which are
risen against us. Strengthen me therefore this day, O Lord God of
124 DIVINITY.
which were published in a thick and handsome quarto
volume, in the year 1582, when our VIRGIN QUEEN
Israel, now strengthen me [ I say] O Lord God, [even] in this
hour." The song of praise and ' thanksgiving ,' follows. I select
a portion, beginning at the seventh verse. " For the mighty [Holophornes] did not fall, nor was destroyed, by the young men. It
was not the sons of Titan that slewhim, neither have the great giants
invaded him, or set themselves against him: but JUDITH, the daughter
of Mesari, with her fair beauty and comely countenance hath discomfited and brought him to nought. For she put off and laid away
the garment of her widowhood and put on the apparel of gladness,
for the exaltation and rejoicing of those that were oppressed in
Israel. She anointed her face with ointment, and bound up her hair
in a coif, and took a new stole or linnen garment to beguile him.
Her slippers ravished his eyes, her beauty captivated and took his
mind prisoner, with the sword or faulchion smote she off his head .
The Persians were astonished at her boldness, and the Medes were
troubled with her hardiness . " Page 44-5 .
....
This is followed by a prayer of Queen Esther, " to be delivered
out of the bloody hands of Haman. " It is full of the most unfeigned prostration and humility : and perhaps its simplicity is not
exceeded byany similar effusions . . " Thou knowest all things,
O Lord ; thou wottest that I hate the glory and worship of the unrighteous, and that I abhor the bed of the uncircumcised, and of all
the heathen. Thou knowest my necessity, and that I hate this token
of my pre-eminence, worship, and dignity, which I bear upon mine
head, what time as I must shew myself and be seen ; and that I
abhor it as an unclean or menstruous cloth, and that I wear it not
when I am quiet and alone by myself. Thou knowest also, that I,
thine handmaid, have not eaten at Haman's table, and that I have
had no pleasure nor delight in the king's feast, nor drunk the wine
of the drink offerings. " Page 47. The preceding are from the
FIRST LAMP.
The SECOND LAMP contains, among other things, the " Godly
Meditation of the inward love of the soul towards Christ our Lord ;
composed first in French by the virtuous Lady Margaret, Queen of
Navarre : aptly, exactly, and fruitfully translated by our most gracious Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, in the tender and maidenly
years of her youth and virginity, to the great benefit of God's church,
MANUALS OF DEVOTION. 125
was in the very zenith of her glory. Perhaps no
country could boast of a more extraordinary publication at the time of its appearance . It is not only, in
part, a collection of the compositions of several royal,
noble, and canonised, authors, but it contains many
and comfort of the Godly. " The beginning is rather strong, and a
little terrific but the recollections of the Heptameront might have
rendered the author's secret moments uneasy. " Where is the Hell,
full of travail, pain, mischief, and torment ? Where is the pit of
cursedness, out of which doth spring all desperation ? Is there any
hell so profound, that is sufficient to punish the tenth part of my
sins, which in number are so many, that the infinite swarm of them
so shadoweth my darkened senses, that I cannot account them,
neither yet well see them ? " In this Lamp also appear the devotional
effusions of Lady Mary Dudley, Lady Frances Abergavenny, and Queen
Catherine of the latter of which, however, I find an edition printed
in the year 1545, by Berthelet and Wayland : Typog. Antiq. vol. iii .
p. 329. Amongthe effusions of Lady Abergavenny, is " A necessary
prayer in metre against vice ; " —beginning thus :
:
O Lord my God, make thou my heart repentant for to be,
The spirit of contrition, do thou ingraffe in me,
Unto mine eies let there be given aboundant teares of weeping,
And let mine hands be occupied with often almes giving.
&c. &c.
At page 207, we observe a specimen of the common conceit of the
age : eight short prayers are printed, headed by one of the eight let-
+ Marguerite, Queen of Navarre, and sister of Francis I. , was probably the most
winning, brilliant, and celebrated woman of her day. I forgive her relapse into Catholicism, from a consideration of the good she did when a favourer of the Protestants : but the commonest impulses of Christian benevolence induce us to doubt whether she could have really written the obscenities and ribaldry which are to be found
in the Heptameron. The authors of the Nouveau Dict. Historique well say of this, and
of similar performances, such as the Cent Nouvelles Nouvelles and Contes de Bocace,
when they observe thus : -"' Des avantures galantes, des séductions de filles encore
novices, des stratagêmes plaisans, employés pour tromper les tuteurs et les jaloux : voilà
les pivots sur lesquels roulent tous ces contes d'autant plus dangereux pour la jeunesse,
que les images obscènes y sont cachées sous un air de simplicité et de naïveté frequentes. " And because the Heptameron was not sufficiently piquant, one Jean de la
Haye, the valet de chambre of Marguerite, followed it up with another highly- seasoned
dish, called Les Marguerites de la Marguerite des Princesses ; of which, however, the
absurdity prevails over the immorality.
126
DIVINITY
.
prosaical and poetical effusions, and forms of prayer,
upon the duties and occupations of man, in all situaters, in consecutive order, of her ladyship's name : MARY FANE.
It concludes with the following charade.
F From sinfulnesse preserue me Lord,
R Renew thy spirit in my hart,
A And let my tonge therewith accord,
V Vttering all goodnesse for his part.
N No thought let there arise in me,
C Contrary to thy statutes ten,
E Ever let me most mindful be,
S Still for to praise thy name : Amen.
A As of my soule, so of my bodie,
B Be thou my guider, O my God
V Vnto thee onlie I do crie,
R Remove from me thy furious rod,
G Graunt that my head may still devise,
A All things that pleasing be to thee,
V Vnto mine eares, and to mine eies,
E Ever let there a watch set bee,
N None ill that they may heare and see,
N No wicked deede let my hauds do,
Y Yn the good paths let my feete go.
This is sufficiently dull and feeble. A little onward, another set
of prayers, fifteen in number, occurs under the initials ELIZABETH
REGINA. But at page 307, we have a very bold figure in the assumption of an address of the Deity to the same Queen, beginning
thus, " Elizabeth, thou virgin mine, the king's daughter, and fairest
among women : most full of beauty and majesty : attend a little to
my heast, and mark what I shall say. Thou art my daughter indeed,
this day have I begotten thee, and espoused thee to thy King Christ,
my son, crowned thee with my gifts, and appointed thee queen to
reign upon my holy Mount Zion. " Among Bentley's collections which
begin with the fourth Lamp, there is a prayer to Christ crucified,
which glows with the occasional warmth of catholic devotion : as thus
-"Thou, O our Saviour, hast bowed down thy head at thy death, to
receive the kisses of thy beloved, and so often do we kiss thee, O
Lord, as we be thoroughly touched with the love of thee, who for
love to mankind, being God, camest to man, camest into man, and
becamest man, " &c. But there must be a limit to these extracts ;
MANUALS OF DEVOTION. 127
tions of life, and at every period of the day : from the
moment of his " beholding himself naked " on quitting
his bed, (fol. 370, ) to that of his " hearing the clock
strike," (fol. 365, ) after he has got comfortably into
bed for the night. Among the royal contributors to
this cornucopia of family devotion, are our Queens
Catherine, Mary, and Elizabeth ; while, among
those of noble designation, we read the names of
the Lady Jane Dudley, and Lady Frances Abergavenny. Foreign saints and heroines are enlisted
into the service : and amongst them we notice Deborah the Prophetess, Dorcas Marten, Eulalià, Ann
Askew, Queen Hester, Rosweyd, and SAPPHO THE
POET! The book is beautifully printed ; and now
scarce. It is yet interesting ; and was once, doubtless, an indispensable volume in the library of every
accomplished gentlewoman.
Descending to a much later period, and exhibiting
specimens of a much better regulated piety, the
Young Collector will not scruple to secure the
Holy Living and Dying of Jeremy Taylor, Private Thoughts of Bishop Beveridge, Reflections on
the Holy Spirit, by Allix, Scott's Christian Life,
Nelson's Fasts and Festivals, the Whole Duty ofMan,
the Ladies' Calling, and the Companions to the Prayer
Book(including those to the Altar) by Comber, Wheatand, I conclude this account of the SEVEN LAMPS of VIRGINITY, by
requesting the curious, in such lore, to let no opportunity slip of
securing a fine, and above all, a perfect copy of it. This book is
sometimes found with only five lamps ; but the additional two lamps
will bring an additional five guineas to the value of the work. A
very fine copy of it, collated and perfect, was sold at the sale of
Brand's library (Part I. no. 1326) , for 8l . 188. 6d. , such copy is now worth double the sum. The paper, printing, and decorative title
pages are worthy of the intrinsic curiosity of the volume.
128 DIVINITY.
ley, and Sparrow. Nor will the perusal of Bishop Kenn's
Practice of Divine Love be unattended with good
fruit. Of course, I do not consider the whole of this
small, but powerful phalanx, necessary for every
studious man or diligent Collector ; but some two or
three of the treatises, just mentioned, would occupy
little space upon the table, and furnish the understanding with much that is valuable and useful. * They
would, peradventure, occasionally operate as wholesome drastics, to keep in compact and efficient order
the otherwise loose thoughts and unsettled principles
of frail human beings.
Such is the outline of a THEOLOGICAL LIBRARY
which I have submitted to the well disposed and wellinformed student and collector. I am aware that
much may be added to, and a little detracted from,
the foregoing details : but it will be conceded, I trust,
upon the whole, that here is a BODY ofDIVINITY, which
may serve to guide " the Young " into the paths of
piety and virtue. and to secure to the Aged, " peace at
the last. "
Let the diligent, but patient, Collector, endeavour to get possession of copies in their original bindings-usually of morocco. I know
more than one bibliomaniacal friend who will not admit copies of
any other description-even if it be in the very best coating of
Charles Lewis. Now this is bordering upon heresy, if it be not
heresy itself. While I am upon the topic of old bindings of Manuals
of devotion, I cannot forego the pleasure of noticing an extraordinary
copy, which Lord Spencer possesses-of a French volume, of Catholic Devotion-evidently, from the style of the prefixed MS. memoranda, the original property of a French Princess. It is cased in fishskin, studded with various- coloured pebbles, and worked all over,
within, in very minute, and Persian- fashioned, gilt ornaments . But
the cabinets of the curious, doubtless, abound with many similar
specimens.
129
HISTORY.
He may be pronounced to be a bold man who shall
venture upon giving a Catalogue ofHistorical Works,
fit for every Library, within the limits of a publication
like the present -when Struvius, Buder, and Meuselius have occupied eleven goodly octavo volumes in a
similar composition ; * and when Le Long and Fontette have filled five folio volumes with a list of Histories exclusively belonging to FRANCE . † What,
therefore, is to be done ? Is the " Young Man " to
despair of slaking his thirst for historical information,
merely because, if he live till the age of Methusalem,
he will not have read one half of the works which are
enumerated in the publications of the forementioned
Bibliographers ? And if the Catalogue be followed up,
by works which have been published since the labours
of Meuselius-how interminable the toil, and how repulsive the attempt ? !
Between the years 1782 and 1785. A copy of this excellent
work, which may be said to have well nigh superseded all preceding
similar works, may be had for about 31. 13s. 6d. in boards. A beautiful copy of it, bound in white calf, was sold for 3l. 10s. only—at a
public sale at Mr. Evans's, in 1817-which, having been obtained in
time of war, had cost the owner 117. 11s . in boards. There have
been more disheartening depreciations in property, even than this !
+ This publication appeared in 1719, in one folio volume ; but the
labours of Fontette, Herissant, Rondet, and others, have augmented
it to four additional ones, 1768, folio : so that the first edition is superseded. Brunet well observes that " this is one of the most essential
performances in bibliography, and should be found in all large libraries." But I beseech the prudent Collector not to buy it on large
paper. Works of this description should never be bought in such a
form. A copy on small paper is worth from 4l. 148. 6d. to 6l. 6s.
K
130 HISTORY,
Let him not however despair. HISTORY, which
may be considered as the mother both of fiction and
of truth, is mastered with less difficulty than may be
at first imagined. Among the most delightful of her
associates, may be designated Biography, Voyages,
and Travels. Of these in their proper order. I shall
not lose a minute, or waste a line, in the recommendation of various Introductory Treatises " on the Study
and Use ofHistory. " The feeling of the reader must
be natural: his appetite strong : his digestion good :
and the nourishment cannot fail to be salutary. The
reading of " Introductions " is like the having recourse
to stimulants to provoke an appetite-and food, thus
procured, is rarely digestive or nutritious. We do not
want such works as those of Du Fresnoy, Du Pin, or
even Lord Bolingbroke, * to tell us that Herodotus and
Thucydides are the great luminaries among the Grecian-Sallust, Tacitus, and Livy, among the Roman—
* DU FRESNOY : Methode pour Etudier l'Histoire, par Drouet. Paris,
1772, 12mo. 15 vols. See the Bibliomania, p . 70. This is the best
edition of Du Fresnoy - which is rather a work of historical bibliography, than an Introduction to the Study of History. It was
translated and abridged in a useful manner by Rawlinson, 1738, 8vo.
2 vols. DU PIN's Universal Library of Historians, 1709, 8vo. two
vols.: is dull and superficial . BOLINGBROKE'S Letters on the Study
ofHistory, in one 8vo. volume, have been frequently reprinted . The
work is chiefly remarkable for a certain lofty elegance of style, in
which that writer excelled . To these works may be added those of
MABLY, LARCHER, and FERRAND, to be found in most catalogues of
French booksellers. But I am most unwilling to dismiss this branch
of our enquiries, without the notice and recommendation of a spirited and luminous Essay on the Study of Modern History, 1821 , 8vo.
by Mr. J. S. Boone, student of Christ Church, Oxford : a gentleman, full of academic honours, and likely to be equally an ornament
to his University and the country. I hope he will adhere almost exclusively to HISTORY.
OF GREECE. 131
and Rapin, Hume, Robertson, and Gibbon, among the
English-historians. We have known this from the
lips of our parents and instructors ; and therefore it is
that we fasten with such avidity upon choice copies of
the works of these great writers that we seek them
in chaste morocco or full-gilded calf: in their first and
unsophisticated bindings when ink was black and
paper white. *
-
Small therefore is the space here allotted to works
uponthe Study and Use of History. Let the " Young
Man " prepare himself with certain BODIES of Ancient
and Modern History †-in the English, French, or
Latin languages-and go at once to the best editions
of the choicer writers in each. To begin with the
HISTORY OF GREECE,
or with those authors whose works are supposed to
take the lead in Grecian History. Where the Bipont
* when ink was black and paper white. ] —The notes in the Bibliographical Decameron, vol. i . p. 5-7 ; vol. ii . 338-340, will justify me
in this language-however quaint or paradoxical.
+ Universal History Ancient and Modern- with maps and additions,
1736, folio, twenty-six volumes. This useful work, incorporating a
great portion of Sacred History, was reprinted in 8vo. in sixty- seven
volumes : and again in sixty vols . , with omissions and additions . The
first 8vo. edit is called the best, but each of them is worth 26l. 5s. Of
the folio edition, there is, at this moment, a copy just bound out of
sheets, by C. Lewis, in white calf, with marble edges, and full
charged gilt backs-lying at Mr. Triphook's, for the not unconscionable sum of 521. 10s. To this work, add Calmet's , Histoire Universelle, Strasb. 1735 , 4to. 17 vols. Calmet was a very extraordinary
man; and his labours are equally an honour to the age and to the
French nation . His Dictionnaire de la Bible, in four folio volumes,
with cuts, of which the edition of 1730 is the best, might have
132 HISTORY,
Editions can be procured, let them be so. Of HERODOTUS, the Collector may content himself with
the edition of Wesseling, Gr. and Lat. 1763, folio,
which is worth about £7. 7s.; or with those of
Reitzius and Schweighauser, in octavo ; the former in two volumes, recently reprinted at Oxford,
and worth about £1 . 10s.: the latter, at Strasbourg,
in 1816, Greek and Latin, six volumes -valued at
about £6. 6s. * and reprinted in the following year by
Mr. Priestley, at London, in four volumes, 8vo. at about
one half the price. He who has got this Father of
historians, illustrated by the labours of Wesseling and
Schweighæuser, need not distress himselfabout possessing the preceding editions of Gale and Gronovius : †
but I should be wanting in all correct bibliographical
feeling, if I omitted strongly to recommend the beaufound a place in the previous chapter. MILLOT's Elémens d'Histoire
générale, Ancienne et Moderne, Paris, 1779, 12mo. nine vols .: and
ANQUETIL'S Précis de l'Hist. Univ. Anc. et Mod. 1807, 12mo. twelve
volumes, may be also advantageously consulted.
* There are copies of this edition upon LARGE PAPER ; of which
one, bound in olive- colour morocco, gilt leaves, is marked at 127. 12s.
in Mr. Payne's Cat. of 1822 , no. 3668. This learned and splendid
performance reflects infinite credit upon the Editor and Printer. Mr.
Schweighæuser is now busied in the compilation of a Lexicon Herodoteum. His ardour abates not with his age. He is the classical
Swan who sings to the last.
† Agood copy of the folio edition of Gale or Gronovius may be
worth about 17. 10s. Of the TRANSLATIONS of Herodotus, that of
Larcher ( 1802, 9 vols. 8vo. edit. opt. 3l. 13s. 6d. bds. ) is by much
the best. In our own language, Mr: Beloe's is the most popular : but
an improved version is an acknowledged desideratum . We have
many admirable living scholars and geographers for such a task. The
labours of Major Rennell are alone a tower of strength . His Geography ofHerodotus, 1800, 4to . , evinces the extent of his knowledge
and the soundness of his judgment.
OF GREECE. 133
tiful and correct edition published by the Foulises at
Glasgow, in 1761 , in 9 duodecimo vols , Gr. and Lat.
-ofwhich copies, in nearly coeval morocco binding,
rejoice the heart of the young and tasteful Collector.
From Herodotus, let us descend to Thucydides,
Pausanias, Xenophon, and Diodorus Siculus. Of
THUCYDIDES, the Bipont Edition, 1788, 8vo. six vols .
-comprehending the labours of Wasse and Duker
(from the folio of 1731 ) is assuredly the best ; although
each edition be pretty much about the same price ;
namely £6. 6s. If this sum be considered too high,
let the Young Collector be well content with the
labours of Hudson, in his splendid folio volume of
1696, Gr. and Lat. which may be obtained at one
third of such price. From the increasing scarcity and
high price of the Bipont edition , I could wish to see it
reprinted at the Clarendon Press ; where it will lose
nothing of its elegance or correctness : although the
recent edition of Bekker, published at the same place,
almost renders this wish void. But let me not be forgetful of the edition printed at Glasgow, by Foulis, in
1759, eight vols . 12mo.- " companion meet " for the
Herodotus, just described, and printed at the same
place. Yet more estimable for its emendations-and
not much inferior on the score of typographical beauty
-isthe Edinburgh edition of 1803, 12mo. Gr. and Lat.
six vols-recently reprinted, 1812-of which the Rev.
P. Elmsley is the reputed Editor.†
*
Bekker's edition is in four vols .: 1821 , 8vo. The last volume
contains the Latin version of Wasse. It is in some few respects an
editio princeps. For an account of this edition, and of the excessive
rarity of copies upon large paper, consult the Edes Althorpiana,
vol. i . p. 135.
+ Of the English TRANSLATIONS of Thucydides, those by Hobbes
134 HISTORY,
The Gr. and Lat. edition of PAUSANIAS, by Kuhnius,
1696, folio *—or the octavo edition, Gr. and Lat. by
Facius, 1794, 4 vols. may well satisfy any Collector ;
although, for critical utility, as well as for commodiousness of form, I should recommend the latter.
XENOPHON Comes upon us in so many tempting
forms in such variety of shapes and fraught
with so much wisdom, in every department of which
he treats-that I am puzzled in the selection of what
inay more fully satisfy the anxious or the ambitious
Collector. If the entire works only be sought for, I
should recommend the edition of Wells or Weiske :
Schneider and Zeunius : the first, in 1703, Gr. and Lat.
seven parts, in five vols. 8vo. † the second, in the same
number and form of volumes, in 1798-1802 ; and the
third, preferable to either of the two preceding, in
1812, Gr. and Lat. at Oxford, in six volumes, 8vo.
Perhaps, upon the whole, Schneider is the ablest of
the editors upon Xenophon. Yet I must not omit
informing my reader that a good edition of the entire
works of Xenophon, comprehending the labours of
Wells and Ernesti, was published in four octavo volumes at Leipsic, in 1801. Either of these latter ediand Smith, frequently reprinted, are the best. They are obtainable at
moderate prices.
* Lord Spencer is supposed to possess the only copy of this edition
upon LARGE PAPER see the Æd. Althorp. vol. i . p. 133 .
+ Perfect copies of this edition, upon LARGE PAPER, are of the
rarest possible occurrence. The possession ofthefirst volume, in this
condition, is almost the ne plus ultra of bibliographical felicity !
There are copies of this edition upon LRRGE PAPER-of elegant
execution for about 61. 6s. in boards. This Oxford edition was preceded by a very neat one, containing the emendations of the same
editors, at Edinburgh, in 1811 , in ten volumes, 12mo.: of which
there are also copies upon large paper.
OF GREECE. 135
tions maybe had in boards at from twoto three guineas.
Again, I am unwilling to omit a brief notice of the
beautiful little edition of Xenophon's works put forth
by the Foulises at Glasgow, in 1762-1767, Gr. and
Lat. 12 vols : -" companion meet " of the Thucydides
described in the preceding page.
*
As tothe works of this instructive writer, separately
published, he who shall possess the editions of Hutchinson, or Schneider, or Schæfer, (to say nothing of
those by Simpson and Benwell) , will do well to rest
contented with such specimens of editorial sagacity.
Nor let the Lexicon Xenophonteum of Thieme and
Sturzius, 1804, 3 vols. 8vo. be wanting to render the
Xenophonian department complete.
Of DIODORUS SICULUS, I shall unhesitatingly and
exclusively recommend the Bipont edition of 1793-
1807-Gr. and Lat. in eleven 8vo. volumes -containing the annotations of Heyne and others. A good
copy of it may be worth £5. 15s. 6d.
Of modern publications, relating to the HISTORY OF
ANCIENT GREECE - secure the highly interesting and
not less original work entitled Voyage du Jeune Anacharsis en Grèce, par I. I. Barthélémy, An. VII.
(1799) seven vols. 8vo. in eight : with a quarto Atlas :
* The " Young Man " will necessarily be anxious to possess fine
copies of the Cyropædia and Anabasis of Xenophon, by our Hutchinson : the former published in 1727, the latter in 1735, 4to. They
are by no means rare ; but, upon the LARGEST PAPER, of a scarcity
almost amounting to desperation. The principal translations of Xenophon, in our own language, are by Smith and Spelman . Ofthe
latter, indeed, Gibbon has said that it is " one of the most accurate
and elegant prose translations that any language has produced. "
Let the reader examine a copious list of English Translations of the
Greek and Latin Classics, in the Cat. of Messrs. Arch, 1821 , p . 116.
136 HISTORY,
the best edition : but frequently reprinted. Didot published a magnificent 4to. edition of it, in seven volumes
in the same year, with an Atlas, in folio. To these, add
the later editions of Histories of Greece by our Gillies
and Mitford. But never let Potter's Antiquities of the
same country be wanting in your historical collections
of Greece. I believe that none of the later editions of
this profound, and yet unpretending work, contain
improvements. But I hear the " Young Man "—ambitious of possessing almost every thing which can
throw light upon that most interesting ofall countries
-exclaim, " am I to be debarred of the TREASURE of
GRECIAN ANTIQUITIES, " by Gronovius ?
Are so
many dull and dreary nights of winter to pass, or
rather creep, away, when the possession of such a
" treasure" may serve to enliven and improve them ? "
Be it so, therefore. Let him get a copy of this most
elaborate, learned, and desirable work -printed at
Leyden in 1697-in thirteen folio volumes ; of which
the thirteenth furnishes him with an admirably copious
Index of the contents of the twelve preceding tomes.
He may see the Heads or Titles of the tracts, contained in each volume, in Mr. Harris's judiciously
compiled Catalogue ofthe Royal Institution.
HISTORY OF ROME.
I come to ROMAN HISTORY ; which may occupy
even less space than Grecian ; as, in the selection of
original texts, less care is necessary. He who has the
DION CASSIUS of Fabricius and Reimar, 1750, Gr. and
Latin, folio — the DIONYSIUS HALICARNASSENSIS of
Reiske, 1784 , 8vo. Gr. and Lat. six vols. -the Livy of
-
OF ROME. 137
―
--
Drakenborch, 1738, 4to. seven vols. *-the APPIAN and
the POLYBIUS of Schweighauser, 1785-1789, Gr. and
Lat. the first in three, and the second in nine vols.-
the TACITUS of Brotier, 1771 , 4to. four vols. † —the
CESAR of Oudendorp, 1737, 4to. , or of Oberlin, 1805,
8vo. and the SALLUST of Havercamp, 1742, 2 vols . -
together with almost any respectable impression of
VELLEIUS PATERCULUS and FLORUS he, I say, who
shall possess sound and fair copies of these ancient historians, may be said to possess a full and complete
Body of Roman History. Or, if he prefer a Collection
of the whole, in a sort of Corpus Historicum, let him
rest well contented with that published by Haurisius,
in 1743, in three folio volumes, containing the Latin
authors only. And if, to the foregoing, he add the Thesaurus Antiquitatum Romanarum of Grævius(the companion of the collection of Grecian Antiquities by
Gronovius) published in 12 folio volumes, in 1694,§
* If minor editions of Livy be rather sought after, obtain the beautifully executed one of the late learned Mr. Homer, 1794, in eight
octavo volumes ; or the yet smaller one of Ruddiman, Edinb. 1751,
12mo. four vols. But he who has the Variorum impression of 1679,
8vo. three vols. , need not feel comfortless in the absence of any other
edition.
† Again, as to minor editions-let the Barbou impression of 1776,
edited by Lallemand, in seven 12mo. volumes, be your elbow.companion ; for it hath never yet been eclipsed for beauty and accuracy
united.
Among the smaller editions, that of Edinb. 1755, 12mo. has been
long and highly prized ; but of equal, if not higher, estimation, is
that of Homer, 1789 , 8vo.- now become a very scarce book. Among
Our VERSIONS Of Sallust, none approach, for quantity and quality of
research, that of Dr. H. Steuart, in two 4to. volumes, 1806. It is replete with useful collateral aids. Murphy's version, both of Tacitus
and Sallust, is in more general requisition.
§ But even вотa treasures-the one by Gronovius, and the other
138 HISTORY,
the Young Collector's historical library will be sufficiently complete.
-
Descending to Modern Historians of the Roman
Empire, the names of Rollin, Crevier, Hooke, Ferguson, and Gibbon, will necessarily present themselves -to which, that of Montesquieu- whose sketch
of the " Grandeur et Décadence des Romains " has
been expanded into such a magnificent picture by
Gibbon, may be judiciously added : while, descending
to lower periods, connected with Italian Antiquity
and History, let every work of the greatest of all
modern antiquaries-MURATORI-find a place, if possible, in the library of everyjudicious Collector. It will
be here only necessary to notice his truly stupendous
performance the " Scriptores Rerum Italicarum ab
ann. D. ad ann. M. D. quorum potissima pars nunc
primum in lucemprodit" -1723-51, in twenty-eight or
twenty-nine folio volumes. The life ofthe longest liver
should seem to be inadequate to a performance like
by Grævius-are not perfect without the following supplemental volumes, " Novus Thes. Antiq. Romanar. ab A. H. de Sallengre, " in
three folio volumes, 1716 : and " Utriusque Thesauri Antiq. Roman.
Græcarumque Nov. Supplementa congesta ab. I. Poleno, Venet. 1735,
folio, five vols. In Tom Osborne's time, when these substantial tomes,
especially upon LARGE PAPER, brought great prices, a copy ofthis kind,
of Grævius and Gronovius, was marked in the folio sheet catalogue
of 1759, at sixty guineas ; and with the Thes. Antiq. Hal, et Sicil.
bound in forty- eight volumes, at 947. 10s. A copy of the former set,
on small paper, and in neat binding, may be obtained for about 421.
But the Young Man " may travel a little further if he pleases,
and the weight of his purse allow of it. Perhaps he already anticipates the collection of the BYZANTINE and TURKISH HISTORIES in
the earlier periods of Christianity – which furnished Gibbon with
such a supply of curious and important matter. Of the writers of
these histories, the Paris edition of 1647 to 1680, folio , will amply
satisfy the most inordinate book-appetite.
66
-
-
OF ROME. 139
-
this where materials were collected from MSS. of
which the greater part had never been before liberated from the huge brass bosses that had helped to
hold them together ; but which, being touched, as
it were, with the magical wand of Muratori, poured a
flood of light and of information upon periods, hitherto
deemed impenetrably dark and wholly uninstructive.
One hardly knows sufficiently how to appreciate the
talents of this wonderful man. *
From the departed and splendid æras of Greece
and Rome, we touch upon those of the modern world ;
and first, necessarily, of the History of our own
COUNTRY. Many are the helps, and yet many are the
deficiencies, connected with this important branch of
our enquiries. The former arise from the excellent
materials supplied by a regular succession of Historians beginning with the author of the Saxon Chronicle, and ending with that which issued from the press
of Caxton. I mention this latter as the first book,
regularly connected with our history, which was published since the invention of the Art of Printing. And
yet, (as just intimated) at the very outset of our pursuits, there are deficiencies ; arising chiefly from the
want of a Collection like unto the Recueil des Histo-
* The principal of his other works, of less extent, but of equal
utility and importance, are these : Antiquitates Italicæ Medii Ævi
post Decl. Rom. Imp. ad an. 1500, 1738-42 : folio, six vols. This is
now become a rare work with us ; it will excite the reader's surprise
when he learns that a copy even of the " Scriptores " has not been on
sale, by auction , these five years. Of the " Antiquitates, " a reprint
appeared at Arezzo, in 1777, in 4to. in seventeen volumes, but of
considerably less beauty of execution . To the " Scriptores, " must
be added the " Accesiones " by Mittarelli, 1771 , folio : and, again,
two more folio volumes of historians, from the year 1500 to 1600,
published at Florence in 1748. We have not yet done with Muratori. His " Nov. Thes. Vet. Inscript." in four folio volumes, was
140 HISTORY,
riens des Gaules, &c. of which the foundation stone
was laid by Bouquet. *
But it must be remembered that we are not without many very solid foundation stones of our history
which have supported the more elegant superstructures of modern historians. " The Young Man, " whois
emulous of a complete English historical library ( and
what young Englishman of enlarged views, and enabling purse, is not thus emulous ? ) will do well to attend
to the following bill of fare- which will supply him,
not only with food for to-day (dressed as daintily as
intellectual viands need be dressed) but with food for a
succession of " to-morrows:"-which, the more carefully it be digested, the more strengthening will be the
nutrition, and the more fixed and permanent the health
of him who is thus nourished.
Know then, hungry and enterprising student, that I
deem it necessary, in the first place, to present thee
published at Milan, in 1739 : and his Annali d'Italia dal principio dell'
era volgare sino all ' anno, 1749, appeared in twelve quarto volumes
at Milan in 1749. This latter has been twice or thrice reprinted.
But the keener hunter of Muratori must beat the brakes and bushes
of Brunet in pursuit of the choicest game : in other words, of the
various editions of this multifarious writer. Had Niceron survived
Muratori, we should have seen a capital account of his productions.
* Ofthis magnificent, and truly invaluable work, the first volume
appeared in 1738, and the xviiith and last volume (the work being
yet imperfect-extending only to the thirteenth century) in 1822. It
is in folio ; and appertains almost as much to English, as to French
History. It should doubtless be found in every collegiate, and
PUBLIC LIBRARY. The copies upon large paper are by no means
uncommon ; but a finer one than that which adorns the shelves of
Sledmere Library will with difficulty be found. It is bound in
French red morocco. The immediately ensuing pages will prove
the use which I have made of some of the volumes of this work ; and
for the gratification of the historical antiquary, I subjoin an alphabet-
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 141
with a few publications which contain " Bodies of
History, "-or Collections of Ancient Historians-all
of whom lived and wrote before the invention of printing. The earliest portion of British History, of which
any MS. exists, is that called by the well known name
of the SAXON CHRONICLE - an undoubtedly coeval
fragment of the eleventh century ; of which Bishop
Gibson published a useful and valuable edition, towards the close of the seventeenth century, but of
which, it cannot be dissembled, a new and improved
edition, collated with other MSS. is much wanted ;
and, as I learn with great satisfaction, is on the eve of
publication, from the competent pen of the Rev. Mr.
Ingram, late Saxon Professor at Oxford. *
ical list of some of our earlier historians who are mentioned, critically, in the pages of the Recueil :
Vol. Pages.
Vol.
Abbas Benedict, xiii. xvij. 142.
Brompton, iii.
Chronicon Saxon. vij. ix. 47.
Durham, Simeon of, -
Eadmer,
xi. 79.
iv.
Girald Barry,
Hemingford, W. de,
Hoveden, R. de,
Huntingdon, H. de,
xiii.
Pages.
xviii. xxii.
- iii.
· xi. 309.
• Iviii. 206.
xi.
xi. liij.
lij. 173.
Malmesbury, G. de,
Neubury, or Neubridge,
X. xxxvij. 24.3
G. de,
xiii. xiii. 92.
xiii. iv. Odericus Vitalis, • xi. lxiij. 221 Encomium Emmæ,
Gemeticensis, G. de,
Gervais of Canterbury,
Tilbury,
xi. iv. 5.
xxxix.
Paris, Matthew, • xiii. iii.
Ralph de Diceto, xviii. 183.
xiii.
xi.
Gesta Guil. Ducis,
Stephani,
xi.
xv. 120.
Ixxxj. 317.
xxii. 75.
Coggershal,
- xxiij. 217.
Walsingham,
- iii.
iii.
xiii. iv. x. 67.
Westminster, G. de,
Worcester, Flor. de,
But the most pleasing part, attending the introduction or notice of
this grand French work, is, that we have at length been roused to a
glorious spirit of rivalry in undertaking, a similar work devoted to
the History of our OWN COUNTRY. This laudable plan was brought
into the House of Commons, and carried through without the semblance of opposition, at the close of the session of last year. FELIX
FAUSTUMQUE SIT !
* I cannot omit this opportunity of noticing, with the commend-'
142 HISTORY.
HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN.
The first Body of British History which appeared
from our press, is contained in a folio volume, comprising, 1st, Asser's Life of Alfred ; 2nd, the Ypodigma
Neustria ofWalsingham, a Norman History to the
time of Henry I.; and 3dly, the Historia Brevis of the
same Author, being a Chronicle of Events from the
commencement of the reign of Edward I. to the end
of that of Henry V. Of these three works, which are
usually found in the same volume, the two former
were printed by Day, and the latter by Binneman, in
1574-under the patronage and even particular superintendence of the famous Archbishop Parker : * a voation which it merits, the literal English version of the Saxon Chronicle by Miss Gurney, sister of the Member for Norwich. Why should
such a laudable effort of industry be confined to private circulation
only ? But whether privately, or publicly circulated, Miss Gurney is
sure of being suitably enshrined in a future edition of Ballard's
" Memoirs of LEARNED BRITISH LADIES ."
* The above text comprehends three names of some importance ,
in the annals of our country : Asser, Walsingham, and Parker. I
shall devote a few lines to each, in reference to the work in question.
Of ASSER, Bishop of Sherburne, [A. D. 890.] the reader will find a
pleasing, and the best, account in Mr. Turner's Anglo- Saxon History,
vol. i. p. 292. 4to. edit . 1807. Tanner adds little to Leland ; but
Nicolson is worth consulting ; who repeats Parker's expressions,
that it is printed " in the old Saxon character to invite his English
readers, and to draw them in unawares to an acquaintance with the
handwriting of their ancestors, in hopes to beget in them (by degrees) a love for the antiquities of their own country." Eng. Hist.
Library, p. 47, edit. 1736.
OF THOMAS WALSINGHAM, we are told that—“ his chief delight
was in the collection of English Histories ; wherein he hath left, to
the perpetual registering of his name, divers monuments of reverend
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 143
lume, by no means of common occurrence. Having
furnished the reader with a particular description of
this precious book, in the fourth volume of the recent
edition of our Typographical Antiquities, it only remains to urge him-if he be earnest in laying a good
foundation for an English HISTORICAL LIBRARY— to
let no opportunity escape of becoming master of a
sound and perfect copy of it.
About a dozen years after the publication of the
Ypodigma, there appeared a collection of our historians
at Heidelberg and Lyons, in the same year, 1587 ; but
the latter seems to be only the former book with
a fresh title-page. This collection contains Geoffrey
of Monmouth, Gildas, Bede, William of Newbury,
or Newbridge, and an abridgment of Froissart, *
all of whom had been before separately published.
antiquity. He lived in 1443." See Hearne's Hemingi Chartularium,
vol. ii . p. 646. The author of this remark is said to be John Stow.
Of ARCHBISHOP PARKER, even Gibbon, whose affection towards
our prelacy was at no time very violent, is compelled to pay this handsome tribute to his literary memory : " Far different from such reformers was the learned and pious Matthew Parker, the first Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth.
His apostolical virtues were not incompatible with the love of learning, and while he exercised the arduous office, not of governing, but
of founding the Church of England, he strenuously applied himself
to the study of the Saxon tongue, and of English antiquities." Posthumous Works, vol. iii . p. 566. Strype tells us, in his Life ofthe Archbishop (pages 471, 529) , that the above work was carefully printed
from the original MS. " to a word, " in Saxon characters, and was
somewhat rare in former times : that the Archbishop delayed the
publication " of which there had been great expectation among the
learned," owing to his care in correcting, printing, and getting a few
presentation copies to be bound- " wherein he was very curious."
From the dedicatory epistle to the reprint of it, in 1603, in Camden's
time, it appears to have been, then, a rare book. A fine and perfect
144 HISTORY,
This collection is praised by Du Fresnoy, in his
Methode pour étudier l'histoire ; but on this point
copy of it was sold last year at the sale of Mr. G. Isted's library, for
71. 78. Consult the Typ. Antiq. vol. iv. p. 136. My friend Mr. Amyot
possesses Hearne's copy of it , with a ms. collation or two , in Hearne's
hand writing : a perfect, but not a fine copy-and obtained of a bookseller at the comforting price of 21. 5s.
• The abridgement of Geoffrey, by Virunnius, accompanies the
entire text of that author ; but Bishop Nicolson mentions a previous
edition of this abridgement by Powell, of the date of 1585. London,
8vo.; he might also have referred to Newbury's, or Bollifant's, edition of the same date, in 8vo. See Herbert, vol. ii . p. 912 : 1215,
and Bibl. Hoblyn. pt. ii p. 500. Virunnius was an Italian ; upon
which the learned Bishop remarks, -speaking of the original history
of Geoffrey, ' ' tis of a complexion fitter for the air of Italy than England.' Historical Libraries, p. 37. edit. 1736. GEOFFREY of MonMOUTH lived in the 12th century, and is supposed to have taken many
hints from NEnnius, who lived in the ninth century. Consult the
spirited observations of Bishop Nicolson upon them ; Eng. Hist. Library, p. 36-33. , and Hearne's Robert of Gloucester, vol. i. p. xxiii. ,
note 6. Mr. G. Ellis has made the former interesting, in spite ofhis
incongruities : see his Specimens of Early English Metrical Romances,
vol. i . p. 42. 100. The first edition of Geoffrey was printed in the
office of Badius Ascensius, at Lyons, in 1508. 4to : and may be
worth about 11. 1s. It is said to be " translated into the Latin
tongue from the most ancient monuments of the British or Saxon
tongue." It was published by the care and expense of L. Cavellat,
whose introductory address is most diverting. He says that, " happening to be rummaging among some old books in a college library at
Paris, he stumbled upon a certain work, called " the History of the
British Kings, " -covered with the glorious dirt and mouldering
of antiquity. " The sight and the perusal affected him almost to
madness ; [" Dii boni ! quanto animi affectu iterum atque iterum
legi et perlegi ! "-are his words] and he began to find that " what
he had hitherto deemed fables, was true history. " The parent text
of such a chronicler may be doubtless deserving of investigation : but
it would be well if any " ancient British or Saxon materials " could
be discovered in it. Till then, Geoffrey must be considered as the
property of Fablers and Romancers. An English translation of the
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 145
there is better praise ( as the subjoined note may testify) to be sought for, than that of the French bibliographer: who tells us, however, that " the book was
printed in Commelin's office, from materials in the
Heidelberg library, when the latter was in its glory,
and before its transportation to the Vatican at Rome."
Latin text appeared in 1718, 8vo. , by Aaron Thompson, who has
prefixed " a large preface concerning the authority of the history. "
Thompson's book is worth about 17. Is. It is not very rare upon large
paper, at 21. 12s. 6d. I once possessed it (as well as the original
edition of Ascensius, ) in this latter form, in coeval blue morocco
binding.
GILDAS lived in the sixth, and BEDE in the eighth, century : see Dr.
Henry's History of Great Britain, vol . iv. p. 5. 25-where the former
is severely censured ; nor does the latter meet with less severity from
Mr. Turner, in his Anglo- Saxon History, vol. i . 63.
WILLIAM OF NEWBURY, or Newbridge, lived at the close of the
twelfth, and at the beginning ofthe thirteenth, century, His history
extends to the year 1197. Bishop Nicolson, Hearne, and Dr. Henry,
have said every thing in praise of the style and matter of this writer ;
and the Benedictine editors of the celebrated " Recueil des Historiens
des Gaules et de la France, " call him " a judicious writer- more attentive to relate the principal events than minute details. His impartiality in the matter of Becket and Henry II., when every body
took part with the former, and abused the latter, is worthy of notice
and commendation ; " vol. xiii. pref. p. xiij . The Rev. Mr. Sharpe
(translator of William of Malmesbury, for which see page 148 post. )
has completed an English version of William of Newbury for the
press ; and I hope there is a sufficient spirit of patronage abroad to
induce him to publish it. The best edition of this historian, in the
original language, is that by Hearne in 1719, 3 vols. 8vo. -see post.
Gibbon, in his Post. Works, vol. iii . p . 565, speaks somewhat too
severely of the above Heidelberg publication ; observing that the
collection " is selected with such critical skill, that the romance of
Geoffrey of Monmouth, and a Latin abridgment of Froissard, are
placed on the same level of historical evidence. " Consult, too, Rawlinson's translation of Du Fresnoy, vol. ii . p. 463 ; and the French
edition, vol. ii . p . 292.
Ꮮ
146 HISTORY
This is a scarce volume ; and a copy of it maybe worth
about 41. 4s.
It was the good fortune, and even glory, of this
country, to witness, towards the end of the same century, the labours of one of the most illustrious of her
scholars and antiquaries, in the publications of Sir
HENRY SAVILE : " a man (says Gibbon*) distinguished
among the scholars of his age, by his profound knowledge of the Greek language and mathematical
sciences ... Some of the most valuable writers ofthe
XIIth and XIIth centuries were rescued by his hands
from dirt, and dust, and rottenness ; and his Collec
tion, under the common title of Scriptores post Bedam
was twice printed : first in London, 1596, and afterwards at Frankfort, 1601." Such is the title of the
work, which I must next recommend to the atten
tion of " the Young Man, " emulous of providing
himself with the earliest printed texts of our most
valuable historians. The names of the authors con-
* Post. Works, vol. iii . p . 566, 8vo . edit. But let the young and
ardent lover of GREAT NAMES in our biographical history, recreate
himself, respecting Sir H. Savile, with the recent edition of Wood's
Athen. Oxon. , by Bliss, vol. ii . col . 310-317 : rather than with the same
author's Hist. and Antiq. of Colleges and Halls, p. 10. Chalmers's
General Biography may be profitably consulted : and in Berkenhout's
Biographia Literaria, p . 435, there is a good compendious account
of Savile. Gibbon, in the notice of Sir Henry's Greek attainments,
alludes to his edition of St. Chrysostom's Works, printed at Eton
in the year 1612. This edition cost Sir Henry Savile 8000l. ;
which 2000l. were devoted to the paper. But he might have made
a better choice both of a paper- merchant and printer. The edition
has an uncomfortable aspect. Not fewer than two thousand copies
were printed. Consult, also , Letters from the Bodleian Library, with
Aubrey's Lives, 1813, 8vo . vol . ii . The anecdote about Sir Henry and
his wife during the editorship of St. Chrysostom is very amusing; but
my" Young Man " must forage a little for himself.
of
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 147
tained in this Collection, are as follow: William of
Malmesbury, Henry of Huntingdon, Roger de Hoveden, the Chronicle of Ethelwerd, and Ingulph. Of
the first of these, -the modest, faithful, and erudite
historian of the twelfth century—the present impres
sion of his historical works was only once reprinted,
namely, in the Frankfort edition of 1601 , folio . But
* Namely, De Rebus Gestis Regum Anglorum, lib. v.; Historia
novellæ libri duo ; De Gestis Pontificum Anglorum, lib. iv. This
latter, is said by H. Wharton to be from a very faulty MS. A fifth
book concerning the English Bishops was published by Wharton in
his Anglia Sacra, vol. ii .; and also by Gale among his Scriptores,
vol. iii. p . 337 -but see the latter's " Præfatio ad Lectorem, " sign.
b. 2; where a doubt is thrown out respecting Malmesbury's being
the author of this fifth Book ; which is devoted to the life of Saint
Aldelm. The remaining work of Malmesbury, concerning the " Antiquities of Glastonbury Abbey, " was published very incorrectly by
Gale, in the third volume of his " Scriptores, " from a vellum MS. in
the library ofTrinity College, Cambrige : but which Hearne republished , with great accuracy, in his Adam de Domerham's Antiquities
of the same Abbey. See the preface of the latter, p. 15.
WILLIAM OF MALMESBURY has received a brief, but satisfactory,
eulogy from Dr. Henry-who has translated the emphatic conclusion
of his prologue-but who might have added, that the author speaks
of contemporaneous events " as having witnessed them himself, or
received the account of them from very creditable witnesses." Hist.
Great Britain, vol. vi . p. 136-8 . Berkenhout has given an animated
abridgement of his labours ; Biog. Literar . p. 11 : but, above all ,
consult Leland's affecting eulogy : De Scriptorib . Britan . vol. i . 195 .
The learned Benedictine editors of that stupendous work, before referred to, have given us a droll story from Malmesbury, about
Richard II. Duke of Normandy, and the supposed witchcraft of Pope
Sylvester the Second, which sufficiently evinces the simplicity of the
manners of the age ; but they accuse our historian, after copying Sir
Henry Savile's eulogy of him, [ see his dedication to Elizabeth-prefixed to the above collection] of ignorance of French affairs : vide
tom. x. p. xxxvj. 243. This is repeated in tom. xiii, p. 4 : but, both
in this latter, and in the fifty- second page of the preface of the
148 HISTORY
of these two editions-one at London in 1596, and the
other as just noticed I strongly recommend the -
eleventh volume, Malmesbury receives their warmest encomiums, in
regard to style, judgment and veracity. This valuable historian has
lately, indeed, been made familiar to English readers, by the translation of the Reverend J. Sharpe, 1815, 4to. This version also contains the fruit of collations with various other MSS.
Although HENRY of HUNTINGDON protests that he writes only of
what he saw, or of what he received creditable testimony, yet, up to
the year 1127, his history is scarcely any thing better than an
abridgement of the famous Anglo- Saxon Chronicle. Afterwards,
in his eighth book, he is more diffuse, and seems to narrate events
which came under his own inspection . His reign of Stephen is,
therefore, the most original and valuable part of his composition ;
and it has been frequently copied. Recueil des Historiens des Gaules,
&c. tom. xiii. pref. p . vj : consult also tom. xi . pref. lviii.
ROGER HOVEDEN held an important diplomatic situation under
Henry II.; and his Annals have been much praised by the foregoing
authority, in the eleventh volume of their Recueil, pref. p. lxxx .-but
in the preface to the thirteenth volume of the same magnificent work,
Hoveden would appear to have been chiefly a copyist of Huntingdon,
Simeon, and Benedictus Abbas. " The first part of his work, which
commences where Bede concluded, and extends to the year 1154, is,
as far as the year 1122, a transcript of Simeon of Durham ; who, in
turn, is the mere echo of Florence of Worcester. From 1122 to
1143 , he almost literally copies Henry of Huntingdon-from 1148
to 1154, his history is so confused that scarcely any event has a
proper date assigned to it. The same censure may be passed upon
the second part of his Annals, up to the year 1170 ; from which
time, however, partly by copying and abridging Benedictus Abbas,
and adding to this latter authority a fewimportant events, he becomes
a valuable and important historian. Hoveden died at the commencement of the thirteenth century. " Idem. p. xxj .
INGULPH (says the foregoing authority) , " avoit tout vu en bon
connoisseur, et ce qu'il rapporte, il l'écrit en homme lettré, judiceux
et vrai ; " tom. xi . p . xlij . But consult the more animated eulogium
upon him at p. 153, note a of the same volume. It is not, however,
noticed in either place, that the Continuation of his history of Croyland Abbey is inserted in the first volume of Gale's Collection ; vide
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 149
second. The Wechels, it is true, were the printers of
it ; and they are noted all over Europe for the
wretched tint and quality of their paper. In this instance, however, they have made some atonement for
the sorry garb of their volume, by inserting all the
" Emendanda " of the London edition ; for which,
from the specimens of the errors, subjoined at the
end of Malmsbury and Hoveden, there was abundant
reason. The Frankfort edition has also the advantage ofa tolerably copious Index, whereas the London
edition is without one. Yet the London edition has
advocates, who deem it more accurate than that
which succeeded it : but it must be observed, in defence ofthe Frankfort edition , that the errata (according to Sir Henry Spelman's Glossary, in voce Frithborga, (as quoted by Nicolson in his English Historical
Library, p. 59), are confined chiefly to the misspelling
of English words : a venial tripping. Du Fresnoy
has echoed the same complaint, on the same subject, against the same edition . * An ordinary copy
post. Ingulph, who lived in the eleventh century, and was the secretary of William the First, published " an excellent history (says
Dr. Henry) of the Abbey of Croyland, from its foundation A. D.
664 to A. D. 1091 , into which he hath introduced much of the general
history of the kingdom, with a variety of curious anecdotes that are
no where else to be found ; " Hist. of Great Britain, vol. vi . 123. The
lovers of the Round Table History should be informed that there are
many minute and curious descriptions in Ingulph, which throw considerable light upon the history of ancient chivalry. Recueil, &c.
tom. xi. pref. p. xlij .
In the Bibl. Mason. pt. iii . no. 509, Nicolson's attack upon
the Frankfort edition, is quoted as an original criticism of the
Bishop's. In the Bibl. Beauclerk. pt . ii . no. 2216, a copy of the
London edition was sold for only 3s. 6d. It may be here observed,
that, besides a general title to the volume, each author has a separate title, within a splendid border of twisted columns, enriched with
150 HISTORY
of the former edition may be obtained for 17. 11s. 6d. ,
and of the latter for 27. 12s. 6d. Of the Frankfort edition, the only copy on large paper, which I ever saw,
is in the possession of Mr. Amyot.
The seventeenth century was fertile in the publication of Bodies of English Histories ; and the lead was
taken by the celebrated antiquary, CAMDEN, whose
Anglica, Normannica, Hibernica, et Cambrica, appeared at Frankfort in 1603, fol. The historians included in this valuable volume, are, Asser Menevensis,
(reprinted from Archbishop Parker's Collection , &c . ,
see p. 142, ante, ) Fragmentum Anonymi, de vit. Guil.
Conquest., Thomas Walsingham, Thomas de la Moor,
Gulielmus Gemiticensis, * and Giraldus Cambrensis.
This volume is of rare occurrence, and worth about
31. 13s. 6d. I apprehend there are no copies ofit upon
large paper.
The Norman historians received " a fuller and closer
attention by the celebrated DUCHESNE ; who, in 1619,
put forth a magnificent work, in folio, entitled , Historia Normannorum Scriptores Antiqui, &c. It was
the intention of the editor to have published three
vine leaves. Mr. Grenville possesses a magnificent copy of it, upon
LARGE PAPER, bound in olive- coloured morocco, by Lewis. It is the
only copy of the kind which I remember to have seen. In the Harleian library (Bibl. Harl. vol. iii . no. 1. ) there appears to have been
a very valuable copy of it, enriched with ms. notes : and in the library of the London Institution there is a copy of the Frankfort edition full of ms. notes by Gale.
* Of William of Jumieges, the present, and the subsequent edition of 1619 (vide post) , are the only publications of his text : unless
we except a short extract from a curious ms. of him, in the twelfth
century, which the editors of the Recueil, &c. have published in the
eleventh volume of that celebrated work. Of Giraldus Cambrensis,
this is the second impression : neither this, however, nor Bollifant's
first edition of him in 1584, contains the second book, " De illaudabilibus Walliæ. "
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 151
volumes of these historians ; but the present was all
that appeared . Du Fresnoy is wrong in mixing up
this work with Duchesne's other publications relating
to France. The work is rare, and appertains equally
to the Histories of France and England. " Such are
the remarks of Du Fresnoy and Niceron, which have
been partly repeated by Debure, in the Bibliog. Instruct. vol vi. no. 5141. See also Cat. de la Serna
Santander, vol. iii . no. 4884.* A good copy of this
Vogt, in his usual manner, calls it " Liber rarissimus, et in paucissimis bibliothecis obvius. " Catalog. Libror. Rarior. p . 248, edit.
1793. But it is not uncommon in this country. Baron Maseres
(who published an abridgement of this work in 1807) observes that
" the tracts, of which it is composed, give us the fullest and most
authentic accounts of the exploits of the Normans in France, Italy,
and England, from the year 838 to the year 1220, that are any where
to be found." At the end of Duchesne's book (which contains one
thousand one hundred and four closely printed pages, besides a
preface and index) , there are genealogical tables entitled " Familiæ
Regum, Ducum, Comitum, et Aliorum Nobilium, quæ in hoc volumine deducuntur. " See the Censura Literaria, vol. i . p. 31 , where
there is a good account of Duchesne and his labours. But Niceron
(Mémoires des Hommes Illustres, vol . vii. p. 323-336) , is , as usual,
copious and instructive . Before the publication of his Norman
Historians, Duchesne had published his History of England, Scotland, and Ireland , in 1614, folio, in the French language ; of which
the best edition, is the third : published in 1657, 2 vols. folio. But
this History is held in little estimation .
BARON MASERES's work contains select passages of ten pieces from
the text of Duchesne's Norman writers, with ample and curious
English notes. There were two impressions of the Baron's book ;
the first was printed for private distribution only ; the second, in
1807, 4to. for public sale. See the Censura Literaria, vol. i . p. 28.
Yet I may be allowed to observe, that the cotemporaneous but
anonymous historian of the " Gesta Stephani, Anglorum Regis, et
Comitis Boloniensis, who is said by the editors of the Recueil des Historiens des Gaules, (vol. xiii. p. 4. ) to be " diffuse to excess, and
wholly devoted to English affairs "-andwho is printed by Duchesne,
152 HISTORY
valuable work is worth 47. 14s. 6d. but copies upon
LARGE PAPER (which appear to have escaped the notice
of Mons. Brunet) , are exceedingly rare and highpriced.
Such a copy appears to have been in the Gaignat,
Gouttard, and La Valliere collections. It will also be
found in the libraries of our principal Collectors.
Messrs. J. and A. Arch, in their recent catalogue,
value such a copy, bound in russia, at 127. 12s.
Wenow approach the yet more distinguished labours
of SIR ROGER TWYSDEN; who, in his Historic Anglicance Scriptores Decem, 1652, folio, gave a specimen
of his competency for finishing the fabric of British
History, of which Sir Henry Savile had laid so noble a
foundation. Unluckily this work was never completed ; but, we may judge from what has appeared,
how admirable would have been the building if finished
by the same hands. The subjoined note may give the
reader a notion of the contents and character of the
volume. A good sound copy ofit may be worth about
"ex veteri, sed imperfecto et semiexeso Exemplari Episcopi Laudunensis, " &c. -is not incorporated in the Baron's work : which,
however, is of considerable use, and moderate price.
* It contains the following historians : -1 . Simeon Monachus Dunelmensis : 2. Johannes Prior Hagustaldensis : 3. Ricardus Prior Ejusd.:
4. Ailredus Abbas Rievallensis : 5. Radulphus de Diceto Londoniensis :
6. Johannes Brompton Jornallensis : 7. Gervasius Monachus Dorobornensis : 8. Thomas Stubbs Dominicanus ; 9. Guilielmus Thorn Cantuariensis 10. Henricus Knighton Leicestrensis : the greater part of
whom are treated with more civility by Dr. Henry than by Bishop
Nicolson. There is a preface by Twysden, which is followed by a
curious account of " these historians now first published " by Selden .
Hearne tells us that " even the Puritans themselves, affecting to be
Mæcenases, with Cromwell at their head, displayed something like a
a patriotic ardour in purchasing copies of this work as soon as it appeared. " Preface to his Thomas Otterbourne et Johannes Wethamstede, p. 16 to 24.
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 153
51. 15s. 6d. The copies on LARGE PAPER are very rare ;
but are found in our principal private collections.
Messrs. Payne and Foss mark a copy of this description
at 147. 14s.
The last body ofauthors, connected with British History, put forth in the seventeenth century, is the well
known collection under the name of GALE ; with the
general title of Rerum Anglicarum Scriptores Veteres,
1684-91 , in three folio volumes. Of this collection,
indispensable to an historical library of any pretension, the first volume was carefully executed by WILLIAM FULMAN, a very skilful and modest editor, who
was urged to the undertaking (as a continuation of
Sir Roger Twysden's plan) by Bishop Fell. * The two
The body of the work concludes at col. 2768 ; after which follow
various readings, a glossary by Somner, an index rerum, &c. , index cognominum, index authorum, &c. , and a leaf of errata. All these pieces
have not the pages numbered ; but commence at Sign U 3, and end
on the reverse of the second leaf after Sign Nn 3. Mr. Hamper of
Birmingham (whose antiquarian attainments, and readiness of communication on all subjects connected with them, need not my humble
notice, ) informs me that some copies of Twysden's book are said to
be printed at Leyden, by the Elzevirs, and others in Little Britain
by Flesher, at the expense of Cornelius Bee. He describes his own
copy, by the former, as printed upon finer paper. A list of some of
the Mss. , which had been transcribed for publication in the INTENDED
SECOND VOLUME of this work, will be found in Kennett's Life ofSomner,
p. 65., &c.
* Both Fulman and Fell dying not long after the appearance of
the first volume, Dr Mill urged Thomas Gale, the learned editor of
Herodotus, to prosecute the work ; who put forth the second and
third volumes in the years 1687-91 , (for it is not worth while to repeat Fresnoy's account about the priority of the appearance of these
latter volumes, ) but who gained very little credit by the undertaking,
as they were acknowledged to abound with inaccuracies. The ardour
of Gale, however, stimulated him to think of a fourth volume of
similar matter, in which Hearne thought Otterbourne would have been
included ; but the then upropitious state of public affairs damped his
154 HISTORY
latter volumes are the editorial production of GALE.
Acopy, in fair condition, is worth 81. 8s. Ofthe LARGE
enthusiasm , and the design was dropped . Hearne's pref. to Thomas of
Otterbourne, &c. Yet, under all circumstances, these volumes are very
precious to the historical antiquary, especially thefirst ; which contains
the following authors : 1. Ingulfus : 2. Petri Blesensis Continuatio :
3. Chronica de Mailros : 4. Annales Monast. Burton : 5. Historiæ Croylandensis Continuatio. Of Ingulph's curious history of Croyland
Abbey, and of its continuation by Peter de Blois and Edward Abbas,
this is the ONLY PERFECT edition extant : of the remaining historical
works, just enumerated, the present are the ONLY EDITIONS. The
second volume presents us with the following : 1. Annales Marganenses : 2. Chronicon Thoma Wikes : 3. Annales Waverleienses : * 4. Historia Galfridi Vinesalvi : 5. Historia Walteri de Hemingford. Of
these historical pieces, Richard the First's Journey to Jerusalem, and
his transactions in the Holy Land, by Geoff. Vinsaufe, (which has
received the commendation of Bale, Pits, and Selden) , are the more
curious performances.
Wikes is described by Dr. Henry, as " famous for the variety and
* In the third page of the " Testimonia " prefixed to this second volume, we are told
by Gale, speaking of the ANNALS OF WAVERLY, that the author seems to have been
contemporaneous with the Norman æra, and to have seen William the First, [ ipse testatur se vidisse Victorem Normannum et fuisse aliquando in ejus curia, p. 134. ] This,
however, is exceedingly erroneous. My friend, Mr. Petrie, Keeper of the Records in
the Tower ofLondon, (and to whose care the foundation stone is now entrusted to raise
the superstructure of a BODY OF OUR NATIONAL HISTORIANS, ) informs me, that, up to
the year 1120, the Annals of Waverly are, with little exception, a translation of the
Saxon Chronicle ; and so close, as to supply, in two or three instances, the gaps left
by Gibson. There exists no doubt as to the priority of the Saxon Chronicle ; for the
MS. (Vesp. A. xvi. ) is in the same hand from the year 1000 to 1201. It evidently belonged to Waverly, and is one of those compilations which became so frequent in the
thirteenth century. Gale was therefore mistaken in supposing these Annals to be an
´original document of the eleventh century. Whatever, therefore, in the Cotton MS.
referred to by Gale, has any reference to the age ofthe conquest, must be supposed to
be the language of the Anglo- Saxon Chronicle. And yet Gale ventured to say that
the writer of the Cotton MS. " was nearly as respectable, in point of antiquity, as
Ingulph himself," [" ipsi Ingulpho de antiquitate vix concessurus videatur "]. This is
another proof, if indeed another were wanting, of the many errors, misconceptions, and
ill-digested accounts, which have already gone abroad, respecting the MSS. of our
ancient historians. See also Gibbon's sensible remarks upon a new edition of our historians, in his Posthumous Works, vol. iii. p. 570.
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 155
PAPER, I have known a very fine copy produce 317. 10s.
I apprehend such copies to be rarer than those of the
preceding works.
In the eighteenth century, a collection of English
Historians, by Sparke, under the title of " Historive
Anglicane Scriptores Varii e Codd. MSS. nunc primum editi," 1723, folio, is the first which was put
forth . The contents of this volume are noted below. *
extent of his erudition ; " and the present is the only impression of his
chronicle. Of Walter de Hemingford, the present is only a portion
of his work ; the more valuable part of it was completed by Hearne.
The third volume has the following title page : Historia Britannicæ,
Saxonicæ, Anglo- Danica Scriptores XV. , " &c . viz . 1. Gildas : 2. Eddius : 3. Nennius : 4. Asserius : 5. a part of Ran. Higden : 6. Will.
Malmesb. 7. Anonymus Malmesb.: 8. Anonymus Rames : 9. Anonymus Elyens.: 10. Thomas Elyens.: 11. Joan. Wallingford : 12. Rad.
de Diceto : 13. Anonymus (De Partitione Provinciæ) : 14. Joan.
Fordun : 15. Alcwinus Flaccus. Of these impressions, that of
Gildas is, I believe, held in the greatest estimation . This third volume
was separately published, with a fresh title page, printed entirely
with black ink ; whereas the present is partly in red . Each volume
has an index. Reviews of these three volumes, as they were published, appeared in the following foreign Journals : Acta Eruditorum ,
An. 1685 , p. 143 : et suppl. tom. i . p. 8 : Nouvelles de la Rep. des
Lettres, An. 1688 : Juin. p. 581 : Août. p. 813. Bibl. Universelle,
tom. xi. p. 397. My authority for these references is Fabricius's
Bibl. Lat. Med. et Inf. Etat. vol . i . p. 271. edit. 1734, 8vo.
* This volume, which is elegantly printed, and not uncommon,
contains the following pieces ; published for the first time : 1. Chronicon Johannis Abbat. St. Pet. de Burgo : 2. Chronicon Anglicanum
per Rob. de Boston : 3. Historia Coenobii Burgensis Scriptores Varii :
(Quinque) 4. Vita Scti. Thomæ Cantuariensis a W. Stephanide.
Sparke, who was registrar of Peterborough cathedral, and seems to
have had the superintendence of Bishop Kennett's MSS. (now in the
British Museum) intended to have published a second volume to 66
Mr. Amyot informs me that the work of Asser, here published, is not the life of
Alfred, but a book of Annals doubtfully ascribed to him.
156 HISTORY
:
It is obtainable at the very moderate price of about
17. 10s. and as it should appear, from the list of Subscribers, that there were three different sizes of paper
upon which the work was printed, the curious prefer
that of which there were only twenty-five copies struck
off-upon a very large paper, and which may be worth
somewhere about 51. 5s.
It remains to notice the last, and literally the smallest collection of our more ancient historians, which was,
edited and published by BERTRAM, at Copenhagen,.
in 1757, 8vo,, and which may be justly considered a
rare book. The names of the authors contained in it,
are, 1. Ricardus Corinensis : 2. Gildas Badonicus :
3. Nennius Banchorensis. There is a copy of this
contain Whittlesey's life of Hereward, Abbot of Peterborough, and
had actually engraved the arms ofthe knights, whose fiefs were instituted by Abbot Thorold ; but he died in 1740." Nichols's Anecdotes ofBowyer, p. 521 , 524. Of the largest size paper, a copy was
sold at Dr. Heath's sale for 41. 4s. See a well described copy, of this
kind, in the Bibl. Hoblyn, pt . ii . no. 499.
* From a MS. remark in a copy of this work in the library of the
Society of Antiquaries, it appears that " the tract Ricardi Corinensis
de Situ Britan. lib. ii . is a most valuable treasure to British antiquaries. It was republished with a translation and commentary in
1809. The part of Gildas, here reprinted, was taken from a Cambridge MS. and differs occasionally, though not materially, from the
first edition of Polydore Vergil, in 1525, 12mo . † A copy of it will be
This first edition of Gildas's history, " De calamitate, excidio, et conquestu Britanniæ," was published under the editorship of Polydore Vergil, who wrote a short preface. It was printed at the expence of Cuthbert Tonstal, Bishop of London ; to whom
P. Vergil dedicates the work. From the preface, the editor does not describe how he
came by a copy of the original-but he says, that the bishop found another copy, and
employed his friend Ridley, a clergyman (probably the same as was afterwards Bishop
of London), to collate the two MSS. with himself (P. V. ).- There is very little interesting matter in Gildas. But if the version of this venerable historian, which was put
forth in 1638, London, 12mo. be correct, it should seem that Gildas was not disposed
to " mince the matter " with the Clergy in those days. His words are as follow :-
" Britaine hath Priests, but some she hath that are unwise ; very many that Minister,
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 157
book in the British Museum, and another in the
library ofthe Royal Institution. In the latter library,
indeed, will be found a choice collection of our ancient
historians ; many copies being charged with the MS.
notes of Thomas Gale. A fair copy of Bertram may
beworth about 17. Is.
"
To the preceding may be added the notice of a few
English Historians who lived inthe twelfth, thirteenth,
and fourteenth centuries, and the editions of whose
works preceded those, by Thomas Hearne, of other
contemporaneous writers. Afterwards we may commence the list of our Historians and Chroniclers in
the order in which they were printed. First of
EADMER; whose account of " affairs during the reigns
ofWilliam I. and II. and Henry I." was first edited
by Selden, in a thin folio volume, in 1623 ; which
volume is obtainable at the moderate price of about
15s. Eadmer is a trust-worthy historian, and was the
intimate friend and companion of St. Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury, in the eleventh century.*
found in Bibl. Beauclerk, pt. ii . no. 2211 : Bibl. West. no. 3763 :
Bibl. Crofts, no. 7269 : and Bibl. Tutet, no. 436. When Lord
Spencer visited Copenhagen in the summer of 1822, he made particular enquiries for the MS. from which the first ofthese histories was
taken ; but could neither discover nor hear of any traces of its existence. It has been doubted whether all ever had existence.
The editors of the Recueil, &c. describe him as so intensely and
but many ofthem impudent ; Clearkes shee hath, but certaine of them deceitful raveners ; Pastors (as they are called) , but rather wolves prepared for the slaughter
ofsoules, (for why, they provide not forthe common peoples commodity, but covet
rather the gluttony oftheir owne bellies ,) possessing the houses of the Church, but
obtaining them for filthy lucres sake ; .... and, being hoarse, after the fashion of
Bulls, with the abundance of fatnesse, and miserably prompt to all unlawfull
actions ; bearing their countenances arrogantly aloft, and having neverthelesse
their inward sences, with tormenting and gnawing consciences, depressed downe
to the bottome, or rather to bottomeless hell : with the gaining ofone penny glad,
andwith the loss of the like sad," &c. p. 184-188. The Epistle of Gildas, London,
1638, 12mo.
158 HISTORY
1
MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER next demands our attention. The first edition of him was published in a
folio volume in 1567, and afterwards in 1570, by
Thomas Marsh : a book, by no means destitute of
typographical attractions. * It was reprinted at Frankfort in 1601 , with an index ; and this latter edition is
considered to be preferable ; but I have known as
much as 21. 2s. given for the former. To this Frankfort edition is added a reprint of FLORENCE of WORCESTER, an early and esteemed Chronicler, from whom
our later historians have largely borrowed. Thefirst,
and perhaps the most accurate, edition of this desirable work, is contained in a small quarto volume,
dedicated to Lord Burleigh by William Howard, and
printed at London in 1592. This may be worth about
21. 2s. , and the reprint 21. 12s. 6d.
MATTHEW PARIS is the last historian to be noticed in
this particular department ; and five folio editions of
his Historia Major, with opuscula of other historians,t
so constantly occupied with the life of his archiepiscopal master, that
he ought rather to be numbered with the Hagiographi ; vol. xiii.
pref. p. 4 : again ; vol. xi. p. liij. Mr. Grenville possesses the only
It copy of this book upon Large PAPER, which I have ever seen.
had belonged to the family of De Thou.
* The reader may consult the minute description of both editions
which are given in our Typog. Antiq. vol. iv. p. 507, 512. In a
copy of the Frankfort edition, in the Royal Institution, is the fol-
"The dates are erro- lowing ms. note-by the late Joseph Ritson :
neous, imaginary, false and forged, for the most part, in both books;
throughout," In the collection of Mr. Grenville is the only copy of
it upon LARGE PAPER (very fine, in olive- coloured morocco binding)
which I ever saw.
The title of the edition of 1640 is thus : Matthæi Paris Monachi
Albanensis Historia Major: et cum Rogeri Wendoveri, Willielmi Rishangeri, &c. Historiis Chronicisque MSS. Huic Editioni accesserunt
Duorum Offarum Merciorum Regum ; et vigenti trium Abbatium S,
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 159
attest the importance of his labours. The first edition appeared in this country in 1571 ; the second at
Zurich, in 1606 ; the third at London, in 1640 ; the
fourth in 1644, at Paris ; and the fifth , again at London,
in 1684. Of these, the third is the most usually purchased edition ; and copies upon LARGE PAPER are of
very rare occurrence. If I did not bear in mind Mr.
Grenville's copy of this kind, which had belonged to
Jacob Joye, I should say that a similar copy at Althorp
was unrivalled. I recommend the edition of 1684,
although it be not the popular one.
Reserving the mention of other historians, in the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, to the editions of
Albani Vitæ, &c. The editor was WATS. It contains the preface
ofthe edition of 1571. I observe a large paper copy of the Parisian
edition of 1644, to be marked at 61. 6s. in the last catalogue of
Messrs. Arch. Perhaps, a designation of the contents of the latter
part of the edition of 1684, may be useful to the Collector. After
page 861, are " various readings " upon the foregoing history ; with
a preface, which begins at Sign. A, and ends at Sign. K: then follow
notes and animadversions upon the same, ending on the reverse of
the first leaf after Sign. N. Then an index at Sign. O.-Then four
indexes, ending on the recto of the first leaf after Sign . Aa. None of
these pieces, from p. 861, have the pages numbered . Next comes a
fresh title page, dated 1683, of the lives ofthe two Offæ, kings of the
Mercians, ending at page 988, but containing a preface, notes, and
index, with the pages of these latter three pieces not numbered. Then
the lives of the twenty-three abbots of St. Albans, as far as p. 990,
Thenthe Additamenta, beginning abruptly at p. 1073, and ending at
1134: next the Auctarium Additamentorum, ending at 1175. Then
the Glossarium, Sign . * 1 to Sign. *7, concluding with a short " Index
Rerum, " and " Index Cognominum. " This glossary and index have
the pages not numbered.
The intention of translating this valuable historian, into our own
tongue-as a companion to the William of Malmesbury, noticed at
p. 148, ante-is, I believe, now abandoned. It was entertained by a
gentleman in every respect competent to execute such a task.
160 HISTORY
――
them given by Hearne, (under the head of HEARNE'S
PIECES) I proceed at once to the notice ofthe Chronicles ofFroissart and Monstrelet, the latter of which
brings us into the fifteenth century : -from whence
the path, to these our present times, is obvious and
straight forward. First, then, ofFROISSART. In the selection of this author, let me press strongly upon " the
Young Man's " attention, the importance, the instructiveness, and the never-failing source of amusement,
of his history ; which has alike endeared the author
to the antiquary, the man of taste, and even to the
lover of romantic lore. The pages of Froissart exhibit a perfectly natural and pleasing picture. Conversations, skirmishes, battles the country, the
town-scenes within the tent, the palace, or the
church-the quiet of pastoral occupations, or the
tumult of a popular assembly-these, and every thing
which he touches, are hit off in a manner the most
simple and striking imaginable ; and severe indeed.
must be that taste, and fastidious that feeling, which
shall deny to the pages of this historian the merit of
great interest, candour, and apparent fidelity. His
episodes are occasionally delightful, and it is evident
that he was fond of them. He has also a peculiar art
in suspending the main narrative, (where the interest
is becoming more and more intense,) by the relation
of a number of little circumstances which only makes
us return to it with a keener appetite.
But it must not be concealed that Froissart is ,
after all, a little bit of a gossipper ; that he relates
stories, sometimes frivolous of themselves, and sometimes told at second hand ; that he is frequently
prolix, when he should be concise ; and concise when
he should be copious ; that many parts of his narra-
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 161
tive might have been spared, and that there are errors
and omissions which excite the wrath of the critic, and
the regret of the antiquary. But this is little better
than a statement of the common lot of humanity ;
and is only equivalent to the declaration that the
pages of Froissart are NOT PERFECT.
His facts, or the events described by him, may in
general be depended upon. FROISSART has been accused of partiality towards the English ; but this
accusation must always be estimated according to
the quarter whence it comes. It cannot be denied
that Froissart has admirably described the campaigns
of our Edward upon the Continent, when the British
arms were covered with glory ; when a spirit of chivalry, amounting to the romantic, stirred every breast
and nerved every arm. The splendors of Cressy and
Poictiers are but slightly shaded, if at all, by the
achievements of Agincourt and Waterloo ; although it
cannot be denied that, in its results, the latter victory
has scarcely a parallel in the world. The truth is, that
France, towards the end ofthe fourteenth century, had
weak Princes, with a crowd of Nobles, who were jealous of each other, and were alike prodigal of their
own wealth, and of the blood and lives of their vassals.
Yet there were great and towering spirits among the
French Noblesse at that period. Gaston de Foix, the
personal friend of Froissart and the patron of his historical work, leaves all competition at a distance.
Compared with him, even Sir John Chandos becomes
but an attendant Knight. Indeed it were difficult to
mention an historian whose pages are more richly
emblazoned with feats of chivalry, than are those of
Froissart. He is the most picturesque of all Chroniclers.
M
162 HISTORY
The popularity of his work, in the XVth century,
was without bounds. Not a baronial mansion, or an
Hôtel de Ville, but what could boast of a transcript of
Froissart in its library ; and almost every such transcript was adorned by the pencil of the illuminator. *
It was however natural to suppose that, as soon as the
Art of Printing was established in France, the impatience of the French would call for an edition of their
favourite historian ; but it seems pretty certain that
nearly twenty years were suffered to elapse between
the appearance of the Chronique de St. Denis, and the
first impression of Froissart, by Verard and Regnault,
in conjunction —the latter, quite at the conclusion -
* In the great foreign private Collections, which have been dispersed by public auction, the libraries of the Duke de La Valliere
and the Prince de Soubise contained the finest Mss. of Froissart . The
copy, in the latter collection , became, I believe, the property of the
late Mr. Johnes —and yet slumbers in the unexplored retirement of
Hafod. But the transcribers of these splendid Mss. of Froissart
were sometimes "jolly fellows. " Witness, the subscription to the
magnificent copy in the Soubise collection, just mentioned : which
was executed very shortly after the death of the Chronicler.
-
Raoul Tanguy qui POINT N'EST YVRE
AIantem accomplit ce livre
Le Mardi quatrièmejour de Iuillet,
Puis ALLA BOIRE chez Tabouret
Avec Pylon, et autres Caterveaux
Qui aiment Ongnons, Trippes, et Aulx.
In our own public libraries there are several beautifully illuminated Mss . but none of greater splendour than that in the British
Museum, and in the library ofthe Royal Society-which latter, however, is unfortunately imperfect.
The first edition of the Chroniques de France appellées chroniques
de S. Denys were published by Pasquier Bonhomme in 1476, folio,
3 volumes. Verard reprinted these Chronicles in 1493 , and Eustace
in 1514 ; of both of which latter impressions, there are copies urPON
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 163
of the XVth century. In the sixteenth century, however, ample amends were made for the negligence of
the previous century ; and the presses of Le Noir
and Eustace put forth magnificent editions of their
favourite Chronicler. Speaking soberly and critically,
I must advise " the Young Man " to rest satisfied with
the edition of 1559, superintended and corrected by
Denis Sauvage ; but I scarcely know how to refrain
from urging him to let no opportunity pass-provided
his means allow of it-to secure a good old MS. ,
VELLUM : of exceedingly rare occurrence and high price. See the
Macarthy Catalogue, vol. ii . p. 100. The very first edition of Froissart, in the French language, is yet perhaps a moot point. Fontette
is not only indecisive, but somewhat superficial. Clement, Bibl. Curieuse, vol. viii. p . 473, &c. and Meuselius, Biblioth . Historica, vol. vii.
partii. p. 91 , may be consulted with respect to Verard's edition . The
former is copious and interesting. See also Bibl. Krohn, no. 242.
In the Valliere sale, the vellum copy, of Verard's edition, (which had
been Gaignat's) was sold for 920 livres. * Consult also Brunet, vol.
ii. p. 57. See also Oldys's British Librarian, p. 73, and Bibl. West.
no. 4096, for Le Noir's impresion of 1503. The edition of Eustace,
of 1514, was unknown even to De Bure. The copy of it UPON
VELLUM, formerly in the Soubise collection , is now the chief ornament of the Hafod Library. It was obtained at the sale of Mr.
Paris's library for 150l. The varieties and apparent discrepancies
in the early editions of Froissart are pointed out by Mr. Greswel in
his Annals of Parisian Typography, p. 224-5 . At Althorp there are
beautiful copies, upon paper, of the Chroniques de St. Denis, and
Froissart's Chronicles, each by Eustace, in 1514, folio ; and at
Spencer House there is a copy of the first edition of St. Denis. The
reader will witness a rich harvest of early vellum copies of the
French Chroniclers in the Macarthy Catalogue, vol. ii . p. 100-5 .
* This copy was purchased by Count Macarthy. The first volume was in bad condition. The Count was lucky enough to get possession of another first volume (also
upon vellum) which was adorned with a greater number of illuminations : and the copy,
with the discarded original first volume, produced the weighty sum of 4250 francs at
the sale ofthe Count's library. It was purchased for the Royal Library of France.
164 HISTORY
whether illuminated or not ; and the black letter impression by Verard or Eustace. * Froissart, to a well
versed French scholar, is a comfort and delight in any
ancient shape ; and whatever be the boast of our ingenious and enlightened neighbours, there is no printed
edition of this historian, in his vernacular tongue, so
entirely correct, as is the English version of him by
the late Mr. Johnes.
This necessarily brings me to the notice of our own
TRANSLATIONS of the Chronicler under consideration.
And first, of that by LORD BERNERS. A soldier, a
statesman, and a scholar, this nobleman was singularly well adapted for the task which he undertook.
Indeed, considering the period of its completion, it
was a sort of literary miracle. " In imitating the
style of his Original, Lord Berners's translation becomes peculiarly valuable to an English reader. His
version is faithful, but not servile ; and heimitates the
spirit and simplicity of the original, without allowing
us to discover, from any deficiency in either of these
particulars, that his own work is a translation." This
* If Verard and Eustace are beyond the search-or the pocket-of
the Collector, let him sit quietly and contentedly down with the four
folios, in the black letter, printed by Couteau and Regnault, for Jean
Petit, in 1530 : especially as, according to De Bure, the impression
of 1559 has by no means superseded the use of the previous ones ;
for Denis Sauvage is not free from the imputation of frequent inaccuracy. I have in vain searched for a large paper of the edition of
1559, and I conclude that it is not in existence ; inasmuch as De
Thou's copy of it (now in the richly stored library of Mr. G. Hibbert) is upon small paper. I am aware that, of the subsequent edition of 1574, there are large paper copies - to match with the Monstrelet, so temptingly described in an ensuing note ; but even of this
latter edition, Brunet tells us he has seen only one copy. Can it be
so scarce ? Messrs. Arch mark such a copy at £14 . 14s.
--
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 165
""
is the opinion of one, who has read every sentence of
the work which he criticises. The version of Lord
Berners first appeared in two folio volumes, from the
press of Pynson, in the years 1523-1525, and a perfect
or genuine copy of this book is of the very rarest
occurrence-especially in a fine condition. The latter
part of the second volume is frequently " made up
from the reprint by Middleton, without date.† But
he who has the reprint of 1812, 4to. two vols. may rest
perfectly satisfied that he has the text of Lord Berners as correctly given as in the first edition by
Pynson, with a great number of proper names, in
places and persons, corrected into the bargain. If,
however, the " Young Man" sigh, and sigh deeply,
for the oak-bounden impression of Pynson, he must
purchase it--but with caution and previous collation.
In other respects, the russia-coated binding ofthe
edition of 1812 has many advantages over its sable
predecessor.
The name of JOHNES is so coupled with that of
Froissart, that I should not stand excused either to
* The Editor of the reprint of Pynson's first edition of 1523-5 ; of
both of which, see above.
† A complete bibliographical description of the editions of Lord
Berners's version, by Pynson and Middleton, may be found in the
recent edition of our Typographical Antiquities, vol . ii. p. 508-10 ;
vol. iii . p. 552-3. A good sound copy of this kind is in the library
at Blickling, in Norfolk ; see p. 30, ante ; but my friend Mr. Hibbert
possesses one of the very soundest and most desirable copies with
which I am acquainted. Messrs. Payne and Foss mark a copy, " very
neat in russia, " at £21 . Middleton's edition is said to be an absolutely lineal reprint of Pynson's. As to the black letter pirated
reprint of Pynson, I own that I have no faith whatever in its existence. In the reign of Henry VIII. there were few or no " Pirates "
in printing offices. That marauding system was reserved for the
present enlightened period.
166 HISTORY
myself, or to the public, if I did not introduce it with
the honourable notice which it merits. Nearly three
centuries had elapsed since the death of the first English translator of Froissart, before any other candidate, in the same field of literary fame, presented
himself as the Editor of the historian in question.
Fortunately for the second, and recently deceased,
translator, he brought, to the task which he undertook, not only a fair stock of knowledge of the original
language in which the work was written, but leisure,
opportunity, taste, and a devotional ardour which has
never been surpassed . He erected a press, from which
press issued Froissart, Monstrelet, De Brocquiere, and
Joinville. * The public were equally delighted and
-
* The first edition of Mr. Johnes's Froissart was in the year 1803,
in 4 vols. 4to.: containing outlines of illuminations of some of the
more precious MSS. consulted . Of this edition, as well as of the
subsequent versions by Mr. Johnes, there were about twenty- five
copies struck off in a folio form-the press being re- set-with duplicate impressions of the plates coloured after the originals. These
copies have been sold at very high prices. At this moment there is
a most splendid one, in the binding of C. Lewis, at Mr. R. Triphook's. There have been also two octavo editions, or re- impressions, of Mr. Johnes's Froissart - - each in twelve volumes, with the
same plates : and I believe I am speaking correctly, in saying, that
neither of these octavo editions are now of common occurrence.
Such are the unqualified testimonies in favour of the historian himself, and of Mr. Johnes's version ofhis text. For an interesting account
of Mr. Johnes's labours, consult the Edinb. Review, vol. v. p. 347.
With MONSTRELET, as an historian of English matters, we have less
to do ; and therefore I recommend only the folio edition of Denis
Sauvage, 1572, or Mr. Johnes's version, in 1809, 4to. , with very much
abler outline illustrations than those in Froissart. But I should be
guilty of an almost flagrant act of omission, if I did not inform my
"Young Man " of the rarity and value of large paper copies of the
edition of Denis Sauvage. De Thou's copy of this kind—belonging
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 167
instructed by these productions ; and Froissart, the
first in order, and the only author just now necessary
to the late Colonel Stanley, is now in the collection of Sir M. M.
Sykes, Bart. but that intrepid Baronet paid £136. for its acquisition.
See the Bibl. Decam. vol. ii . p. 478 ; vol. iii . p. 81. It is probable
that Mr. Evans's stimulating note might have been the cause of such a
high price given. Mr. Evans has since told me, that, having had a
strong impression upon his mind that this copy was not only upon
large paper, but upon paper of a superior quality, he resolved, on
visiting Paris, to have this point determined—and found, on examination of the copy in the Royal Library there, that his conjecture was
confirmed. Mr. Hibbert has a very fine large paper copy, in two
volumes, bound in red morocco, which had belonged to * * * : and
at Blickling, there is a beautiful similar copy, in three volumes,
bound in white calf, which had belonged to Maittaire. It is the condition of these large paper copies which determines their value : as
they are by no means of rare occurrence. I proceed briefly to the
mention ofthe Mémoires de Joinville (a contemporary of St. Louis, or
Louis IX., at the end of the XIIIth century) —also translated by Mr.
Johnes ; but of which the best edition, in French, is that by Messrs.
Mélot, Sallier, and Capperonnier, in 1761, folio ; although Ducange's edition of 1668 should be consulted for its ingenious notes.
The edition of 1761 is very fine, and copies upon LARGE PAPER are
by no means uncommon.
-
Having thus entered upon those portions of older French History,
in which frequent mention is made of OUR OWN COUNTRY, I may be
permitted to recommend Les Grandes Chroniques de Bretaigne, composees en langaige francoys ; Paris, S. de la Roche, &c. 1514.
This is the first edition ; of which the second appeared (with the
name of the author, ALAIN BOUCHARD) in 1518, folio each in the
Gothic letter. The late Daines Barrington, (in a copy of the first
edition, once in my possession) said " This Chronicle seems to contain more particulars with regard to what is called the fabulous part
of English History, than any other, either English or French, which
I have happened to meet with. " This may be true enough ; and, as
a proof of it, Du Fresnoy classes the work amongst the Romances of
chivalry. Of course, no English historical collection can be complete
without the Memoirs of P. DE COMINES ; of which I shall not
quarrel with either the " Young Man, " or " the Old Man " (should
168 HISTORY
to be noticed, as connected with our history during
the period which it embraces, is, at this moment,
perhaps, as great a favourite as Rapin and Hume.
You meet with him in the stately folio, bulky quarto,
or portable octavo form, in the libraries of almost
every well educated Englishman.
The order of these researches has at length brought
us to the period of the INVENTION OF PRINTING ; and,
with it, to that of a series of publications under the
denomination of CHRONICLES , ANNALS, MEMOIRS,
MEMORIALS, &c. which render the collection of British History, (as those publications appeared in the
sixteenth and following centuries, ) a work of considerable labour, but of scarcely less amusement, and of
almost endless variety. I will, therefore, commence
with the Chronicles-a popular branch of collectingand go through the series of them ; or rather notice the
most distinguished Chroniclers, from Caxton to Strutt.
the latter be fortunate enough to have sufficiently good eyes) if
either should make much of a beautiful large-margined copy of the
Elzevir edition of 1648, 12mo.-whereof I have seen several of considerable price. The printers profess to have examined the following
editions : 1525, by I. G. no date or place : 1526, at Lyons, by
Nourri : 1546, at Paris, by Mesuiere : and 1549, at Paris, by Thibout. At the end of the Eighth Book there is a short explanation of
17 pages of difficult passages which occur in relating to the wars of
Charles VII.-followed by theTable of principal matters, or chapters,
as before. But the best edition is that of 1747, 4to. 4 vols. by Du
Fresnoy and let the curious look well to the portrait of, and Dedication to, Marshal Saxe-both of which were suppressed. Nor will
I quarrel with the folio edition of 1649 ; and still less with some of
the earlier editions, in the black letter, from 1523 to 1600. Brunet
speaks of a tempting copy, UPON VELLUM, of the edition of 1534, in
the Royal Library at Paris. But what vellum copy of a black
letter edition of an old historian, or chronicler, is NOT tempting? "
:
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 169
I am aware that the names of Peter Langtofft and
Robert of Glocester stand the earliest in the list of
our CHRONICLERS ; but I shall reserve the mention of
them till I come to the account of the Pieces published
by THOMAS HEARNE, who was their first and only
Editor. It is true that, in taking up the series of
Annals, Memorials, &c. I shall often have to retread
the same path, chronologically speaking ; but this is
of subordinate consequence. Any plan is better than
no plan : and discussions and disputes about " systems"
are interminable. " To begin " therefore " at the
beginning "-with a Chronicle, which was printed in
1480 by the father of the British Press, and hence derives its name of CAXTON'S CHRONICLE. To this work is
usually subjoined The Description of Britain ; and a
fair and perfect copy of these two works is an acquisition of very rare occurrence. * This book, was
* These publications have been so fully described in the first
volume of the recent edition of our Typographical Antiquities, p. 85,
that I may here only refer the reader to such description. To obtain
a sound and perfect copy of both, or of either, is a circumstance of
no ordinary occurrence. Hearne expatiates very feelingly upon
their rarity and value ; supposing (but a little loosely) that not more
than 120 copies were printed. " They do well (adds he) who buy
them at any price ; and none but blockheads would part with even a
fragment of them-on the ground, forsooth, that the language is a
little old-fashioned ! " Consult his Thoma Caii Vind. Antiq. Oxon.
vol. ii . p. 802 ; and Robert of Glocester, vol. i . p. lxxxii. At the sale
of the Alchorne Library, in 1813, no. 168, a copy of the Chronicle
alone, with " the first leafof the table and one leaf of the text supplied
by manuscript," was purchased by the Duke of Devonshire for sixty
guineas. At the sale of the Towneley Library, a copy of The Description of Britain, alone, was purchased for the Royal Library at
the weighty cost of eighty guineas. Lord Spencer possesses a most
desirable and perfect copy of each of these books, in the same volume, as they were doubtlessly originally printed . Perhaps the
170 HISTORY
reprinted four times in the fifteenth century ; namely,
in the Abbey of St. Albans in 1483 ; by Machlinia,
without date, but probably within a year or two of
the preceding ; by Gerard de Leeu, at Antwerp, in
1493 ; and by Wynkyn de Worde in 1497. It should
however be noticed, that the reprints in the Abbey of
St. Alban's, by Machlinia, and by Gerard de Leeu, do
not contain the Description of Britain. *
largest and finest copy of each (in the same volume, old binding) is
in the archiepiscopal library at Lambeth ; but an ancient ms. memorandum informs me that the Chronicle is slightly imperfect in the
middle.
It is somewhat surprising that, in the rage for reprinting oldEnglish Chronicles, which obtained several years ago, the Publishers
should not have commenced with this most ancient, most curious,
and least bulky text of our Chroniclers ?
* The St. Alban's reprint is called the " Fructus Temporum," and
contains precisely the same text as Caxton's, with the addition of
slight notices of Popes and Emperors. A perfect copy of this book
is of the rarest possible occurrence. Mr. West's copy, now in the
Royal Library is supposed to be so. Lord Spencer's copy (formerly
in the Alchorne collection) should seem to be deficient only in the
table, and in the last leaf, which contains nothing but the barbarous
device ( in red) of the printer. I refer the reader to the full and particular account of this copy in the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. iv. p. 369,
&c. Miss Currer, a lady who ennobles a large property by a correct
and liberal taste in the collection of a fine library, has the singular
good fortune to possess a copy of this very rare book (wanting
only the last leaf) UPON VELLUM. The copy of this book (whether
perfect or not, I cannot pretend to say) in Dr. Hunter's collection at
Glasgow, had belonged to Ratcliffe, and was purchased bythe Doctor
for 71. 78. The cuts in this Chronicle are barbarous in the extreme ;
but luckily they are few in number.
Mr. Douce (in his Illustrations of Shakspeare, &c. vol. i . p. 423)
+ It is mentioned in the Catalogue of Miss Currer's library, printed under the
care of Mr. R. Triphook, bookseller, 1820, 8vo. Of this catalogue, containing
308 pages, only fifty copies were printed-for private distribution.
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 171
In the sixteenth century, not fewer than seven reprints of it appeared ; of which four were by Wynkyn
supposes that Machlinia's impression of this Chronicle was anterior
to that of Caxton ; but I differ decidedly from this inference, and
deem it to be only a reprint : barbarously enough executed, and of a
degree of rarity, in a perfect state, scarcely conceivable. Lord
Spencer's copy (obtained from Mr. Douce, in exchange for some
other book- rarities) is, I think, the only known copy in a perfect
state. See the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. iv. p. 393. Mr. Roger Wilbraham possesses an imperfect copy which was formerly in the
Tutet Collection , where (Bibl. Tutet, no. 485) it was supposed to
have been printed by Caxton. The volume is without date, and destitute of every species of embellishment. Of the reprint by Gerard
De Leeu, at Antwerp, in 1493, a particular account (with a facsimile of the printer's device) will be found at p. 229-31 , in the
authority first referred to. As this was the last book ever printed by
De Leeu, the reader may not object to be made acquainted with the
phraseology of the colophon-in which the printer's decease is mentioned :-" maister Gerard de leew. a man of grete wysedom in all
manner ofkunngng : whych now is comefrom lyfe vnto the deth, which
is grete harme for many a poure man. On whos sowle god almighty
for hys hygh grace haue mercy." Consult Maittaire, vol. i . p . 562 ;
Panzer, vol. i. p. 12 ; and the Dict. Bibliogr. Choisi. part ii , no. 421 .
Lambinet, in his first edition , was ignorant of the existence of this
very curious volume. Lord Spencer's copy of it was once the property ofMr Roger Wilbraham, who kindly consented to part with it
in exchange for some other typographical curiosity.
The reprint by WYNKYN DE WORDE, in 1497, contains the Description of Britain. See it described in the Typog. Antiq. vol. ii.
p. 69-71, and Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. iv. p. 401. It is rarely found
in a perfect state. The same printer reprinted it in 1502, 1515,
1520, and 1528 : perhaps again. See the Bibl. Harleiana, vol. iii . no.
394. Ofthe reprints by JULIAN NOTARY, in 1504 and 1515, I have
no certain information to impart beyond what is contained in the Typog.
Antiq. vol. ii. p. 579-580. The first of these reprints appears to
have been in the Bibl. Harleiana, vol. iii . no . 392 ; and the second is
found in the Bibl. Brand. part i . no. 2836 ; and particularly described
in Bibl. Monro. no. 796. Of PYNSON's edition in 1510, Lord Spencer
possesses a copy, from the Alchorne Collection. The wood- cut,
172 HISTORY
―
de Worde-briefly alluded to at the conclusion of the
last note. Julian Notary printed it in 1504 and 1515 ;
and Pynson only once in 1510. The Chronicle of
Caxton should therefore seem to have become unpopular a short time after the publication of that of
Fabian, of which presently. Meanwhile, I am to
notice a ponderous historical volume which appeared
as a sort of help- mate to the Chronicle of Caxton : I
mean, the POLYCHRONICON, printed also bythe Father
of the British Press, in 1482, from the English version
of John de Trevisa, who translated it from the Latin
original of Ranulph Higden. * A perfect copy of
preceding the Description of England, has been copied in the Typog.
Antiq. vol. i. p. ix. There is a little tract, or table, entitled " Anglorum Regum brevis Epilogus post conquestum, " after the Description which Herbert " had not found in any other edition of this
book." In an imperfect state, Pynson's re-impression is by no
181
means uncommon.
*" The father of printing (says Gibbon) expresses a laudable desire to elucidate the history of his country ; but, instead of publishing
the Latin Chronicle of Ranulphus Higden, he could only venture on
the English version, by John de Trevisa ; and his complaint of the
difficulty of finding materials for his own continuation of that work,
sufficiently attests that even the writers, which we now possess, of the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, had not yet emerged from the
darkness of the cloister. His successors, with less skill and ability,
were content to tread in his footsteps, " &c. Posthumous Works, vol. ii .
p. 710. Gibbon must be understood to speak of the Polychronicon.
My interleaved copy of Herbert informs me, that, in the account of
English History, there is a considerable variation from Caxton's edition of the Chronicle. Perfect copies of this impression of the
Polychronicon are of most extreme rarity. Lord Spencer could not
complete his own fine copy, without the acquisition of three imperfect ones. Sir M. M. Sykes possesses a very sound and nearly perfect copy which he purchased from Messrs. Arch. This copy had
long lain (in oblivion) in an old library, in the attic story, belonging to a noble mansion in one of our midland counties . Miss Currer
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 173
this very rare Caxtonian volume is indeed seldom to
be met with ; although I should pronounce imperfect
copies to be rather common than otherwise. This
sort of historical Olla Podrida has been only twice
reprinted ; once by Wynkyn de Worde in 1495, and
the second time by Peter Treveris in 1527 : each in
folio. Of these reprints, the first, in a perfect state
(especially with the frontispiece) is a very rare, as
well as a very handsomely executed, book : the second,
even in a perfect state, is by no means of uncommon
occurrence.
At the very commencement of the sixteenth cenpossesses a copy of it, but not quite perfect. The reprint of this
edition by W. DE WORDE, in 1495, presents us with one ofthe most
beautiful folio volumes of that skilful artist. The printer promised
to bring the history down to the tenth year of Henry the Seventh :
but, as Herbert justly observes, he was not " so good as his word ; "
the present edition being only a reprint of that of his predecessor.
It is, however, executed with great typographical beauty ; and has
an introduction of a few poetical stanzas, (reprinted in the Typog.
Antiq. vol. ii. p. 50.) in which one Roger Thornye, ' a mercer, is
justly lauded for stimulating the printer to undertake so laborious a
performance. A " fine gilt copy " of it was sold at the sale of Mr.
Daly's books, in 1792, for 18l. 5s. See Bibl, Daly, n° 553. The
only perfect copy which I remember to have seen, is that in the collection of J. D. Phelps, Esq. of Lincoln's Inn. Of the reprint by
TREVERIS, in 1527, the reader will find abundant notice ( together
with fac-similes of some of its wood-cut embellishments) in the
Typog. Antiq. vol. i . pp. xii. xv. vol. iii . p. 40. It has a magnificent frontispiece, or title-page, of St. George killing the Dragon,
&c. which is repeated, with some slight variations of ornament, on
the last leaf of the book. Most of our principal collections possess
it ; and, till within a few years, the price of it, when in fine and
perfect condition, has been pushed to 127. 12s. It may be now had,
at a public auction, in a perfect state, for about half that sum. One
of the finest copies of it is in the library of the Marquis of Bath, at
Longleat.
174 HISTORY
tury, appeared a thin folio volume entitled the Names
of the Bailiffs, &c. ofthe city of London, commonly
called ARNOLD'S CHRONICLE ; * and of which a re-
*The Names ofthe Baylifs, Custos Mayers and Sherefs, ofthe cyte of
londo, &c. commonly called Arnold's Chronicle, London. 1500. 1521 .
Folio. Those who are fond of searching deeply into bibliographical
lore, may amuse themselves with the various opinions which have
been advanced in Oldys's British Librarian, p. 22 ; the Harleian Catalogue, vol. iii . nº 423 ; Capel's Prolusions ; sign. C. 6. Herbert's
Typographical Antiquities, p. 1746 ; Percy's Old Ballads, vol. ii . 27 .
edit. 1794 ; and the Censura Literaria, vol. vi. p. 113, 393, respecting the printer, date, and number of editions of this very curious and rare performance. This work, as above intimated, contains the original of Prior's celebrated Poem of the Nut Brown
Maid ; ' of which specimens may be seen in the authority last quoted.
All that seems necessary further to observe is , that Pynson was probably the first printer, and that there are at least three editions of it.
The first about the year 1500 ; the second in 1521. A third edition,
and a very curious one, was printed abroad by one Doesbrooke,
Duesbrowghe, Dusborrowghe, Doesborowe, Doesborow, or Doesbroch, (for he writes his name each way, ) at Antwerp, with types
similar to those in the Life of Virgilius, * and Stanbridge's Accidence
printed by him. See Herbert, vol. iii . p. 1531 .
·
Doesborow's edition ends on the recto of V. v. Mr. R. Wilbraham is in possession of a fine copy of it . Copies of the English impression are in most of our public libraries.
West's fine copy, now in the royal library.
Bishop Percy mentions
See also Bibl. Tutet.
no 210, 211. Bibl. Mason, p* . iii . nº 178 ; and Bibl . Brand. p¹ i .
n° 227 : which latter copy was purchased by Mr. for £18. 18s.
Four copies, two perfect and two imperfect, were in the collection
of Ratcliffe, nos. 815, 999, 1660, &c. Earl Spencer, Mr. Gren-
* Of this most singular, and not unamusing performance (being the life of a
Necromancer of the name of Virgilius, who wrought many marvels thorough
the helpe of the devyls of hell") a reprint appeared in 1812, by my friend Mr.
Utterson, for the exclusive gratification of some fifty friends -with one additional
copy struck off UPON VELLUM. This reprint was executed by Mr. M'Creery in a
diamond letter, upon soft french paper, of a duodecimo form and has been long considered a bijou of rarity and value.
:
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 175
print appeared in 1521 , and again at Antwerp, without date : although, in fact, neither of the editions
contains a date. I hardly know how to raise this
work to the dignity even of a Chronicle ; but it may
be considered as rather a precious relic of the ancient
customs and manners of the metropolis, and as yet
more interesting to the philological antiquary in containing what is supposed to be the original of Prior's
celebrated poem of the " Nut Brown Maid." At
length came forth the celebrated CHRONICLE OF FABIAN, " Citizen and Alderman of London, " which
first appeared in 1516 ; secondly in 1533 ; thirdly in
1542 ; fourthly in 1559 ; and, fifthly and lastly, in
1810.* Of all these additions, the last is of the
ville, and Mr. Heber, each possess it. But " the Young Man" need
not sigh-nor need " the Old Man " despair-in the non- possession
of either of the foregoing editions of this curious and even instructive volume : since a faithful reimpression of it, together with a
judicious introduction, was published by Messrs. Longman and Co.
in 1811 , 4to. under the editorial care of Mr. Douce. Every liveryman and alderman must of necessity procure a copy of such a work.
* Let us take the editions of Fabian in the order above specified ;
and let us say somewhat more than " a word" about the first, since
it is a volume of exceedingly great rarity. Berkenhout justly observes, upon the authority of Nicolson, that this work contains
several curious particulars of the city of London, not elsewhere to
be found,' Biogr. Literar. p. 23. This first impression, besides the
superior beauty of its typographical execution, and the embellishments of cuts (not introduced in the subsequent editions ) , has a still
further recommendation to the notice of the collector and antiquary,
from its containing the legitimate text of the chronicler. See Mr.
Brand's remark in the Variorum edition of Shakspeare, 1803, vol.
xviii. p. 85, 6 ; and Hearne's Robert of Gloucester, vol. i. P. xxxii.
It has been a received opinion , from a loose dictum of Bale (Cent.
no lxii. ) , that Cardinal Wolsey ordered many copies of this first edition to be burnt, owing to the freedom of some observations in it
upon the clergy of the day ; and also that it contains some copies of
176 HISTORY
greatest intrinsic value ; it having been collated
throughout with the subsequent editions ; and the
66 verses, suppressed in the latter editions." The latter remark,
which was first advanced by Warton, (Hist. Eng. Poet. vol. ii . p.
192,) is not quite correct : these verses having been in part omitted,
and in part altered, in the editions of Reynes and Kingston ; but
inserted entire in Rastell's. The former remark may, probably, be
equally without foundation ; as it is clear that neither Cavendish, *
Tyndal, nor Fox, notice Wolsey's destruction of the first edition.
Nicolson was ignorant of this impression, but Tanner expressly notices it. Whether Leland ever saw a copy of it, may, in some measure, be ascertained, by comparing the extract from his Collectanea,
(vol. ii. p. 426, edit. 1774, ) with the original text. Neither the
Harleian nor the West collections contained it . The imperfect copy
in the Beauclerk Library ( p' ii. nº 2229) , was in the collection of
the late Mr. Craven Orde, and afterwards in that of the late Mr.
Samuel Lysons, at the sale of whose library, in 1821, it was purchased by the Earl of Aylesford for £35. Mr. Utterson possesses
a very considerable portion of a copy ; and Lord Spencer has been
the fortunate possessor of two perfect copies. The one, now retained by him, is of great beauty and soundness of condition : the
other, parted with, was sound and perfect, and was sold for £84.
at a public auction, in 1815. There is a copy, in thorough pristine
condition, in the very curious library of Dysart House at Ham. A
perfect copy is said to be in the public library at Cambridge.
The second edition was printed by WILLIAM RASTELL, in 1533,
and is indeed a very pretty typographical production. In the Bibl.
Harleiana, vol. iii . nº 402, there is a long note attached to a copy of
this edition which may be worth consulting. It seems to have been
unknown to Nicolson and Tanner. The third edition was printed
by John Reynes in 1542 ; and we are informed by Mr. Henry Ellis,
editor of the last edition, (to be presently noticed) that the alterations and omissions in it are more numerous than the generality of
readers may probably suspect. The deficiences of Herbert's description of this impression may be found supplied in the recent edition
of our Typ. Antiq. vol. iii . 268. There was a copy in the Harleian
* See the Life of Wolsey by Cavendish, in Dr. Wordsworth's Ecclesiastical
Biography, vol. i . p. 323—which is remarkably interesting.
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 177
second part with a MS. of the Chronicle in the British
Museum. The preliminary matter also renders this
·
Collection, with MS. notes ;' and one in the Fletewode Collection,
' which formerly belonged to Maister Thomas Sakevile, afterwards
Lord Buckhurst, and Lord H. Treasurer ; having several marginal
references in the hand- writing of that accomplished genius and statesman.' Bibl. Fletewode, nº 3339. This very copy recently came under
the hammer of Mr. Evans, and was knocked down for £19. 8s. 6d.
See also Bibl. West. n° 4119 ; Bibl. Folkes. nº 893 ; Bibl. Tutet. nº 484,
" fine copy in morocco. " Some copies of this date, with the name
of BONHAM, as the printer, are only the same book with a fresh title
page.
The fourth and last edition of Fabian's Chronicle, printed in the
black letter, is that by John Kingston, in 1559, folio, 2 vol. in 1 .
The printer professes to have cleared Fabian's text from the errors
of his predecessors, and especially from those introduced by Reynesby a careful collation with the original impression. The present is
therefore greatly preferable to the two immediately preceding it ;
and, when found in a large and clean state, may be called a magnificent book. See Bibl. Woodhouse, nº 334. Such copies have sold
for £15. 15s.; but the recent edition has greatly, and justly, deteriorated their value. Each impression brings the history down to
the period of its publication. Lastly, I have to notice, with the
commendation which it unquestionably merits, the recent and most
valuable edition of Fabian's Chronicle published by Messrs. Longman and Co. in 1811 , 4to. from the editorial pen of Mr. H. Ellis,
Curator of the MSS. in the British Museum. I have above enumerated the principal features of superiority in this work ; and need
here only further remark, that the second part of the Chronicle is
collated with a MS. text of it in the British Museum .*
I have a perfect recollection at this moment of a letter, written to me by
my friend the Editor, on the morning following that, when, beneath a cloudless
sky, and fanned by a refreshing breeze, he described himself as seizing his pilgrim's staff (to wit, a comely black-thorn) , in order to make a journey to the Commons, to discover the WILL of Master Fabian -and the joy, on the discovery of
it, seems to have been scarcely less than that which seized Belzoni on the first
view of his Egyptian tombs and temples, or Mr. Buckland on a similar view of
the ante-diluvian remains of the hyæna. It will always be so with enthusiastic
cultivators of every pursuit. Life seems but a dreamless and profitless slumber
without some such occasional stimulants.
N
178 HISTORY
edition of considerable value ; as it contains a life of
the Chronicler, with an account of the different historians whence he gathered his materials. There is
also a copy of his will ; and the volume is closed by a
useful index. Yet, on the score of bibliographical
curiosity and as a rarity of no mean value, the
thorough-bred Roxburgher will never rest satisfied
till he possesses a perfect copy of the FIRST EDITION—
of which I should doubt whether there were six such
copies in existence.
The order of time induces me to notice another
publication in the character of a Chronicle, which
was published by John Rastell, about the year 1530,
under the usually received title of THE PASTIME OF
PEOPLE. This volume was of such excessive rarity,
that scarcely a perfect copy of it was known till of
a late period. Its chief merit seems to consist in the
cuts or portraits of the Kings-with which it is
professed to be adorned. Those, who assign these
cuts to the pencil of Holbein, know little of the character of the Artist whom they thus traduce. This
Chronicle was reprinted in 1811 , with fac-similes of
all the strange regal portraits, and a prefatory advertisement. *
* First, however, of the old edition, or parent text : of which it
may be premised that a long and faithful account appears in the recent edition of the Typog. Antiq. vol. iii . p. 91 , &c. together with a
fac- simile of the title page. The title is thus. The Pastyme of
People, or the Chronycles dyuers realmys and most specyally of the
realme of Englond breuely compylyd, and emprynted in chepesyde at
the sygne ofthe mearemayd next to polly's gate. " It is justly observed
by Herbert, that this is one of the scarcest histories we have in
print. Very few copies of it are known to be in existence ; and of
these, his Majesty's (it being Mr. West's copy, which was given to
West in the year 1729, by Lord Oxford, ) is perfect. Consult Bibl.
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 179
The notice of this graphically illustrated Chronicle
reminds me of another somewhat similar production,
but of considerably greater rarity, and of yet greater
merit of embellishment. I allude to the mixed prose
and poetry-chronicle, printed by GILES GODET, (dwelling in Black Friars) about the year 1560, of which
an account first appeared before the public in the
Ædes Althorpianæ : * and of which the private hisHarleian. vol. iii. nº 253, and Bibl. West. nº 4094. Mr. Grenville's
copy is also perfect : but Lord Spencer's (formerly Ratcliffe's copy)
is imperfect. See the Bibl. Ratcliffe, no 1013. 1392. Bibl. Farmer, nº
6226. Bibl. Mason. pt. iii. nº 341 and Bibl. Brand. nº 8320.
Herbert has been sufficiently elaborate in his account of this extraordinary performance ; justly remarking upon the ignorance of
former historians of its existence. Hearne never saw but one copy
of it, which was lent him by his indefatigable book- collecting friend,
John Murray ; and of which a curious notice will be found in the
Thomæ Caii Vindic. Antiq. Acad. Oxoniens. vol. ii . p . 803-4 ; as well
as a specimen of the work given in Peter Langtoft's Chronicles, vol. i .
liv. 19, 84, &c. But the reprint above mentioned (which contains all the decorations of the original—and which decorations were
cut upon blocks of the apple tree † ) will give the reader every information which he may require. The author of this work was the
Editor of the reprint in question ; and placed the only copy of it in
existence, upon thick paper, on the shelves of the Althorp Library.
The ordinary copies are obtainable at a very moderate price.
p.
* A particular account of this very singular, and almost unique
volume, will be found in the Edes Althorpianæ, vol. i. p. 180-184.
The only other known copy (and a very fine one it is) is in the collection of the Rt. Hon. T. Grenville. The reader may probably not be
† “ Experientia docet.” It was with the greatest difficulty that these blocks--
from the soft and pliable nature of the wood - could be kept together for the
purpose of printing. There were fractures in them, like those on a sheet of ice
after the breaking up of a frost. I take it the originals were cut on pear or chestnut wood. It is almost certain that the large and ancient block, now in Lord
Spencer's possession, and of which a specimen is given in my Tour, vol. iii . p.
234-5, is of pear-tree wood.
180 HISTORY
tory-as to the particular object in view, the author,
and the artists employed- will probably for ever
remain concealed. But I must not omit the mention of
a Chronicle, entirely metrical, under the title of HARDYNG'S CHRONICLE, which was published in a small
quarto volume in 1543, and of which the recent reprint in 1812, has rendered the possession of the
original edition scarcely an object even with the most
fastidious collector . The reader is referred to the
accompanying note* as a whetter to further research
respecting this singular production.
displeased to have a specimen (such as it is) of the poetry in this extraordinary performance. The ensuing stanza relates to the murder
of the young Princes, by Richard III. , in the Tower at London.
But the manner how these princes were dead
Some say they were buried quick : and some tell
That they were smothered vnder a fether bed.
Some say they were drowned in a vessell
But when they came vnto the tower to dwell
They were never after seene with mannes eye
Thre moneths this king raigned men know well
But God knoweth where his body doth lye.
* Ofthe old edition, in black letter, there were at least two impressions ; both in the same year. One has the title " A Chronicle
in Metre ;" the other has the words " in metre " omitted, and the
date in Roman letters-whereas the former has the date in Arabic
numerals. It is quite evident, throughout, that the press was reset ;
a circumstance, which seems to have escaped Herbert. The reader
will find a full account of this rare and interesting book in the Typog.
Antiq. vol. iii . p. 447, together with a transcript of " an original
grant of King Henry VI. to Harding, upon vellum "-which belonged to a copy that had successively enriched the collections of
West and Mason, and which is now the property of Mr. George
Hibbert. See also Bibl. Pearson, nº 5210 ; and Bibl. Allen, nº 713.
But, on the score of utility, neither " the young" nor " the old '
will hesitate one moment about the preference to be given, in all
respects, to the reprint above mentioned of which Mr. H. Ellis is
the Editor.
""
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 181
About this time appeared a shoal of minor or fugitive publications, of the character of which it is
difficult to give any precise account ; and of which
the account, if given, would very little profit the
reader. Suffice it therefore to mention, in very general terms, the abridgements or Summaries of Chronicles under thenames of Lanquett, Cooper, and Stow. *
·
This " shoal of minor publications, " in the character of Chronicles, shall be here summarily described . Among the earliest, is
that by ARTHUR KELTON ; being A Chronycle with a Genealogie
declaryng that the Britons and Welshmen are lineallye dyscended from
Brute. Newly and very wittely compyled in meter. London. 1547.
12mo. This is a very uncommon book. An outline of its contents is given in the Typog. Antiq. vol. iii . p. 455 , from a copy in
the possession of Herbert ; who tells us that the text is compiled in
seven-lined stanzas ; and that it contains forty leaves ; the last leaf
being blank. There was a copy of it in the Beauclerk collection,
[Bibl. Beauclerk, pt. ii. nº 2220] which seemed to require the aid of
another black letter book, to produce the sum of 4s. 3d.-for which
they were both sold. It would appear from Ritson's Biographia
Poetica, p. 260, that the poetical effusions of Kelton are very rare :
they are not noticed in the new edition of Philips's Theatrum Poetarum, nor have any further discoveries of him, or indeed any specimens of this poetical chronicle, found their way into the Censura
Literaria by the sedulous author of Additions to Ritson's work just
quoted, and of which, let us hope, a new edition is forthcoming.
Secondly, of LANQUETT'S CHRONICLE, continued by Cooper : in
the years 1549, 1559, 1560, 1565, &c . 4to. These, and more than
are here specified, are editions of a Chronicle which does not appear
to have been compiled with any extraordinary care or attention, and
+ Even this little volume was preceded by a " SHORT CHRONYCLE wherein ye
shallfynde the names ofall the Kings ofEngland, ofthe Mayors and Sheriff's ofthe
cytye ofLondon, &c. printed by Bydell, in 1539, 1542, 12mo.: byVowell, in 1551 ,
and again without date. This seems to have been a sort of Manual, or Vade Mecum , published annually for the common people. Herbert has been exclusively
indebted to Ames for his account of it. A copy of the second edition appears in
the Bibl. West. n° 3764 ; and of the third in Bibl. Harleian. vol. iv. nº 11720.
182 HISTORY
Of the Annals, or larger Chronicle of Stow, I shall
speak in chronological order.
which, therefore, is but of limited authority. The editions of 1549
and 1560 are printed by T. Berthelet ; those of 1559, the one by
Marshe and the other for Seres. They are all thick and inelegant
small quartos ; but bear some price from the increasing demand for
this species of books. A copy of the edition of 1560 was sold for
21. 6s. at Brand's sale : vide Bibl. Brand. pt . i . nº 2323.
In the third place, let us say a word of " The Thre Bokes ofJOHN
CARION'S Chronicle ; printed by Lynn at London, in 1550, 4to.
This English version of the Latin text of Carion was never , I believe, reprinted. The preface, on " the use of reading History, " is
by no means a despicable production. An index, with the pages not
numbered, terminates the volume. A clean and perfect copy of this
book is not common. Its title is well set forth in the Bibl. Fletewode, nº 2522. At the sale of Ratcliffe's library, (Bibl. Ratcliffe. nº
1500) Dr. Hunter purchased a copy in morocco for 19s. A fine
copy was sold for 17. 18. at West's sale : Bibl. West. nº 3813 ; and
for 41. 10s. at Brand's sale-nº 2326. In 1562, there appeared an
Abridgement of GRAFTON'S CHRONICLES, (or rather, as I conceive, of
Hall's, published by Grafton, in 1548, 1550) , in one octavo volume,
which will be found described in the Typog. Antiq. vol. iii . 433.
I owe it to the accuracy of research, and kindness of communication, of Mr. Grenville, to state that the first edition of this Summary
(unknown to all bibliographers) was in 1561 ; of which Mr. G. has
a copy, and which will solve the puzzle of Grafton's notice of it, in
his own abridgement of 1562. See the Typog. Antiq. vol. iii . p. 423 .
Fourthly, of STOWE's Summarie of English Chronicles, 1565. 8vo.
printed by Marshe. This is the first edition of repute, and which
was reprinted for a number of subsequent years. See Bibl. West. nº
3770 ; from which Herbert appears to have copied his list verbatim.
Typog. Antiq. vol. ii . p . $53 : note. Among Bagford's papers upon
printing, in the British Museum, there is the printed title page of an
edition of 1570—of the existence of which Herbert doubted. I cannot, at this moment, exactly specify upon what basis, or of what
materials, JAGGARD's Briefe Chronicle of the Successe of Times from
the Creation of the World to this instant, ( viz. 1611 ) is composed ;
but it commences with the creation, and occupies a 4to. volume of
613 pages. Jaggard was the printer ; and Anthony Mundy, the
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 183
I am now to touch upon a higher class of Chroniclers, under the names of HALL, GRAFTON, and HoLINSHED ; and of which the recent and faithfully
executed reprints, put it in the power of the Collector
to avail himself of copies at an ordinary cost. * No
Editor, dedicates his work " to the right Honovrable, Sir VVilliam
Cravon, Knight, Lord Maior of the Cittie of London ; Sir Henrie
Montagve, Seriant at Law to his Maiestie and Recorder of London :
and to all the Knights, Aldermen, and worshipfull Bretheren , the
carefull Fathers and Gouernours of this honourable Estate." This is
followed by an Epistle to the Merchant Tailors, " being the worthy
Society of S. John Baptist " -also by Mundy. The book however is
of little worth .
* The ancient editions shall be described as briefly as is compatible
with propriety of late years, the rage for the Originals having much
abated. First of EDWARD HALL ; whose Chronicle is entitled " the
Union ofthe Two Noble and Illustrious Families of York and Lancaster." Premising that the edition of 1542 is entirely supposititious, I
proceed to the first impression in 1548.
-
The conclusion of the address of Grafton, the printer, informs us,
that, Hall dying-and " being in his latter time not so painful and
studious as he ought to have been, " he, Grafton, undertook the
compilation of the greater part ; although he published an edition
which goes expressly under his own name. Grafton in fact continued it down to the reign of Henry VIII . from Hall's MSS. Athen.
Oxon. vol. i. col. 165. edit. Bliss. This impression of 1548 is a
scarce as well as a beautifully executed book. The possession of the
first three leaves, including a preface and other introductory matter
-and the last leaf but one, on the reverse of which is a beautiful
wood- cut of Henry the Eighth sitting in full council, -should be
well looked after by the purchaser, -for they are often missing : and
heavy must be the sum to redeem them. There is a good note
affixed to a copy of this edition in the Harleian Collection ( Bibl. Harl.
vol. iii . no. 398) , which shews the blunders of Bishop Nicolson respecting to it : these have been also noticed by Dr. Pegge, who calls
Avery successful fac- simile of this embellishment was published in the recent
edition of our Typographical Antiquities, vol. iii. p. 462 : along with a particular
account of the book : see too , p. 422.
184 HISTORY
thoroughly good historical library can be said to be
perfect without these Chronicles ; and, above all, that
66
our chronicler " a good writer for his time, and a competent
scholar.*" Hearnet has very spiritedly corrected Nicolson ; adding,
that both this and the ensuing edition are very scarce and of great
price. " See Bibl. West, no. 4120 : Bibl. Ratcliffe, no. 1391 : and
Bibl. Bryant, no. 707 : which latter copy was sold for 191. 19s . Fifty
years ago, this book might have been obtained for 12s. See Bibl.
Folkes, no. 888. At present, a fair sound copy may be worth about
51. 5s. Mr. Heber bought a very fine one at Mr. Knight's sale, in
1821 , for 5l. 10s.
This edition was reprinted in 1550 ; " whereunto is added to
every Kyng a seuerall table. " Whoever chooses to examine the
Typog. Antiq. vol. iii . p. 466-8, will easily satisfy himself that this
impression is not, as has been imagined, only the previous one with a
fresh title-page. The leaves of each reign begin with a fresh set of
numerals and the present is, on the whole, the preferable edition.
A good copy is worth 71. 7s. My friend Mr. Douce has a very
one. The reprint appeared in 1809.
:
fine
Secondly, of RICHARD GRAFTON's " Chronicle at large and meere
History ofthe Affayres of Englande and Kinges of the Same," &c.:
printed by R. Tottel for R. Toy. 1569. Folio. More sumptuous
and elaborate than either of the preceding publications, is the one
now under consideration ; and to which it will be necessary to add
only the following particulars to Herbert's minute and satisfactory
Typog. Antiq. vol. iv. p. 439. The three introductory
pieces have the pages unnumbered ; and a Summarie of the afore.
said History ' one page, and a table of seven pages, not numbered,
follow the text of the first volume, which contains 192 pages exclusively. The second volume, containing 1369 pages, is succeeded by
* Anonymiana. 1809. 8vo. p. 1. See also some remarks relating to him at page
62, 394, in the same publication.
+ Hemingi Chartul. Eccles. Wigorn, vol. ii . 671 , &c. To the Harleian extract
may be added, that Bishop Nicolson, talking of a flattering dedication to Henry
VIII:, Hearne thus remarks upon it : " All the copies I have yet seen or heard of
are dedicated to King Edward VI. and the dedication is far from being flattering.
The informations too are all along so very good (abating that the chronology is
here and there wrong) that they have been, and will always be, highly valued by
the most curious men."
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 185
ofHolinshed requires particular notice and commendation. Indeed, to the comfort of the poor, but not
a table of thirty-one (not numbered) pages of the reigns of the kings
of the realm, and an alphabetical table of nine unnumbered pages.
Both volumes contain some very spirited wood- cuts. My friend
Mr. Heber triumphs inthe possession of an extraordinarily fine copy
of this Chronicle ; but, if the tearing out of the title, ( which is ornamented with portraits of kings) by some execrable depredator, be
excepted, I question whether his own copy, magnificent as it is, have
an amplitude of margin superiorto the one in the library of St. John's
College Oxford. " A matchless copy " of it was sold at the sale of
Mr. Bryant's books, A. D. 1807, for 19l. 19s. See too Bibl. Landsdowne, no. 2517, and Bibl. Allen, no. 615 .
Thirdly, of HOLINSHED's Chronicles of England, Scotlande and
Ireland : - which are by far the most popular and important of our
historical records, in print, during the time of Queen Elizabeth ; and
from which, indeed, all modern historians have freely and largely
borrowed. The first edition of these Chronicles was printed for John
Harrison the Elder, in 1577, in two folio volumes, full of spirited
wood-cuts , which were omitted in the subsequent edition of 1586 .
This work must have been printed with great cost and labour. From
Holinshed's dedicatory Epistle to Lord Burleigh, it should seem that
REGINALD WOLFE, the celebrated printer (see Typog. Antiq. vol. iv.
p. 2) had projected and even executed the greater part of the work,
it having " pleased God to call him to his mercie after xxvyears travel spent therein." Wolfe, in fact, intended to make these Chronicles the substratum of " An universall Cosmographie of the whole
worlde." The other Assistants and Continuators of Holinshed, were
Harrison, Hooker, Stanihurst, Stow, Thyn, and Fleming, &c. There
are those who suppose this first edition to contain particulars not
found in the subsequent one. Hearne speaks with his usual enthusiasm ofit : Robert ofGlocester, vol. i. pref. p. xxxiii-and Du Fresnoy,
* The " execrable depredator " (not, fortunately, either a Johnian or an Academic) is known—and I need hardly say, shunned and despised. The history of
this man's spoliations, in which even the venerable Bodleian Library was not
spared, would startle the sensitive, and even amaze the incredulous , Collector of
Anecdotes of this kind.
+Among these cuts, there is one of a GUILLOTINE.
186 HISTORY
the faint-hearted Collector- be it made known, that
good copies even of the original editions may be had
catching the current opinion of the day, observes-" Il faut cependant avoir aussi l'édition de 1577." Methode, &c. vol. iv. page
295. " An exceedingly fine copy " of this edition , bound in russia,
was sold at the sale of George Steevens's library in 1800, for 221.:
and a very fine one, almost uncut, and bound in blue morocco, was recently (December 1822) sold at the sale of Mr. Neunburg's library for
117. 11s. Mr. Heber possesses it in russia (bought of Mr. Stace) uncut.
Holinshed dying between the years 1578 and 1582, * anew edition
of his Chronicles was put forth in 1587, chiefly under the editorial
care of Boteville, † Stow, and Abraham Fleming ; the printer was
Henry Denham. Consult Herbert, vol. ii . p. 961. The Continuation, from 1576 to 1586, contained several curious particulars,
which gave great offence at the time of publication, and were accordingly suppressed ; "whereby (says Herbert) the paging, from
1220 to 1275, is very irregular." According to Nicolson, they
extend from page 1491 to 1536. ‡ These are called the " Castrations " of Holinshed, and were republished by Dr. Drake in 1728, in
the black letter, in a thin folio volume. The curious , however,
necessarily look sharply after the original pages . A copy of this
His will was proved on April 24 , 1582 ; as a transcript of it, in Herbert's hand
writing, in my interleaved copy of his Typographical Antiquities, sufficiently
proves.
† Or THYNNE ; an admirable antiquary. Consult Bliss's edition of the Athen.
Oron, vol. i. p. 136.
↑ Engl. Histor. Library, fol. ed. p. 71. It appears from a note in the Bibl. R.
Smith (A. D. 1682) p. 276, no. 160 , that these suppressed leaves " were not thought
fit , and so not allowed, to be printed in the second impression." According to
some Antiquaries, they contained matter relating to Lord Leicester, which gave
great offence to the Privy Council : according to Nicolson, the suppression was
occasioned by Thynne's " singular respect to the Lord Cobham, at that time very
unseasonable. All that's left out relates to Royal Grants in favour of that unfortunate Peer and his ancestors ." After so much said about them, the reader may
not be displeased with a more distinct notice of them, taken from Dr. Drake's reprint. William the Conqueror " A. D. 1066-7 , 6 pages : " The historie of Scotland ;
p. 421 to 424 : p. 443 to page 450 : " " An. Reg. 23, Queene Elizabeth, p. 1328, to
page 1331 : An. Reg. 27. p . 1419, to 1574 (all inclusively) . An. Reg. 28." Also twelve
pages of Index, beginning on the recto of sign . zz. taken far leuieng ' to the conclusion Ypresse besieged. ' Peignot has slightly noticed these castrations in his
Dictionnaire des Livres Condamnés, &c . vol . i . 184.
"
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 187
at no very extraordinary price. In this department of
book-collecting, it may be safely affirmed that veins
are hardly now opened, where, formerly, arteries used
to bleed profusely !
As we come to the conclusion ofthe sixteenth century, and commence with the seventeenth, we
immediately struck with the venerable name of Srow,
a laborious and honest man ; content to state simple
facts, without any enlarged views, and in a style the
kind was in the Harleian, and another in Dr. Mead's collection . *
Osborne marked an elegant copy, in 3 vols. at 4l. 4s. in his sheet
catalogue of 1759. The Mead copy now adorns the Cracherode Collection, in four volumes. There are copies supposed to be on large
paper ; and, although this may be questionable, yet that copy, which
more decidedly approached such a form, was the one, in four vols . , in
Colonel Stanley's Collection , which was purchased by Mr. Heber for
£63. Very fine copies are also in the Luton and Althorp collections .
See Bibl. Pearson, no. 5274 ; Farmer, no. 6216 ; Crofts, no. 7276 ;
Allen, no. 766, Steevens, no. 1700, and Reed, no. 2702.
The REPRINT in 1807, in six vols. 4to. incorporating the castrations, has materially diminished the value of the original impression
-and here, as this is the last of the Chronicles in the 16th century,
which come under my present review, and which closes the order of
the Reprints, (getting scarcer every day) it may be as well to inform
" the Young Man" -anxious for the possession of these useful reimpressions, that a complete set of them, in fifteen volumes,
neatly bound in calf, is marked by Messrs. Payne and Foss at £40.
-
* Mead's copy belonged to Thomas Rawlinson, who received 251. for it ; and
yet it wanted four pages of the castrations. These were supplied by a transcript
from a copy in Bishop More's library at Cambridge ; which, although a perfect,
was a very inferior copy. In former times there was an absolute MANIA about the
possession of these original castrations. John Bridges, (of whose library see
somewhat in the Bibliomania, p . 480 ) , who had a perfect copy of Holinshed, told
Hearne that " he would not part with it for fifty libs." And Thomas Sclater Bacon, a man of very large fortune, and a fierce bibliomaniac, (who died in 1736) ,
gave twenty guineas to Bateman, the bookseller, for the castrated sheets alone,"
Reliquiæ Hearnianæ, vol. i . pp. 406-7 : 413-4. In the library of the Royal Institution there is a copy of Holinshed, with an account of the variations in these
castrated sheets by the Rev. P. Morant, in MS. So says Mr. Harris, in his excellent catalogue of that library.
188 HISTORY
most unpretending imaginable. But there are those
who rank him even above Holinshed and the contemporaneous Chroniclers. That he was a diligent
and careful collector of facts, and far better acquainted with ms. authorities (even with some, of
which all traces are now lost) than any writer of his
day, may be unequivocally allowed. Stow found a
continuator in EDMUND HOWES ; * a man, who seems
* JOHN STOW the Chronicler, and EDMUND Howes, his editor and
continuator, shall be as summarily described as is consistent with the
importance of their labours. Berkenhout (Biogr. Literar. page 47.)
seems to mention the Annals and Chronicles of Stow as separate
works, but they are one and the same. Herbert makes brief mention of an edition of 1594, printed by Ralph, for his brother James,
Newbury ; and in the Bibl. Beauclerk, part ii . no. 2239. I find an
edition specified of the date of 1592 ; but I apprehend that both these
editions are supposititious, and that the FIRST EDITION of Stow's
Chronicle (which is only an enlargement of his " Summary" †) was
printed without a date to the title page - which is ornamented—
but with the date of November 24, 1600 , in the dedicatory address to
Whitgift, Archbishop of Canterbury. In this address, Stow tells his
Grace that " twas nigh forty yeeres since he first addressed all his
cares and cogitations to the Studie of Histories and search of Antiquities." Strype has reprinted this dedication in his Life of Whitgift,
p. 543. An address " to the gentle reader '-a table of " Authors
out of whom these Annales are collected " and another table " of
the principal matters contained in these Annales, " follow. The text
of the history contains 1316 pages : the last seven pages treating " of
the Universities. " I recommend a good, clean, large-margined copy
(such as it was once my good fortune to possess ! ) of this parent text
of old Stow, to the tasteful collector (be he " young " or old ") of
-
See page 182, ante. Stow died in 1605. Mr. Chalmers (Biog. Dict. vol.
xxviii. p.445 ) has well observed upon the indelible disgrace reflected upon the
government, the city of London, and the Company of Merchant Tailors ( of which
Stow was a member) that this honest and indefatigable Chronicler and Historian
of the Metropolis , should have died in such an abject state of poverty. He is supposed to have " traversed all England on foot to obtain materials for his history. "
He cuts a more splendid figure upon his monument, than he did during his life : -
a fate, not peculiar to John Stow !
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 1.89
to be entitled to less respect than his predecessor—
notwithstanding he makes pathetic mention, in his
preface, of the scoffs and gibes to which he had been
subjected for the " painful travail " of his perform .
ance. Fuller, who loved to jeer, and who scattered
about his criticisms with very little regard to truth,
taunts our continuator in rather bitter terms.
his country's history and antiquities. A copy is marked at 15s. in
the late catalogue of Messrs Payne and Foss.
EDMUND HOWES twice republished Stow's text, in folio, with corrections and additions : the first time, in 1615, the second, in 1631 .
To each edition, an ornamented title-page is prefixed, enough to give
a fit of the cholic to every lover of good art : so greatly inferior,
generally speaking, were the book- ornaments of the seventeenth, to
those of the preceding, century ! Both editions are printed in the
black letter, but in a style-worthy only of the frontispiece. The
first is the better printed book. Three introductory pieces precede
the body of the text, which terminates at p. 988 [" of the Universities] ; and which is succeeded by a page of verses from Drayton's
Poly Olbion-an alphabetical Table, and a curious letter to the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen of London, by Howes, dated 1615 ; in which
Howes tells them how heroically he had surmounted the labours and
difficulties ofhis Continuation ; ' in the course of which " he had to
encounterthe scoffs, sarcasms, and discouragement of several friends ;
one telling him, that he " thanked God he was not yet made to
waste his time, spend two hundred pound a yeere, trouble himself
andall his friends, onely to gayn assurance of endlesse reproach, losse
oflibertie, and bring all his dayes in question," Bishop Nicolson
says, " Howes is very unfortunate, if, after the great pains of thirty
years bestowed upon his continuation of this Chronicle, he be
justly liable to the sharp sentence that Fuller has passed upon him ?"
Engl. Hist. Libr. , p. 72 ; and Fuller's Worthies, p. 220-1 in London.'
I have heard of, but never seen, copies upon large paper of the
second edition of 1631. Mr. Grenville is the fortunate possessor of
a copy upon thick paper-the only one I ever saw - which had belonged to Dr. Mead. It was probably the one which had been sold
at the sale of Barrett's library, in 1818, for £6. 2s. 6d. Messrs.
Arch mark an ordinary, sound copy, in calf binding, at £3. 3s.
190 HISTORY
In the sixteenth century (reserving Speed's work as
the first of our Histories, so called, ) I amnot aware of
any thing particularly deserving of notice, till we
reach the age of cant and persecution during the time
of the Interregnum-when the Parliamentary Chronicle of VICARS, * published during the years 1643-6,
JOHN VICARS is one of the triumvirate thus noticed in the immortal poem of Hudibras.
Thou that with ale, or viler liquors,
Dids't inspire Withers, Pryn, and Vicars.
Canto 1. v. 645.
The strange titles of the PARLIAMENTARY CHRONICLE of Vicars ar
set forth at length in the Cens. Literaria, vol. i. p. 329, and Watt's
Biogr. Britan.-to the former of which I refer the reader for extracts
from the work. The first published portion of this Chronicle is
called Jehovah Jireth, God in the Mount, &c. containing Parts I. II.
Part III. is called, " God's Arke overtopping the World's Waves :"
and the IVth part, " the Burning Bush not consumed, " &c. Dr.
Bliss (Athen. Oxon. vol. iii . col . 309, note 3) tells us that, in the
year 1803, he " saw a perfect copy sell at an auction for £12 ." A
copy of it, in blue morocco, border of gold, gilt leaves, ' was purchased at the sale of Mr. Heathcote's books in 1808, (nº 834) , by
Sir Masterman Mark Sykes, for 4l. 14s. 6d. ; which copy was pur.
chased at Mr. Woodhouse's sale, (Bibl. Woodh. n° 806) , for the
sum mentioned by Dr. Bliss, in Bibl. Allen. nº 1504. Dr. Lort's
copy . in which the Doctor had written such a copy as this, compleat, is seldom to be met with ' -was sold for 21. 2s. Another work
of Vicars, called Transactions of these latter yeares, emblemised.
(being the preceding article), was sold for £3. This latter work
has plates. It would be difficult now to appreciate, with accuracy,
the pecuniary worth of Vicars's Chronicles ; but I should say that a
good and perfect copy might be worth 67. 6s. As to the POETICAL
PIECES of Vicars, their rarity must have arisen from their destruction on account of their worthlessness . Dr. Grey, in his note upon
--
† And for a perfect specimen of Vicars's choicest slang, I recommend th
reader to Chalmers's Biogr. Dict. vol, xxx. p. 332-3.
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 191
in four parts, in 4to. arrests our immediate attention.
It has of late become very rare, in a perfect state ;
and as it is never likely to be reprinted, it will not
want severity of competition among purchasers. There
is doubtless much curious, and much distorted information, in this chronological, " medley of facts, and
of party fury "-as the recent Editor of the Athenæ
Oxonienses properly designates it. The republican
annals were doomed to meet with another Recorder,
or Chronicler, of the name of JAMES HEATH ; * whose
the verses of Hudibras (just quoted) is , I submit, much in error
in calling Vicars " as able a poet as Withers." The truth is, he
had neither the genius nor the (comparatively) felicitous versification of the latter. Let me select a specimen-from a specimen—
in Dr. Bliss's Athen. Oxon.-from the Chronicler's " Prospective
Glasse to looke into heaven." 1618. sign. D. 6.
The gates of which most holy habitation,
Are pearles of peerlesse price and valuation,
Whose wall is all of precious stones most pure,
Incomparably rich, and strong t' endure :
There is that glorious paradise celestiall,
Surpassing Adam's paradise terrestriall,
Wherein are fluent oily riuers, currents,
Faire brooks of butter, and sweet honny torrents.
But this is taking " the young man" prematurely, and by stealth,
as it were, into the department- or region-of POETRY. I must
not be guilty of any further such indiscretion.
* The title of Heath's work is this : " A briefe Chronicle of the
late intestine War in the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, &c. Four parts, in 2 vol. 8vo. 1661 , 1663 .
66
The same,
continued to 1675 ; London, 1676, Folio. I shall speak chiefly of
the octavo edition ; which, on account of the pictures (says Anthony a Wood) of the most eminent soldiers in the said war, makes
the book valued the more by some NOVICES." A frontispiece, and
thirty-seven Portraits, render a copy complete. As to the text, the
said Anthony designates it as " being mostly compiled from lying
pamphlets, and all scrts of news- books, having innumerable errors
therein, especially as to name and time, things chiefly required in
192 HISTORY
wretchedly printed, but by no means wholly useless,
performance, seems to have been put forth rather as a
vehicle for cuts of the sorriest possible description.
It first appeared in four parts, forming two small
octavo volumes, in 1661 ; and afterwards in 1663.
Copies, containing all the portraits, are yet caressed
by enthusiastic collectors.
Among the last ofour Chroniclers, was SIR RICHARD
BAKER : * a man of versatile, but, as I take it, of
history." Athen. Oxon. vol. iii . col . 664. Edit. Bliss . I takethe edition
of 1663 to be only that of 1661 , with a fresh title- page. Since the
publication of Granger, this book-on account of cutting out the
portraits, for an illustrated copy of his work-has greatly risen in
price, if ALL the portraits are found in a genuine state. Tom Osborne marked it at a price, which would have pleased old Anthony ;
namely, at 3s. 6d. " with cuts ; " in his catalogue of 1766, nº 12045.
Of late years it has brought a large sum. At West's sale, Bibl.
West. nº 4037, it was sold for 21. 2s.: at Woodhouse's, (Bibl. Wood.
nº 350) , for 51. 5s., " elegant, in morocco binding. " See too Bibl.
Allen. nº 518, and Scott's Catalogue ( 1804) , nº 990. A fine and
perfect copy may probably be worth 101. 10s .
The folio edition has no ornament but a frontispiece of Charles II .
surrounded by his loyal Generals. Wood says that this continuation,
" mostly made up from gazetts," was by John Phillip, " nephew by
the mother to Joh. Milton." There is another folio edition , of the
date of 1691. But neither the one nor the other is scarce or dear.
* Dr. Bliss, in his recent and truly valuable edition of Wood's
Athen. Oxon. yol. iii . col. 146-8, has given us a list of the various editions of this once popular Chronicle, which I believe few lovers of
history now venture to peruse, and still fewer to quote. It is entitled a
" Chronicle ofthe Kings ofEngland, &c. with a Catalogue ofthe Nobility and Baronets ; and was first published in 1641 , folio, about
three years before the death of the author. Not fewer than nine
"This first edition is a rare book. Besides the engraved frontispiece by
Marshall, containing portraits of Charles I. and Sir Richard Baker, it should possess a plate, by Cor. V. Dalen, of Charles II. when a boy, to whom the original
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 193
shallow parts ; and yet, such was the popularity of
his flimsey performance, that not fewer than eight
editions, in the same century, succeeded it : and before the second
edition, in 1653 , I find an edition of it published in the Dutch language, at Amsterdam, in 1649, " embellished with neat historical
plates and portraits." See the Bibl. Fagell. nº 7734. The two
latter editions of the dates of 1730, and 1733 , -bringing the
chronicle down to the death of George I. are considered the preferable ones. Anthony a Wood calls the author a " noted writer," and
strives hard to inspire us with a reverence for his character : but
Bishop Nicolson says, that his Chronicle is fit only " to please the
rabble." Historical Library, p. 73. And what are we to say to an author, whose vanity was so excessive as to instigate himto tell the world
that " if all other Chronicles were lost, posterity would be sufficiently
informed of every thing memorable in past times, by reading his
OWN." Yet, as Mr. Chalmers (Biogr. Dict. vol. iii . p. 343 ) , has observed, the late worthy and learned Daines Barrington gives the
most favourable opinion of this Chronicle. " Baker, (says the
latter authority, ) is by no means so contemptible a writer as he is
generally supposed to be it is believed that the ridicule on this
Chronicle arises from its being part of the furniture of Sir Roger
de Coverley's Hall , in one of the Spectators. " Sir Richard (in spite
of all his pious effusions) * appears to have been a gay and an imprudent man, as he died in the Fleet Prison : A. D. 1644 .
work was dedicated. The first continuation , extending to the year 1658, was by
Edward Phillips , the nephew of Milton, who printed it in 1660, and probably superintended many of the subsequent impressions. Certainly the ninth, in 1696, has
his name to the introduction. When Langhorn's continuation commenced (if he
did continue the work at all ) seems uncertain ; Langhorn died in 1681. The editions of 1730 and 1733 seem to be one and the same-excepting a fresh title to
the latter. It is called the best edition ; but the earlier copies, ( particularly that
of 1641) , contain many very curious documents, and several interesting particulars omitted by Phillips and his followers. BLISS's Reliquiæ Hearnianæ, vol. i. p.
241. Langhorn published a chronicle, in Latin, entitled Chronicon Regum Anglorum, &c. Lond. typis E. F. 8vo. without date : but perhaps about 1670. See this,
and three other works, relating to our history and antiquities, noticed in the same " Relics."
* Several " Meditations and Disquisitions on the Psalms of David," are notified
by Wood and one upon the Lord's Prayer, 1633, &c . 4to. Of this latter, we
have a singular testimony from Sir Henry Wotton, the author's " quondam
0
194 HISTORY
editions of it went through the press after his deathin 1644 ; he himself living to see only the first edition
in 1641. I believe no man was found imprudent
enough to republish it after the year 1733 ; the date
of the last, and what is considered to be the best,
edition.
The word " HISTORY" should seem to have so completely superseded that of " Chronicle," that I am not
sure whether any Chronicler is to be found till the
year 1777-when a work, under the title of " The
Chronicle of England, from the landing of Julius
Cæsar in Britain to the Norman Conquest," appeared
from the laborious pen of JOSEPH STRUTT : among the
earliest of his performances. It is a mere collection
of facts ; exhibiting, however, the result of much
curious research, which has considerably enlarged
our stock of information respecting our Anglo- Saxon
Bishop Nicolson has well called upon the impartial reader, to
look into Thomas Blount's Animadversions on this Chronicle, published at Oxford, in 1672, 8vo. —in which the public had " such a
specimen of its many and gross errors, as ought to have shaken its
credit." And yet (in the Bishop's time) " it sold as well as ever."
Blount himself is supposed to have spent several years in writing a
Chronicle of English Affairs ; but neither Wood, nor Nicolson, nor
Hearne, had ever met with it. See the latter's Peter Langtofft's Chronicle, vol. i . p. xxviii . He was the author of the well known Gloschamber-fellow, " to whom Baker sent it before it went to press. " I much admire (says Sir Henry) the very character of your style, which seemeth unto me
to have not a little of the African idea of St. Austin's age, full of sweet raptures,
and of researching conceits : nothing borrowed, nothing vulgar, and yet all flowing from you, ( I know not how) with a certain equal facility." Athen Oxon, vol.
iii. col. 147. Sir Henry must have been in more than a usually complimentary
mood. The sight of the author's ms. before it went to press must have quite overset him. I find, in that singularly rich library of R. Smith, 1682, p. 216 , nº 36, a
work by Sir Richard called " Motives for Prayer upon the Seven Days in the Week :"
with cuts, 1642, 18mo.
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 195
Ancestors. The plates, forty-two in number,* are
merely intended for illustrations. With Strutt, died
our Chroniclers, professedly so called.
t
I now take up the HISTORY OF ENGLAND, properly
so designated, from the time of Polydore Vergil to the
more recent publications of the present period, not
without the accompanying and appropriate aid of Memorials, Journals, and Memoirs. The Chronicles will
be found to supply the vacuum between the middle of
the sixteenth century to the commencement of the
seventeenth century. The Historia Anglica of POLYDORE VERGIL, first published at Basil, in 1534, † is
sographia Nova, &c. Wood is fertile , in the notice of his labours.
Note of Sir Richard's Chronicle : the later editions have engraved
title pages, and a copy is worth about 17. 10s.
"
These plates are little better than magazine productions ; un
worthy ofthe name and reputation of the author. At the end of the
second volume, p. 277, there is an "Appendix, " which extends to
page 291 , inclusively. The catalogue of Messrs . Payne and Foss is
enriched with several copies of this not undesirable work. The
small paper being marked at 41. 4s.; and the large,
russia," at 12l. 128.
66 very neat, in
+ This is the first edition of the work, which was afterwards reprinted at the same place in 1555, 1556, 1557, and again in 1570,
folio. The octavo edition of 1651 is considered the best. An intermediate edition was published at Ghent in 1556, 8vo. 2 vol. The
edition of 1534 will necessarily be considered as the Editio Princeps ;
and perhaps, of all copies of it, now in existence, that of the Rt.
Hon. T. Grenville is the finest. * It seems to be also on LARGE
PAPER. The binding is in the original, beautiful condition ; and
will be found described in the Bibliogr. Decameron, vol. ii . p. 469.
All the books, with this peculiar binding, appear to have belonged
to a collector, resident at Basle. At least I have seen none but
Basle books in such a binding. But the typographical execution, and
graphic embellishments, of this first edition of Polydore Vergil's
* It has however the date of 1533.
196 HISTORY
now rarely consulted ; its chief merit consisting in the
purity of its style. The author has been accused of
having destroyed those ms. authorities which he consulted. The Collectanea of LELAND * have been the
well-springs of a great portion of information found
in the pages of Polydore Vergil's successors.
From Vergil I proceed to JOHN SPEED ; whose Historie of Great Britaine was first published in 1611 ,†
History of England, are most inviting . Consult the Typog. Antiq.
vol. i. p. xliv, xlv. In regard to the character of the historian, the
reader may see some powerful hostile criticisms, from powerful
names, in the Bibliomania ; p . 323. There are some who think that
Polydore, in the purity of his style, redeems the frequent infidelity of
his narrative. Had he given us a History of his own Times "
66
(and those times were most interesting, and he an acute observer)
as Burnet has done, we might have cheerfully parted with every line
of his " Historia Anglica. "
• Leland's valuable Collections were first published by Hearne, in
1715, 6 vol. 8vo. Of these, hereafter.
Mr. Triphook has at this
Messrs. Arch mark a copy
The dates of the subsequent editions are 1614, 1623, 1627,
1632, and 1650 each in folio-and all substantial volumes : butthe
first of 1611 seems to be the favourite. Large paper copies of this
first edition are by no means uncommon.
moment a very fine one, marked at 51. 5s.
of it, together with the Theatre, &c. (of which presently) at 9l. 9s. It
is in most of our celebrated public and private collections : but one
of the most gorgeous copies, with which I am acquainted, is that in
the archiepiscopal library at Lambeth-in 2 vol., bound in red morocco, with the plates coloured. The brass and gold coins, &c. have
a good effect ; but the rest of the ornaments are tawdrily executed.
In former times, this copy appears to have been much used. The
cuts in Speed's history are in wood, and consist of coins, seals, arms,
and different insignia of the several reigns. The first three editions
have engraved title- pages ; the two latter have letter-press titleIt was also in the Library of Major Pearson, nº 5484. Asimilar large paper
copy is in the library of Trinity College, Dublin- from the Fagel Collection, nº
7732.
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 197
in a splendid folio volume, and of which five editions
appeared before the expiration of the half of the same
century. Whoever was the projector of the mode of
publication, is not known : if it were Speed himself,
pages, with an excellent portrait of Speed, engraved by Savery, prefixed . This is the only portrait of Speed (according to Granger)
extant. Nicolson's English Hist. Library, p. 73, edit. folio, 1736,
may be worth consulting, respecting the particular merits of Speed's
history. Fuller has sneered at it-in his usually characteristic mannanner : but it is only a sneer. *
I have said that the first edition of 1611 , is " the favourite ; " but
as Speed died in 1629, I know not why the subsequent editions, up
to his death, are to be hastily discarded. Accordingly I find a copy
of the fourth edition, in 1627, upon LARGE PAPER, in the Bibl. R.
Smith, p. 280, nº 364 ; and a similar one in West's collection, (Bibl.
West. nº 4125) splendidly illustrated, which latter was sold for 6l. 10s,
Messrs. Payne and Foss mark a large paper copy of this edition,
together with the Theatre, in russia binding, gilt leaves, at 81. 8s.
2 vol. † The Theatre of Great Britain has been published perhaps
more frequently than the history-as early as 1611 , and as late as
1743 see Gough's British Topography, vol. i . p. 91 : where the
work is called " a noble apparatus " to the history. It consists of
maps of several counties and principal borough towns of G. B. and
has small engravings of palaces and great mansions, in the corners→→→→
which the hungry illustrator seizes upon and cuts up without remorse. Agood copy of this Theatre (in which the maps and arms
are frequently coloured), may be worth 21. 2s. Du Fresnoy (in
Rawlinson's Catalogue) calls the Theatre " a diligent and exact work,
and of equal use for the history, as the topography of England,"
vol. ii . p. 460. A remarkably fine large paper copy of the first edi
tion, 1611, was sold at Woodhouse's sale for 11. 11s.
What Sir Henry Spelman said to Sir Wm. Dugdale, about Speed, was a harmless joke rather than a sneer. "We are beholden to Mr. Speed and Stowe for
stitching up for us our English history. " Both Stowe and Speed were Tailors,
Aubrey's Lives of Eminent Men ; vol. ii. p. 541,
+ In this same catalogue ( 1822, nº 5531 ) , I find a copy of Speed's “ Catalogue
ofReligious Houses in Great Britain, interleaved, with portrait of Speed inserted,"
very neat, 15 .
198 HISTORY
he deserves the warm thanks of posterity-for it is , of
all others, one of the most tasteful and useful plans
ever carried into effect. And Granger has told us,
that Speed's work " is, in its kind, incomparably more
complete than all the histories of his predecessors put
together."* The History and Lives of XX Kinges of
England, &c. by WILLIAM MARTYN, Esq. is now, Ι
believe, a volume, coveted chiefly for the brilliant
frontispiece of small portraits of the Monarchs whose
deeds are recorded in the text. Wm. Marshall was
the engraver of these brilliant little heads. The labours of Martyn were never intruded upon the public
beyond a second edition, which appeared in 1638.
The first was published in 1615. A book of greater
intrinsic worth, and of much rarer occurrence, next
arrests our attention . I speak of the " Palo-Albion,
or The History of Great Britaine, &c. by WILLIAM
SLATYER ; which appeared without date, but I believe
* Biographical History of England, vol. ii . p . 320, edit, 1804.
† Martyn's history comprises a period from the reign of William
I. to that of Henry VIII., with the succession of the Dukes, Earls,
&c. of this kingdom to the XIIth of James I. London 1615, 1638,
folio. The engraved portraits, above noticed, are within very small
circles, suspended, medallion- wise, to the shafts of two columns.
The curious necessarily covet brilliant impressions of these graphic
gems. See Bibl. Hoblyn, pt. ii . p. 509. Nicolson notices the second
edition as enlarged with the lives of the three succeeding Monarchs :
but without the frontispiece. My memory may misgive me, but I
seem to possess not a very indistinct recollection of a fine large
paper presentation copy of the first edition, with such impressions of
the regal portraits as made the beholder almost start back with delightful astonishment ! Martyn was recorder of Exeter; and his
history was ushered into the world, after his deceasc, by his sons ;
who were very anxious that the public should acknowledge the
same degree of merit in it which they themselves fancied they discovered. But the event proved sadly otherwise.
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 199
in the year 1621.* Old Anthony a Wood says that
the author was " in good esteem for his knowledge in
English History, and his excellent vein in Latin and
English poetry"-of both of which, indeed, he has exhibited copious specimens, in the Latin and English
verses throughout the Ten Books of which his history
is composed.
It is now time to notice " The Collection of the
History of England by SAMUEL DANIEL ; " not pro-
* In the recent edition of the Athena Oxonienses, vol. iii . col . 227,
there is some account of Slatyer, together with a specimen of the
English verses from his history : for which Dr. Bliss, the editor, refers to the Censura Literaria, vol. ix. p . 31-36—and where indeed
several specimens will be found both of the Latin and English poetry.
Dr. Bliss, with good reason, thinks the former superior to the latter.
I know not for what reason, but this has always been a rare book in
a perfect state. Nicolson gives a very brief notice of it ; and it is
only to the Bibl. Beauclerk, pt. ii . nº 2244, (which copy with another
book, was sold for a shilling only) , that I am able, just now, to refer for the existence of a copy in a printed catalogue of a private
library. A copy is in the British Museum, but not in the Royal or
London Institution libraries. An inspection of a sound and neat
copy, in the choice collection of Mr. Roger Wilbraham, enables me
to point out to the purchaser the necessity of examining whether the
copy, he have in view, contain sign. I) d. 3—on the reverse of which
the work ends. From signature C c 2, the leaves are not numbered.
The " marginal notes " are duly mentioned by Wood. As a specimen of one or two of them, let the reader consult p. 113, where the
heraldic authorities of John Harding, John Hanvill, and N. Upton
are cited, in order to prove what arms " BRUTE bare ! " The cutof
Hengist at the commencement of Ode VII. , is borrowed from Speed.
+ It is perhaps difficult to know precisely when the first edition of
SAMUEL DANIEL's truly desirable volume appeared. Bishop Nicolson hastily (I think) places it in 1602. Mr. Burnett (Specimens of
English Prose Writers, vol. ii . p. 368) in 1613. It seems that two
editions preceded that of 1634 ; namely, one in 1618, and another
in 1621. The dates of TRUSSEL's (very unworthy) continuation are
200 HISTORY
bably in the precise chronological order in which it
was published, but from the " last corrected copy" of
the author appearing in 1634 ; after which it was continued, chiefly by John Trussel, to the year 1685.
Daniel stands exceedingly high in the estimation of
competent judges, as the preceding note will abundantly testify. About this time came forth the history
of Great Britain by DUCHESNE ; and towards the end
of the same century, appeared the labours of another
French historian, of the name of LARRY, connected
with our history. I place them thus together, * almost
1636, 1650, 1685 -incorporating Daniel's text : and from the
Bibl. Hoblyn, pt. ii . p . 509, these latter should seem to be the preferable editions . The style of Daniel has been generally and warmly
commended. Headley calls the author " the Atticus of his day : " Ancient English Poetry, vol. i . p. xlii . edit 1787 : See also Ellis's Early
English Poets, vol . ii . p. 316. Echard also praises him in the preface of his own History of England ; coupling him with Milton. It
must be noted, here, that Daniel was a poet as well as an historian.
DREN.
* I will, as briefly as possible, dismiss the notice of these two
French writers of our history. DUCHESNE's history appeared at
Paris in 1634-41 ; and again in 1666, in two folio volumes. Although the author be called in the first volume of the Recueil des
Historiens des Gaules, &c . " The FATHER OF FRENCH HISTORIANS,"
he is, in reference to English History, among the least of its CHILDu Fresnoy dispatches the work with the laconic, but emphatic, epithet of " Médiocre. " LARRY, who was a protestant,
published the second volume of his history, first, in 1697 : the third
in 1698 ; the first in 1707, and the fourth in 1713. It was much
applauded abroad, on its first appearance, as the completest history
in the French language : and the portraits, with which it is plentifully furnished, helped to increase its popularity. But scarcely a
score of years elapsed, ere the work was found to be jejune and unsatisfactory ; and in spite of the style and narrative, which Niceron
designates as " coulante " and " intéressante, " the work rapidly sunk
in estimation : and is now seized upon by Collectors chiefly for the
sake of the portraits-which, if blackness, or strong shadow, alone,
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 201
parenthetically, and proceed to Milton, Whitelock, and
Brady. First of MILTON ; whose history, however, is
very short ; it having been first published in 1671 , 4to. ,
and afterwards in 1695, 8vo. It has been incorporated
in the octavo, and both the folio, editions of his
works ; the latter, of 1738, the better edition . The
history extends only to William the Conqueror. *
The Memorials of English Affairs (from the beginning ofthe reign of Charles I. to the Restoration)
by BULSTRODE WHITELOCK, and which first appeared
in 1682 + , is an admirable work ; but both " the
possess merit, are most meritorious. Copies on LARGE PAPER are
by no means rare. Mémoires des Hommes Illustres ; vol. i. p. 10.
* Mr. D'Israeli, the modern " Indagator invictissimus " of every
thing that is CURIOUS and interesting, and precious, relating to our
history and literature, has furnished us with the following piece of
information respecting MILTON's History of England. " Milton, in
composing his History of England, introduced, in the third Book, a
very remarkable digression on the characters of the Long Parliament: a most animated description of a class of political adventurers,
with whom modern history has presented many parallels. From
tenderness to a party then imagined to be subdued, it was struck
out, by command, nor do I find it restituted in Kennet's Collection
ofEnglish Histories. " It was, however, " preserved by a pamphlet
in 1681 , which has fortunately exhibited one of the warmest pictures in design and colouring by a master's hand." New Series of
Curiosities of Literature ; vol. i. p
144. But this tract is reprinted .
in Milton's Prose Works, vol. ii . p. 39, Edit. 1738-where its omission, in all the previous editions of Milton's history, is mentioned.
Myfriend Mr. Amyot seems to suspect that Milton was not the
author of it and I own that I incline to his opinion.
+ I must commence this note with confessing my obligations to
the authority with which the last terminated. WHITELOCK'S Memorials were first published (as above) " by Arthur, Earl of Anglesea,
"The portraits, in number LXVII, are after Vanderwerff, by Van Gunst, and
others ; " See Bibl. Fagel, no. 7737. The ORIGINALS of these engraved portraits
were, I suspect, very frequently, ideal.
202 HISTORY
Young" and " the Old" Collector will do well to
admit only the last edition of 1732 into his library.
More ample, and doubtless more valuable, than
either of its precursors, is A Complete History of
England, &c. by ROBERT BRADY, published at London
in 1685-1700, * in 2 folio volumes ; to which is usually
who took considerable liberties with the manuscript. " The " liberties " usually consisted of a characteristic stroke, or a short critical
opinion, which did not harmonise with the private feelings of the
Earl." The passages struck out were restored (says Mr. D'Israeli)
in the edition of 1732 ; which have scarcely increased the magnitude
of the volume, and " the booksellers imagine that there can be no
material difference between the two editions, and wonder at the bibliographical mystery that they can afford to sell the edition of 1682
at 10s. , and have £5. 5s. for the edition of 1732." New Series,
&c. vol. i. p. 144. The edition of 1732 is doubtless the safest to
purchase; but the recent catalogues of Messrs . Payne and Foss, and
Longman and Co. lead us to indulge the hope that a copy of it may
be obtained for one-fifth less than the " round sum " mentioned by
my very " curious " friend Mr. D'Israeli. Granger says (from
Echard) that " these Memorials would have been much more valuable, if his wife had not burnt many of his papers. " Biogr. Hist.
of England, vol. iv. p. 65. " There is an anonymous pamphlet
(says Granger) well worth the reader's attention, entitled " Clarendon and Whitelock further compared. " It was written by Mr. John
Davys, of Hertford College, Oxford. " There is another work by
Whitelocke, now little read, containing " Memorials of the English
Affairs from the time of Brute to the end of the reign of James I. "
This was published by W. Penn and Dr. Welwood in 1709, and may
usually be purchased for a few shillings.
:
* More cannot be said in recommendation of Brady's history than
is said above and the well-disposed towards an acquisition of good
old English History will do well to secure a copy of it at the very
reasonable price of £2. 2s. , in three vols. , as marked in the recent
catalogue of Messrs. Payne and Foss. Mr. Laing marks a copy ❝ in
four vol. not quite uniformn " at £2. 12s. 6d. The work extends only
to the reign of Richard II .: but says the Lord Keeper Guilford " it
is compiled so religiously upon the very text, letters, and syllable of
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 203
added a third volume, being the author's " Introduction to the Old English History," with a Glossary,
&c. 1684, and a fourth, being an " Historical Treatise
of Cities and Boroughs." Brady's performance, which
has received the warm commendations of Lord Keeper
Guilford and Hume, as its title imports, may be
considered rather the ground work of a general history of England it being " all delivered in plain
matter of fact, without any reflections or remarques."
It is a work, which will every year necessarily become
rarer and rarer. The last historian in the seventeenth
century whom I shall notice and who, especially
with the admirers of the Whig principles of our constitution, is deservedly held in considerable respect, is
JAMES TYRRELL * whose General History of England,
-
the authorities, especially those upon record, that the work may
justly pass for an antiquarian law book. Each volume of the history contains a frontispiece, and a copious Appendix separately numbered. The portrait of James I. is in the first volume ; of which the
" General Preface " is full of Anglo- Saxon historical erudition . His
Introduction to Old English History is " comprehended in three several tracts, " &c. togetherwith a Glossary.+ This forms a third volume.
The account of cities and boroughs, a fourth. A complete copy is in
the Library of the Royal Institution. Brady has been long considered
as the champion of Toryism, at the period when he wrote. I seek in
vain among catalogues for copies of his estimable labours upon
LARGE PAPER.
-
*Perfect sets of Tyrrel are becoming rarer and rarer every day.
The author was professedly a Whig ; and Tom Hearne, who made
whiggism and republicanism synonymous, observes, in a letter to
+ The TRACTS are these : 1. " An Answer to Mr. Petyt's Rights ofye Commons
asserted ;" and to a book intituled " Jani Anglorumfacies Nova." 2. AnAnswer
to a book intituled “ Argumentum Antinormanicum.” 3. " The exact history of
the succession of the Crown ofEngland;" second edit. very much enlarged. The
GLOSSARY expounds " many words used frequently in our ancient Records, Laws,
and Historians."
204 HISTORY
&c. was published in 1696-1704. It is in three, or four
folio volumes, according to the fancy of the purchaser.
Tyrrell is the very opposite of Brady ; and his work
abounds with equally curious and important matter.
He married the grand-daughter of Usher ; and Hearne
admits (but with apparent reluctance) that he " is a
learned man, although he runs counter now and then
Anstis, of the date of July 11 , 1714, " The last time I saw Mr.
Tyrrell, he told me he was going to London to print another part of
his General History of England. I hope he will retract his errors ;
but this I cannot well expect, considering his age, and his zeal for
republican principles. " Letters of Eminent Persons, &c. vol. i . page
289. I do not know what " other part " of his English history
Hearne can allude to, as Tyrrell died in 1718, having just brought
out an enlarged edition of his " Bibliotheca Politica, or an Enquiry
into the ancient constitution of the English Government," in folioof which I observe a copy on LARGE PAPER, marked at 10s. 6d. in
Mr. Payne's catalogue. Of the " History, "* I know of no copy
upon large paper ; nor of any, in any form, which has a date later
than 1704. The volumes in fact are nominally three, but volumes
II. and III, being each of them about double the bulk of volume I.
are more commonly bound in parts; thus making the entire work
consist of five volumes. The purchaser should see that he is supplied with volume III . , Part II . , printed in 1704, and completing
the history tothe end of Richard II . In the Bibl. West. no. 4133 , there
was a copy " with a great number of ms. notes in the margin, and
insertions of curious ms. papers in a fair hand ; " which Paterson, who
drew up the catalogue, supposed to be " the work ofsome very able
historian, if not of the author himself." In the collection of Daly's
books, which were sold in Dublin in 1792, there was a similar copy,
in five vols. thus described. " To this copy Mr. Tyrrel has made
considerable additions in ms. written in a fair hand, which must be
worthy of the attention of the learned ." It was purchased for
£10. 4s. 6d. I observe an ordinary copy of this work marked at₤3.
in Mr. Laing's catalogue of 1822 : no. 7479.
Like Brady's, it extends only to the time of Richard II.; but it has many
curious documents, illustrative even of the history of our language ; to which I
think either Warton, Ritson, or Burnett has referred.
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 205
to usually received opinions." See the preface to
Benedict. Abbas, p. xi. In his Thomas de Elmham,
page xvi, he seems to squeeze out a compliment to
him in a circuitous and heartless manner. The truth
is, that Tyrrell's history, together with that of Brady,
is indispensable to an historical collection of any
extent but one regrets that the volumes are usually
found in such varying sizes.
The opening of the eighteenth century was particularly distinguished by a series, and almost throng, of
Histories ofEngland, general or partial, so as to make
it somewhat difficult to select them with judgment,
and describe them with accuracy. But the names of
KENNET and ECHARD- connected with the formerand that of the illustrious CLARENDON, illustrative of
the latter, species of history-demand our immediate
attention. First, then, of the " Complete History of
England" usually attributed to BISHOP KENNET, but
which was published anonymously-first in 1709, and
secondly in 1719, * each edition being in three volumes.
* First, as to the author. What could be the motive of Bishop
Kennett to deny it, is not, at this period, very manifest. That he
took anample share in it, is evident from Hearne's affirmation ; who
says (Oct. 8, 1708) that " Mr. Took told sir Philip Syndem that he
paid Dr. Kennet 200 libs for his share in the three vols. of English
historians, besides about 100 libs that it cost him in treats ." Reliquia Hearniana ; vol. i . p. 141. Mr. Nichols, in that most interesting 4to. volume called Anecdotes of Literature, 1780 (subsequently
and miraculously expanded into fourteen substantial octavos) tells us,
at p. 54, that the compilation of the first two volumes of Kennet's
history was by aMr. Hughes ; who is supposed to have written " the
general preface without any participation of Dr. Kennet. " (For
some interesting particulars respecting Kennet, consult p. 532 of the
✦ He was not made a Bishop till 1718 : when he had the See of Peterborough.
206 HISTORY
I have little hesitation in affirming, that, considering
the authentic and interesting materials of which this
same volume. ) This history, as the title imports, is " illustrated
with large and useful notes, taken from diverse MSS. and other good
authors : " and at the conclusion of the preface to the third volume,
we are informed that the author's intention was 66 to hold an even
balance, and to let nothing turn it but truth and justice. " The reader
has only to glance on the subjoined note to be convinced of the
importance of the materials of which these volumes are composed.
They are not destitute of embellishments, such as they are ; the
heads being engraved by Vanderbanck. The list of subscribers is
large and respectable. Each volume has a copious index. The
third volume of Kennet gave rise to the following publication :
" EXAMEN : or an Enquiry into the Credit and Veracity of a Pretended
Complete History ; shewing the perverse and wicked Design of it, andthe
many Falsities and Abuses of Truth contained in it ." &c. By the Hon.
ROGER NORTH, Esq. London, 1740, 4to. This, till its recent reprint, was a scarce and coveted book. It contains many curious
particulars ; although Kennet is hardly treated with even the common
civility of a gentleman .
:
The edition of 1719, commonly called " the best, " contains
"notes, said to be inserted by Mr. Strype and several alterations
and additions ." Nichols, ibid. Dr. Rawlinson, † however, seems to
doubt the authenticity of these notes as being penned by Strype.
See a particularly described copy in Bibl. Hoblyn . part ii. p. 508.
66
* VOL. I : contains : 1. MILTON's History ofEngland, up to the Conquest : 2. DANIELL'S ditto : 3. DITTO, Life of William the First : 4. The same of William II.
down to Henry VI.- that of Richard II. being 'new writ : 5. HABINGTON'S
Life ofEdward IV: 6. SIR THOMAS MORE'S Life of EdwardV., and ofRichard
III continued by Hall and Holinshed : 7. Buck's Life of Richard III.;
8. LORD BACON's Life ofHenry VII.
VOL. II. contains : 1. LORD HERBERT's Life of Henry VIII : 2. HAYWARD's Life
ofEdward VI.: 3. HUGHES'S Life ofQueen Mary, translated from the Latin
of Francis , Bishop of Hereford : 4. CAMDEN'S Life ofElizabeth, translated by
Davis : 5. Appendix to the same : 6. CAMDEN's Annals ofJames I. never before
in English. 7. ARTHUR WILSON's Life ofJames I.
VOL. III. From Charles I. to William III. inclusive 66 all new writ by a learned
and impartial hand ; " which " hand " is supposed to be Kennet's.
† Translation of Du Fresnoy ; vol. ii . 464 , note *.
-
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 207
work is composed, (and of which the subjoined note
affords a testimony) it must be entitled to a more
conspicuous place in the Library of the careful collector than either of its predecessors : and if the materials
are sound, it is but of second importance by whom
they were collected ; although, in my own estimation,
the hand of Kennet was chiefly instrumental in their
selection. The history of LAURENCE ECHARD, * of
which both editions were published just one year after
those of Kennet, seems to have less claim upon the
attention of posterity ; although (as the subjoined
note may testify) there have not been wanting weighty
authorities to recommend it to the notice of the author's contemporaries. But, on the whole, Echard is
admitted with reluctance, though sometimes from
The LARGE PAPER copies, are by no means rare. Messrs Payne and
Foss mark a neat copy of the second and best edition at £3. 3s.
tr
"Collectio minime contemnenda "-says Fabricius, as he commences his analysis of the contents of each volume of the first edition. Bibl. Lat. Med. et Inf. Etat. vol. i . p. 274 , edit, 1734. In
his preface, however, Echard treats the monkish writers of the middle
ages, and even Holinshed and Speed, very uncourteously : as highly
disagreeble to the taste and genius of this refined age ; " and as now
much neglected and almost laid aside ” —observations, which equally
prove the author's want of judgment and of taste, if not of knowledge.
Bishop Nicolson oddly observes, that " this history was chiefly intended for the useful diversion of the nobility and gentry." Engl.
Hist. Libr. p.74 : and Rawlinson allows that it was " much esteemed
by the author's countrymen." Trans. ofDu Fresnoy, vol. ii . p. 466.
The author of the " Church History of the Catholicks " has however
accused Echard of " venturing into the world, without the ceremony
of quotations. " Jacob Tonson, the bookseller, had a royal privilege
for the exclusive sale of the first edition , for fourteen years. Of the
second, which does not seem to hold out any advantages over the
first, there are magnificent copies on LARGE PAPER — printed in the
fine style of the first half of the eighteenth century.
208 HISTORY
necessity, into " the Young Man's " historical collection.
Perhaps, pursuing exact chronological order, I
ought here to notice the Genealogical History ofthe
Kings and Queens ofEngland by FRANCIS SANDFORD,
of which the best edition appeared about this time ;
namely, in 1707 ; and of which copies on large paper
are considered as among the great guns even of magnificent collections. But the lustre of all partial and
* Although this edition, with additions and improvements by
STEBBING, be doubtless the best, yet I recommend the very nice and
curious Collector to avail himself also of the previous edition of
1677; because the chief attractions of this work consist in the Embellishments-which are engravings of tombs, seals, devices, arms,
quarterings, crests and supporters, &c. of the several monarchs, &c.
The earlier edition will necessarily have the choicer impressions of
the plates; and if these be taken out and inlaid , as duplicates, in the
later edition, † I hardly know of a more splendid and magnificent
volume-especially if it be on LARGE PAPER : which indeed is of extreme rarity. Mr. Grenville possesses one of the finest copies of this
second edition, on large paper, with which I am acquainted. It had
once (I believe) graced the shelves of the Lee Priory Library. A similar copy, at Althorp, bound in russia, was furnished byMessrs. Arch
at the cost of £36. 15s. In Osborne's time ( 1759) it might have been
purchased for £2. 12s. 6d. in this state. The catalogue of Messrs.
Payne and Foss, marks a copy of the small paper, in russia , at
107. 10s. and a " tall copy, in russia " is marked at 91. 9s. in the
catalogue of Messrs. Longman and Co. Messrs. Arch gallantly lift
up the price to 127. 12s. Sandford may therefore be said to be
" looking up " in the market. With this " Genealogical History "
is usually united, in a large library, " the History of the Coronation of
James II." 1687, with numerous plates. A fine copy may be worth
51. 58.
+ Messrs. Payne and Foss present us with a similar copy in their recent catalogue-but it seems to be BEYOND all price ! At least, none is affixed. It is on
small paper. Watt will supply the other magnificent work of Sandford. The
history of such costly publications, at such a period, must be curious.
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 209
even general Histories of England, was eclipsed, at the
opening of the eighteenth century, by the History of
the Rebellion and Civil Wars-from the powerful pen
of LORD CLARENDON : * a work, of which the impres-
*A pleasing little bibliographical memoir might be composed respecting the progress and success of this immortal work : which has
placed the author among the acutest observers, profoundest thinkers,
and most impartial historians, of any age or nation. † But my business is with a few simple facts . . and to be of service to the reader
chiefly in the selection of the more preferable editions of Lord Clarendon's history. The work first appeared in three folio volumes, in
the years 1702, 1703, and 1704. The Proclamation of Queen Anne,
for fourteen years exclusive sale, is dated " at Hampton Court, the
24th day ofJune, 1703." The preface was written by Dr. Aldrich,
Dean of Christ Church, one of the brightest ornaments of the University of Oxford. Reliquiæ Hearnianæ, vol. i . p. 55. Some ofthe
titles of this first edition (Dr. Bliss tells us) are uniformly dated
1704. This was the favourite edition, especially on LARGE paper,
which served for the Grangerites to illustrate. I observe such a copy
+ It were idle to quote authorities. Sir Walter Scott, in his edition of Dryden's
Works, vol. ix. p. 63, quotes Hume only : but Walpole, Granger, Lodge, and
Chalmers, may be also consulted with advantage. Dryden addressed some verses
to Lord Clarendon on the new year's day of 1662, when the Chancellor enjoyed the
full confidence of the Monarch and the nation : but the poet's Musewas not in her
best trim onthe occasion, and the profligate Charles more than divides the eulogies
upon the upright Chancellor. How ought Dryden to have addressed that great
man in his banishment ? and how magnificent are the lines of Pope to Harley,
Earl ofOxford, on a similar occasion ? To revert to the history : -it is the matter
which chiefly fixes the attention, and confirms the judgment : for the perusal of
Clarendon is, after all , any thing but a recreation. His style is cumbrous. His
periods are long and frequently involved. The very opening of the work, although
indicative of a lofty and generous turn of mind, is somewhat obscure and
oppressive. We rise from Clarendon, as we sometimes do from Milton - often
charmed and astonished- but a little wearied, and well pleased to rise. It is the
magnanimous impartiality ofthe Chancellor, as well as his inflexible adherence to
truth, which constitutes the chief excellence of his History. Many writers, I think,
have described characters as vividly and as copiously ; but it is the honesty ofLord
Clarendon's descriptions which make his figures " stand out of the canvas " and
claim our irresistible attention. Truth has mixed up his colours and time will
render them only more mellow and attractive. Of all the characters given by
writers of Clarendon, that by Granger is one of the most pithy and exact.
P
-
-
210 HISTORY
sions and profits have increased in an equal ratio -
and of which the popularity is built upon an impeof it, together with a similar one of the State Papers, (first published
in 1767) in seven vols. , marked at £21 . in the recent catalogue of
Messrs Payne and Foss. A second folio edition of the History appeared in 1707, of which there are two copies, on large paper, at
moderate prices, in the recent catalogue of Messrs. Longman and
Co.; and a pirated edition of this impression came out at Dublin
in 1719. The octavo editions are almost innumerable ; beginning
with the year 1705, and ending with 1819. The exclusive printing
vests in the University. A Supplement to Lord Clarendon's history,
containing tracts, speeches, letters, &c.: " with the heads [portraits] of the great men on both sides, eighty-five in number, " was
first published at London, in 1717 ; again in 1724, 8vo. These
heads had better been elsewhere . " The History of the Rebellion
and Civil Wars in Ireland, " first appeared in 1720, 8vo. A Collection of Tracts (obtained from Lord Clarendon's youngest daughter, the Lady Frances Knighteley) was also first published at
London, in 1727, folio . The preceding, with the Chancellor's Autobiography, first published at Oxford, in 1759 in folio and octavo
-again in 1761, 8vo. - and again, at the same place, in 1817, 4to.
to harmonise with the 4to. edition of the Rebellion in England and
Ireland, in 1816, 6 vols. -form the principal works that have raised
Lord Clarendon to that rank which he will probably ever maintain
in the annals of historical fame. His Religion and Policy, which
was first published at Oxford, in 1811 , 8vo . 2 vols. , is not likely to
meet with the success of the noble author's previous labours.
-
Of the editions just enumerated, I recommend, unhesitatingly,
"the Old Man " to the recent quarto impression : as less incommodious than the folio, and as equally comforting to the eye. Mr.
Collingwood, the University printer, hath indeed made it a beautiful
typographical production. * The " Young Man " may choose from
an almost countless number of octavo editions ; and will probably
hold out lustily for the large paper of the Master's edition (printed,
Copies of this Oxford edition, in all forms and conditions, may be obtained of
our principal booksellers. Messrs. Payne and Foss , who are the London publishers
for the University of Oxford, seem to revel in a proud display of copies see
their last catalogue, nos . 5616-5620.
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 211
rishable basis. A statesman, a lawyer, and a philosopher in its most practical, and perhaps rational,
sense, there is hardly any name which has reached us,
encirled by purer rays of renown, than that of Hyde,
Earl of Clarendon ; or any which is likely to go
down to posterity in a more unsullied state of purity.
When one considers the times in which this celebrated Lord Chancellor lived, the station which he
filled, the characters with whom he came in competition (as able as they were intrepid, daring, and corrupt) his family connections, his career of glory;
brightest in its wane - and, above all, THE LEGACY,
which, in his History, he has bequeathed to posterity,
says Dr. Bliss, " for Masters of Art only" *) in 1731, or of some
earlier, or later impression . But the recently favourite edition has
been that of 1807, 8vo. : which is already exhausted, and of which
the large paper copies exhibit a beautiful book. Need I remind the
reader of that most exquisite and matchless ILLUSTRATED large paper
copy of this edition, which has been so imperfectly described in the
Edes Althorpiana ? And when I mention this, I am not unmindful
of that still MORE marvellously illustrated copy, of the folio edition,
which belonged to the late Mr. Sutherland, and which is briefly mentioned at page 668 of the Bibliomania. The first copy is " matchless" as an octavo, and containing prints only. The latter admits
drawings also.†
* Athen. Oxon. vol. iii. col. 1024.
† And here, a word or two about the portrait of the illustrious author himself.
It is certain that, if the engraved head of him by Fittler, in the recent edition of
1816, be a resemblance to the Original, those portraits, by preceding engravers,
from the pencils of Lely and Zoust , are not so : and Granger (vol. iii . p. 360) tells
us that " the best picture, and the truest likeness of him, is that which was
painted by Sir Peter Lely." The portrait to the quarto Oxford edition , represents
the Chancellor when he was a young man—but he has, here, a hooked or roman
nose ; whereas, in the other portraits, the nose is rather flat . Once “ a roman nose,"
always a roman nose. See Mr. Harding's Illustrious Portraits : which gives us
the head by Lely, admirably engraved by Cooper.
212 HISTORY
... I hardly know how to call upon both "the Young,"
and " the Old," lover of good books, sufficiently to.
reverence those invaluable volumes known by the
title of the " History ofthe Rebellion and Civil Wars
in England, begun in the year 1641," by the great
author in question.
I am now approaching the period when " General
Histories" of England were written in a more methodical order -when the stream of events flowed on
uninterruptedly ; and when the reader might commence with the invasion of Julius Cæsar, and conIclude with the elevation of the House of Hanover.
The previous histories contained detached Memoirs,
or Lives, or Annals. They supplied the materials for
the picture, rather than exhibited the picture itself.
Or, they were as the groups, or main features, of the
composition ; wanting that keeping and expression
which arise entirely from the magic of colour. At
length appeared an History of England, from the pen
of a foreigner, which, till the publication of Hume's
celebrated history, was attended by an unprecedented
popularity in its sale. I am of course alluding to the
work of RAPIN ;* first published in the French language at Amsterdam, in 1724, in ten quarto volumes ;
* The name of RAPIN-THOYRAS will continue to be as familiar to
the English as to foreigners ; and a great deal of amusing bibliographical discussion belongs to the account ofthe editions of his history.
The two French quarto editions above mentioned, each of which
contains abrilliant head of Rapin, may be had at very slender prices
indeed. The work was translated, and improved by " Notes ecclesiastical and civil," byTindall, and published in 1728, 8vo. in 15 volumes.
Acontinuation, by Tindall, appeared in 1732 : the whole in 3 vols.
folio. This folio was again published in 1743, with the Maps,
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 213
and reprinted the following year at Trevoux, in the
same number of quarto volumes. It was shortly
Plans, Summary and Medallic History, in 5 folio volumes ; and the
octavo, in 1757, in 21 volumes : so that both these latter editions,
of their respective sizes, must be considered the preferable ones.
They are dear, in fine condition. A copy of the former, with the addition of the Monuments and Houbraken's heads, † is worth £31 . 10s.
-and even of the previous folio of 1732, with the Summary and
Medallic History, a copy, in 5 volumes, is marked at £ 12. 12s. in
Payne's Catalogue ; whereas, with the portraits of Houbraken inserted, it is valued at £31 . 10s. “ in russia, with gilt leaves, " by
Messrs. Arch. A copy of the best octavo, neatly bound, is worth
about £10. 10s. The recent labours of Mr. Archdeacon Coxe have
taught us the value of Tindall's Continuation. No historical
library can be perfect without it.
But a word only for the VERY curious-Young and Old Collector.
It is well known that there are copies of the best folio Rapin upon
fine writing paper : and such copies, if they possess fine proofs of the
heads engraved by Houbraken and Birch, are ... NOT NOW to be
purchased-unless on the death of a very eminent collector. Our
old Collectors§ usually enriched their libraries with such copies ; but
• The 5th volume, containing the maps, monuments, plans of battles, &c. was
published by itself : but these are usually incorporated in the body of the work,
in their proper places.
↑ Birch's Lives ofIllustrious Persons, with their portraits engraved by Vertue
and Houbraken, were published in a magnificent folio volume in 1745-51 , of
which copies, on LARGE PAPER, with proof impressions of the plates, have brought
from 20 to 30 guineas. I suspect, however, that there was a very liberal number
ofthese proofs taken, and that the large paper of Birch is almost as common as
the small. It is from this work that the heads were taken to embellish Tindall's
Rapin ; and it must be admitted that they form splendid and appropriate orna- ments.
+ Tindall was assisted by the learned Morant ; who, in fact, abridged his history, and published it in 1747 , 8vo. 3 vols. Mr. Archdeacon Coxe says, (Pref. to
Memoirs ofLord Oxford) that the Continuation was written by Dr. Birch. Th
notes to the former part are excellent, and constitute the principal reason for preferring the translation to Rapin's original edition .
§ West's extraordinary copy was not, however, upon fine writing paper. In
the Bibl. West. n°. 4136 , it is called a matchless set-" embellished with several
hundred extra portraits, plans, maps, views, public buildings, medals-many of
which are exceedingly scarce, with MS. illustrations of the prints." This copy
was sold for 547. 129. I would fain know in whose possession it now is?
214 HISTORY
afterwards translated into our own language, and
published with a continuation by TINDALL, in two
octavo, and three folio, impressions. Such a successful sale was without a parallel : while the skill of
the Engraver was latterly called in aid to embellish
the text of the Historian. Whatever may be the
superiority of the labours of Hume, Henry, and later
historians, let me assure the well educated and tasteful collector of books, that he can have no brighter,
or more desirable ornament, in the historical department of his library, than the second folio edition of
Rapin and Tindall, adorned by the heads ofVertue
and Houbraken. He must shun the last folio, by
Harrison, as he would a plague- stricken Turk.
The present is probably the fittest place to notice
the publications of HEARNE, to which some allusion
has been made in a preceding page. * As Hearne
died between the publication of Rapin's history and
that of Carte, (presently to be noticed) we may as well
therefore occupy a few pages with the register of his
historical works, in the chronological order in which
I know of none which exceeds that at Althorp, bound in 8 volumes,
(including the Summary of the Maps and Plans) which had belonged to George Steevens, and which was not obtained under the
sum of seventy guineas. It is bound in calf, with a broad border of
gold on the sides, having the edges of the leaves marbled, and gilt.
I am told that a fine, similar, copy adorns the library at Woburn
Abbey. The late Sir M. M. Sykes justly boasted of a similar treasure-e-bound in red morocco, and obtained of Mr. Evans. Mr. Dent
is also in possession of a similar copy. It is now a work of the rarest
possible occurrence.
"The last who has dug deep into the mine [of English History]
was THOMAS HEARNE, a clerk of Oxford, poor in fortune, and indeed
poor in understanding. His minute and obscure diligence, his voSee page 169, ante.
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 215
they appeared. The ridicule and satire which once
pursued the person and the publications of the author,
racious and undistinguishing appetite, and the coarse vulgarity of his
taste and style, have exposed him to the ridicule of idle wits . Yet
it cannot be denied that Thomas Hearne has gathered many gleanings of the harvest ; but if his own prefaces are filled with crude and
extraneous matter, his editions will be always recommended by their
accuracy and use." GIBBON, Misc. Works. vol. iii . p. 566—7.
Let me premise, that a complete list ofALL Hearne's works may be
found at the end of the Biographies ofLeland, Wood, and Hearne,
published at Oxford , in 1772, 8vo. 2 vols. * My business here is only
with the historical works, including however the lives of Great Men.
I begin with one of the greatest. I. Spelman's Life of Alfred, from
the original MS. with considerable additions, 1709, 8vo . The large
paper is scarce ; but the small is common and cheap. Hearne
got into a scrape about the prefix of Alfred's portrait, and especially
about the long and dignified beard which is flowing down that monarch's breast. Hethought it worth while to defend this beard, pretty
stiffly, in his Johan. Glastoniens. Chron . vol. ii . p. 648. I had supposed
that there were no copies ofthe Alfred on large paper, but I find the
fact established by a letter from Hearne to Cherry, soon after the publication of the work: Letters of Eminent Persons ; vol. i . p. 191 .
Indeed, Mr. Grenville possesses it. II. The Itinerary of John Leland the Antiquary ; Oxon, 1710-12, 8vo. 9 vols : 1745, 8vo.
Second Edition : 1770, 8vo. Third Edition . Of the first and original
edition, only 108 copies were printed on small paper ; and, as it should
seem from the list of Hearne's works, at the end of the 9th volume,
published in 1712, only 12 copies on LARGE PAper. It is difficult to
say where these 12 copies are now to be found. The Bishop ofEly
(More), Wriothesley, Duke of Bedford, Dr. Frewin, Mr. Francis
Cherry, Dean Aldrich, Charles, Earl of Sunderland, John Bridges, †
• In the British Bibliographer, vol. i . p . 241 &c. 385, &c. there appears avery full
account (furnished by myself) of the contents of some of Hearne's scarcer works
-and although there are abundant materials for the completion of this account,
the probability is that no encouraging opportunity will present itself But the
reader may see a collection of critical opinions, pronounced upon Hearne's labours, in the Bibliomania, p. 441 , &c.
+ Bridges's copy, at the sale of his library in 1725, was purchased by Fletcher
Gyles, the bookseller, for 10%. 12s. Gyles lived in Holborn, and was succeeded by
Lockyer Davies. He purchased lustily at Bridges's sale.
216 HISTORY
are now forgotten ; and Hearne stands upon a pedestal which may be said to have truth and honour
Lord Somers, Rev. Mr. Hinton, Thomas Rawlinson, Sir T. Sebright,
and Dr. Stratford, Canon of Christ Church, had each a copy. Of
these I can only refer with certainty to the libraries of the University
of Cambridge, Woburn, and Blenheim, as still possessing a copy on
large paper. The copy at Christ Church College, Oxford, is on
small paper : which, as Dean Aldrich gave all his books to that college, is a little extraordinary ; the more so, as the LARGE PAPER
HEARNES, at Christ Church, are in remarkably fine condition. Lord
Oxford had a copy, which might have been bought at one of Tom
Rawlinson's sales. The copies of Lord Somers, Dean Aldrich, Mr.
Hinton, Tom Rawlinson, and Dr. Stratford, have doubtless got into
other collections.
Nordothe noble libraries of Rutland, Beaufort, and Spencer, possess it in any other shape but in small paper ; and Mr. Grenville is
compelled to solace himself with the process of inlaying, in order that
his regiment of Grenadier HeARNES may be of the same height.
After this, who shall venture upon fixing a price on such a treasure ?
Thus much only be it permitted me to say. I have heard a young
and adventurous book-knight remark, that 100 GUINEAS should not
stand between him and a large paper copy of the first edition of
Leland's Itinerary !! Surely, the ghost of TomHearne will be seen
flitting about the auction room of Mr. Evans -when that event
arrives !
But the small paper is of rare occurrence,✶ and yet its value is
very differently estimated. Mr. Thorpe, in his recent catalogue,
marks it at 51. 5s. ; and Mr. Bohn, at one half of that sum. However, in point of intrinsic worth, it is rather inferior to the succeeding
It was rare even at the time of publication. Thus, Gale writes to Hearne in
Sep. 1712, " A friend of mine, the Dean of Rippon, is much concerned that he
cannot procure your Itinerary for money." For an account of its rarity and cost,
on large paper, see that of the Collectanea, its companion, post. The Itinerary,
however, (if it be the edition of 1710) seems to have sunk prodigiously in price in
Osborne's sheet catalogue of 1759 ; for it is there marked at 21. 5s. In the Reliquiæ Hearnianæ, vol. i . p. 366, mention is made of" some Grub-street people reprinting this edition of the Itinerary." Atterbury, Bishop of Rochester, told
Hearne so ; but added, " it would only make his still the more valuable." I believe no such reprint ever appeared.
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 217
for its basis. His works, which present us with portions of History, chiefly local, are now coveted by the
editions ; ofwhich the third , of 1770, ( as its prefix or advertisement
notices) is doubtless the best. Of the second edition of 1745, there
were 350 copies on small, and 50 on large paper.
A copy of the
large was sold for 20l. 9s. 6d. at a late sale of Mr. Evans's. Of the
third, to the best of my observation, no number of either is specified
in the preface or prefix : but the original price was 21. 2s. the small,
and 31. 3s. the large paper. I have purchased a large paper of the
third, in russia binding, for 5l. 5s.
III. I. Lelandi Antiquarii de Rebus Britannicis Collectanea. Oxon.
1715, 8vo. 6 vols. First edition ; reprinted in 1745 and 1774. Of
the first edition, only 150 copies were printed on small paper, and
a very few (the number not specified ) on large. It was of great
rarity during the Editor's life- time ; and it should seem that Large
PAPER copies of this first edition, and of the Itinerary of 1710, were
considered asthe true Keimelia ofa thorough-bred Collector's library.
* In the Reliquiæ Hearnianæ, vol. i. p. 304, is the following memorandum, dated
April 30, 1714 , from Hearne's diary. "Whereas my edition of Leland's Itinerary
in 9 vols. was sold to subscribers for 37 shillings the small paper, and 45 shillings
the large paper ; they nowgo at a prodigious price , viz. at 10 or 12 guineas. Mr.
Clements , bookseller in Oxford, bought Mr. Hinton of Corpus's copy (he being a
subscriber for large paper) for 5 guineas, and immediately sold it to another bookseller at London for 8 guineas, who gave him many thanks for his bargain, it
being said that he was to have 12 guineas of another for them." At a subsequent
period, Hearne makes the following memoranda : Sep. 24, 1724, I paid Mr. Samuel Wilmot, ofOxford, bookseller, 20 guineas for a complete set of my edition of
Leland's Itinerary in 9 vols. and his Collectanea in 6 vols. The set belonged to Dr.
Charlett. He would not abate a penny. I bought these books for Mr. Vansittart,
of Shottesbroke, in Berks. A Mr. Edward Prideaux Gwyn thought that they were
cheap; being now worth much more." This transaction is disclosed by Hearne, in
a gossipping letter to the Rev. L. Torkington, who had given him the commission :
see Letters ofEminent Persons, (from MSS. in the Bodleian Library) vol. ii. p. 69.
In this reference, Hearne tells his correspondent that " the price is not dear, considering the great scarceness of the books , and the goodness of the set." Qu. Where
is this set now ? Does it grace the shelves of the library of Lord Bexley ? —who, I
know, hath a keen appetite for large paper copies of elegant works.
On consulting the Letters ofEminent Persons, vol. i . p. 279, I find Hearne thus
complaining ofthe expenses of printing these Collectanea of Leland. " I am now,
(he says, in a letter to Mr. Allen) as youknow, printing Leland's Collectanea about
our British Antiquities, and the work hath been so chargeable, that had it not
218 HISTORY
antiquary, and respected by the scholar. The " old"
and the " young, " professedly attached to BOOK.
A cut copy ofthe large paper of the Collectanea was sold for 147. at
a late sale at Mr. Evans's. Messrs. Longman and Co. mark a small
paper copy of this first edition of the Collectanea at 41. 4s. Mr.
Thorpe marks the same, 9 vols. in 5, calf gilt, at 3l. 13s. 6d.
IV. J. Rossi Antiquar. Warwicensis Hist. Reg. Angliæ. Oxon . 1716,
8vo. Original Edition : only sixty copies printed , of which twelve
were on large paper. It was reprinted in 1745 ; of which reprint, a
copy on large paper was sold for 11. 11s. 6d. at a late sale at Mr.
Evans's. A small paper is marked at 14s. by Messrs. Arch. The
preface to this work is exceedingly interesting, in developing the
real and wretched situation of Hearne, at the time of editing it .
" And now, Sir, (says Wagstaffe to Hearne, in a letter to him, of
the date of May 30, 1716) you must give me leave to mention the
great pleasure with which I read your preface to Rowse. It discovers a wonderful constancy and resolution in adhering to a well
settled principle, and is so pathetical a relation of your sufferings,
as not only raises our pity, but makes them our own : in a word,
'tis full of such sentiments as are unknown to the degeneracy of the
present age, and are the peculiar affections of a soul prepared to suffer
for conscience- sake. " Letters of Eminent Persons ; vol. ii . p. 25.
The passage referred to by Wagstaffe, is subjoined in a note- in the
same authority.
been for the encouragement of several noble and generous persons, I could not
have pretended to have set about it with any prospect of success ; though I am
very sorry to say, that I have not met with the least encouragement in this place.
[Oxford. ] ... Such expensive undertakings are enough to lessen the fortune of
any one, though of a considerable estate ; but then the burden is so much the
heavier upon me, as I have only a salary of ten pounds per ann. (without any other
place) and am so far from enjoying any estate, that my near relations were never
able to contribute any thing to the education I have had, or to share in any of
those expenses I have been put to during my residence here." On consulting the
Reliquiæ Hearnianæ, vol. i . p . 136 , there appears the following memorandum , in
Hearne's Diary, relating to the EXPENSES OF PRINTING books at Oxford about the
year 1708. " The printers say they had 18s. a sheet for composing Lord Clarendon's history. They had 15s. a sheet for composing Pliny's Epistles : 16s. for
Livy, [his own edition] per sheet. Dr. Mill paid 10s . per sheet for composing the
text and notes at bottom of his NewTestament. Bennett paid 12s. per sheet for
composing Thucydides. For Mr. Bugg's book, called Goliah, he paid but 13s. composing, and all other things belonging to the press, and for paper 7s. per ream.
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 219
COLLECTING, can never be thoroughly happy, if their
Hearnean Series be not complete.
Neither class
V. Titi Livii Foro-Juliensis Vita Henrici. V. Reg. Angl. Oxon.
1716, 8vo. To this work there were 100 subscribers ; of whom 46
had copies on large paper. The most amusing part of it, is the
collection of letters (cxxii . in number) from p. 99 to 216-the biography of Henry comprising only 95 pages. These letters were
taken from the collection of Dr. Smith. A copy of this book, on
LARGE PAPER, was sold for 71. at a late sale at Mr. Evans's.
VI. Aluredi Beverlacensis Annales, sive historia de gestis Rerum
Britanniæ, &c. Oxon. 1716, 8vo. Of the 148 copies printed, there
were 33 copies on large paper. The small was published at 8s. and
the large at 12s. A copy ofthe small paper is marked at 31. 13s. 6d.
in the catalogue of Messrs. Longman for 1822 ; and a copy of the
large paper was sold for 71. 17s. 6d. at a recent sale at Mr. Evans's.
But it usually bears a higher price. It is very rare.
VII. G. Roperi Vita D. Thoma Mori, &c. Oxon 1716, 8vo.
One hundred and forty- eight copies printed ; of which forty- two were
on LARGE paper. It is therefore erroneous to suppose the large
paper of this work to be the rarest, or any thing like the rarest, of
the large paper Hearnes. Yet copies, in this condition, bring great
prices. That, at the sale of Mr. Watson Taylor's library, most splendidly bound by C. Lewis, in Venetian morocco, in the Grolier style,
was purchased by the Hon. Mr. Finch, for 35l. 3s. 6d. A similar
copy, at a subsequent sale at Mr. Evans's, reached a yet higher sum ;
namely, 371. 16s. Messrs. Longman mark a small paper at 31. 3s. The
portrait of More, prefixed to this book, is a very sorry performance.
VIII. G. Camdeni Annales Rer. Anglicar. &c. regn. Elizabetha.
Oxon. 1717, 8vo. 3 vols. There were 50 copies on large paper. Mr.
Thorpe marks a fine copy of the small paper, in extra russia binding, at 21. 12s. 6d. A copy, on large paper, was sold for 71. 7s. at a
late sale at Mr. Evans's.
IX. G. Neubrigiensis Historia, &c. Oxon. 1719. 8vo. 3 vols.
From the list of subscribers, vol. i. p. cxxiii, there appear to have
been not fewer than 90 copies on large paper. This work, both on
large and small paper, is among the most ordinary and low priced
of those of Hearne ; but it is , at the same time, one of the most intrinsically valuable, and singularly illustrative of the gossipping turn
of mind of the Editor. A fine small paper copy is marked at
220 HISTORY
ofCollectors must expect the earlier and choicer editions of all the works of this indefatigable author ; but
it may be no unreasonable wish to desire to possess
21. 12s. 6d. in Mr. Thorpe's last catalogue ; and a fine large paper
copy, in russia, bears the elevated price of 107. 10s. in Messrs. Arch's
catalogue of 1822-the sum which it brought at the sale of Mr.
Watson Taylor's library.
X. Sprotti Chronica. Oxon. 1719, 8vo. Originally published at
12s. the large, and 8s. the small paper. Messrs. Arch mark an uncut
copy, with russia back, at 14s.; and a fine copy of the large paper
was sold for 51. 5s. at the sale of Mr. Watson Taylor's library.
XI. Textus Roffensis. Oxon. 1720, 8vo. A copy on Large paper
was recently sold for 31. 3s.-though a very fine one of this description brought 71. 7s. at the sale of Mr. W. Taylor's library. There
were 72 copies subscribed for. A very neat copy of the small paper,
with gilt leaves, is marked at 15s. in Mr. Thorpe's last catalogue.
XII. Roberti de Avesbury Historia de Mirab. gestis Edvardi III.
Oxon. 1720, 8vo. This is one of the most curious and amusing of
Hearne's pieces ; but, like many of them, the most so, when relating
to extraneous matter. The letters between Henry VIII . and Anne
Boleyn (of which a specimen appears in the Bibliomania, p. 285-7)
are among the most interesting of the Appendix. It should seem
that there were 176 Subscribers, but no large paper are specified ;
yet Osborne, in his catalogue of 1759, marks such a copy at 15s.:
and a similar copy was sold, at the sale ofMr. W. Taylor's library, for
£7. 10s. Messrs . Arch mark a similar copy, bound in russia, by Lewis,
at £7.7s. Afine copy of the small paper, in russia binding, is marked
at £2. 2s. in Mr. Thorpe's last catalogue. In the Brit. Bibliographer, vol. ii. p. 78-85, appear copious extracts from this singular
volume.
XIII. Ioannis de Fordun Scotichronicon Genuinum, Oxon. 1722,
8vo. 5 vols. One hundred and fifty- one subscribers ; but, as far as I
can discover, the number of large paper copies is not specified . The
original price was 1. 1s. the large ; and 10s. 6d. the small ; per
volume. It is among the commonest of Hearne's pieces ; and was
reprinted, with additions and improvements, at Edinburgh in 1759,
in two volumes folio. Of Hearne's edition, a neat copy on small
paper, with marbled leaves, is marked at £2. 5s. in Mr. Thorpe's
last catalogue ; and an uncut copy, in Venetian morocco half bind-
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 221
those which are really and bonâ fide necessary in the
department more exclusively historical. Hence, ening, at £3. 13s. 6d. by Mr. Bohn. A copy on large paper was sold
at a recent sale at Mr. Evans's for £7.: but a very fine one, of a
similar description, was bought by Mr. Clarke, at the sale of Mr.W.
Taylor's library, for £ 15.
XIV. Hemingi Chartularium Ecclesia Wigorniensis, Oxon. 1723,
8vo., 2 vols. There were 160 subscribers ; but, as far as I can discover, the number of large paper copies is not specified. The original price was £2. 2s. the large, and £1 . 1s. the small. The MS. *
from which this work was printed, was supplied, or rather given
to the Editor, by a Mr. Richard Graves of Mickleton, in Glocestershire-one of Hearne's warmest friends and earliest patrons ; and it
lately fell to the lot of Mr. Evans to sell the identical LARGE PAPER
presentation copy to the Donor of the MS. -beautifully bound in
red morocco-for £19 . 19s . Lord Aylesford was the fortunate purchaser of this unique treasure, in its way. The small paper may be
worth 21. 12s. 6d.
XV. Robert ofGlocester's Chronicle (in verse) transcribed and now
first publishedfrom a MS. in the Harleyan Library, Oxon. 1724, 8vo.
2 vols. Printed in the black letter : and among the most valuable
and important of Hearne's publications. The very first line of the
--
This publication of Hearne is full of all manner of desultory, and yet neither
unamusing nor uninstructive, memoranda, or supplemental pieces. In conformity with the plan above stated of publishing a raisonné catalogue or analysis ofHearne's pieces-I had transcribed very many passages from the present.
From these, I subjoin the following curious, and generally unknown, piece of old
English poetry. "Some verses on King Henry VI. and his bad Counsellors, as he
was sitting in Parliament in the 28th year of his reign, which I shall here publish,
as I transcribed† them, some years agoe, from a MS. paper in a box in the Ashmolean Museum :
For fere or favour or eny false man,
Lese not the love of al a rōialte
Be ware, y say, for by saynt Julyan,
Duke, Juge, Baron, Archyebyschop at :: he be,
He wyll repente withynne ys monthes three.
Let folke accuse, excuse theym as they can,
Receyde no goode, let all such brybery be,
Supporte they not, that thys wo be gan,
+Coll. nostr. MSS. vol. LIX. p. 10.
222 HISTORY
joying this class complete, NENNIUS looks with complacency upon his octavo shelves ; and POLYDORE
text of this Chronicle (of the XIIIth century) should be the motto
of every true-born Englishman :
Engelond ys a wel god lond, ich wene ofeche lond best.
It was originally published at £1 . 1s. the small, and 21. 2s. the large
paper ; but, along with its successor and companion, Peter Langtoft's Chronicle, it having been reprinted with great care (but without any additions) it has now fallen somewhat in price. Messrs.
Payne and Foss mark a new and very neat small paper copy at
4l. 4s. and Mr. Thorpe has a " fine copy, morocco, gilt leaves, silk
insides, " at the reduced price of 21. 15s.: but this latter has, in all
probability, long taken its departure. Mr. Evans recently sold a
large paper copy for 71. 17s. 6d. ; yet Mr. Watson Taylor's fine copy,
purchased by Mr. Cuthell, reached the price of 161. 16s . The reprint, in 1810, was published in an octavo, a royal octavo, and a
quarto form. The two first are to be had at very reasonable prices :
the latter ranges with the quarto re- impressions of the later Chroniclers.
XVI. Peter Langtoft's Chronicle (as illustrated and improved by
Robert of Brunne) from the death of Cadwaladon to the end of King
Edward the First's reign . Oxon . 1725, 8vo. 2 vols . The companion
to the preceding ; and of about equal rarity and intrinsic worth. I
remember to have once seen Mr. Manson, the late bookseller, gallantly push a large paper copy of this first edition to the sum of
£33 . 128. at which price he bought it for the late Mr. Towneley.
At a recent sale at Mr. Evans's it produced only £5 . 7s. 6d. Yet
Mr. Watson Taylor's copy produced 14 / . 14s. Messrs. Longman
and Co. mark a small paper copy at 5l. 15s. 6d. This Chronicle
But lete them were such clothes as they span,
And flein fro yow there wages, and see.
For y ensure yow by God, and by saynct Anne,
Some most goo hens, ther may no beter be,
And ells ys lost all thys lond and we.
Hange uppe suche false men to awr Soverayne Lord,
That ever conseylyd hym with fals men to be acordyd.
Vol. ii. p. 663.
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 223
rests contented with the more pigmy squadrons of his
fine historical army. But to neither of these Viri
has been reprinted like its precursor ; and the reprint may be obtained at equally reasonable prices.
OxXVII. XVIII. XIX. THE GLASTONBURY ANTIQUITIES . Although
it should seem that the publications of Hearne, relating to these
Antiquitities, were rather topographical than historical, yet as, with
the usual peculiarities of the author, they exhibit a Miscellany in
which there are several things appertaining to the earlier periods of
our History, I have resolved upon classing them in the present order,
and embodying them as the reader here observes : premising, that
scarcely fewer than twenty well filled octavo pages have been devoted to an account of these three works, relating to the Antiquities of
Glastonbury, in the British Bibliographer, vol. i . p . 241. The History and Antiquities of Glastonbury ; by an Anonymous Author. *
ford, 1722, 8vo. This is one of the handsomest of Hearne's publications ; and one of the few which contains an English preface ;
but, it must be confessed, that the critical reader could well dispense
with a great deal of extraneous matter. It was published at 10s. 6d.
the small paper, and 17. 1s. the large. Messrs. Payne and Foss
mark a large paper copy, in blue morocco, at 81. Ss. There were
only 151 subscribers to both large and small ; and considering that it
is a topographical work, one is surprised at its frequent occurrence.
Sir R. C. Hoare, as might be expected , possesses a fine copy of it—in
his fine set of large paper Hearnes. Iohannis Confratris et Monachi
Glastoniensis Chronica ; sive Historia de Rebus Glastoniensibus ;
Oxon 1726, 8vo. 2 vols. About 140 subscribers : published at 21. 2s.
the large, and 17. 1s . the small paper. I refer the reader to a critical
analysis of these volumes in the British Bibliographer, vol . i . page
250 ; andin the meantime, to the New Memoirs of Literature, vol. iv.
p. 200-207— " in which the account of the relics, said to belong to
the abbey, is more minutely and sarcastically criticised than by Mr.
Gough, in his British Topography ; vol. ii . p. 215 ," &c. The tenth
article, p. 423, gives a list of the old books in the library of the
monastery at a sight of which, " Leland drew back with mixed
The MS. of this anonymous author appears to have been " finisht April 28,
1716 " see the pref. p. lxxxviii.. and Gough's British Topography ; vol. ii. p. 215.
224 HISTORY
versatissimi in British historical lore, is granted that,
probably, richest of all bibliographical or bibliomaastonishment and veneration." De Scriptoribus Britannicis, vol. i .
p. 41. A copy of this work, on LARGE paper, was sold for 10l. 10s. at
a recent sale at Mr. Evans's . Adami de Domerham Historia de Rebus
Gestis Glastoniensibus.. Oxon. 1727, 8vo. 2 vols. This is the most
intrinsically valuable work relating to the antiquities of Glastonbury.
The text is ancient, and taken from an unique ms.: see pref. x :
but in Hearne's Hemingi Chart. Eccles. Wigorn. vol. ii . p . 602 ; and
Walter Hemingford, vol. ii . p . 631 , there will be found further particulars relating to this abbey. To Adam de Domerham, there appear
to have been 128 subscribers only ; of whom nine subscribed for
more than one large paper copy : in the whole, forty- eight copies in
this condition. A large paper copy was sold for the moderate sum
of 5l. 10s. at a recent sale at Mr. Evans's : but the fine copy of Mr.
Watson Taylor's, produced the sum of 91. 9s. It was purchased by
Mr. Cuthell.
XX. Thomæ de Elmham Vita et Gesta Henrici Quinti Anglor. Regis, e Codd. mss. vet. Oxon. 1727, 8vo. About forty-five copies on
large paper, at 11. 1s. " in gratiam scilicet virorum in libris nitidis
colligendis admodum curiosorum "-as Hearne not inaptly expresses
it. There is a plentiful abuse of Tyrrell and Burnet (as was to be
expected) at pp. xvi. and xviii. of the preface. This is by no means
among the commonest of Hearne's publications ; though I find that
a large paper copy of it was purchased for 4l. 16s. by his R. H. the
Duke of Sussex, at a recent sale at Mr. Evans's. Messrs. Longman and Co. mark a similar copy at 61. 6s.
XXI. Liber Niger Scaccarii, &c. Oxon. 1728, 8vo. 2 vols. With
some inedited Annals of William of Worcester subjoined. Perhaps
The author, like R. Stephen (in planning his division of the NewTestament into
verses) and Erasmus (in meditating on his Moriæ Encomium) seems to have been
indebted to ajourney upon horseback for the discovery of the composition. He hap- pens to alight at an inn ; where, putting up his horse, he walks into the bar,
or common room, for refreshment ; and entering into chit-chat with the landlord,
hears a long gossipping story about the Abbey of Glastonbury-in the neighbourhood ofwhich the public house chances to be. This excites in him a wish to
become better acquainted with the history of so extraordinary a place ; and, going
home,he rummages the works of the " best antiquities," from which he tells us,
that his owncomposition is " gathered. "
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 225
niacal gratifications-the possession of a set, or of the
greater part of a set, of Hearne's works upon LARGE
the commonest, but not the most useless, of Hearne's publications.
It may be worth 18s. in small, and 21. 12s. 6d. on large paper.
XXII. Historia Vitæ et Regni Richardi II. a Monacho quodam de
Evesham, &c. Oxon. 1729, 8vo. Among the more curious and rare
performances of Hearne. The life of the King occupies 216 pages.
In the 220 subsequent pages of miscellaneous matter, are some
amusing particulars, furnished by Sir Richard Wynn, of the Journey
of Prince Charles's Servants into Spain, in 1623. See the British
Bibliographer, vol. i. p. 391 : but in respect to the Regal biography, the Hearnean student should also consult Walter Hemingford, p. 453-477 .* There were only 130 subscribers to this work ;
and, as it should seem, forty-five of these possessed the large paper.
It is now scarce and high priced in either form. The Hon. Mr.
Finch could not obtain a large paper copy, at a recent sale at Mr.
Evans's, under 5l. 12s. 6d.
XXIII. Iohannis de Trokelowe Annales Edv. II. Reg. Angl. Oxon.
1729, 8vo. There are no subscribers' names prefixed or subjoined :
the large paper was published at 17. 1s. and the small at 10s. 6d. In
the collection of large paper Hearnes, recently sold at Mr. Evans's,
and so frequently referred to , I find no copy of this book. In the
catalogue ofMessrs. Longman and Co. , of 1822, a small paper copy
is marked at 11. 11s. 6d.
XXIV. Thomæ Caii ( Collegii Universitatis regn. Eliz. Magistri)
Vindicia Antiquitatis Academia Oxoniensis, &c. Oxon . 1730., 8vo.
2 vols. I possess copious manuscript extracts from the multifarious
and gossipping contents of these volumes : which are full of biographical, topographical, and bibliographical anecdotes. It appears that
there were 129 subscribers ; and forty-three copies on large paper.
Several Subscribers took several small paper copies.
A yet more curious and instructive memoir, relating to the unfortunate
Richard II. was published (with illuminations) in the xxth vol . of the Archaologia, 1823 : from a French Metrical History, written by a Contemporary. The Society of Antiquaries has taken loftier ground by the publication of such a tract
-translated and edited by the Rev. Mr. Webb. It is succeeded by a very sensible and satisfactory " Enquiry concerning the death ofRichard the Second," by T,
Amyot, Esq. now Treasurer to the Society.
Q
226 HISTORY
PAPER. Whether they disdain, or whether they despair of possessing, such a treasure, it is not my
XXV. Walteri Hemingford &c. Historia de rebus gest. Edv. I. II.
et III. E Codd. MSS. nunc primum publicata. Oxon. 1731 , 8vo.
2 vols. This is without doubt one of the most curious and scarce
publications of Hearne; as an examination of the contents of it, in
the British Bibliographer, vol. ii . p. 72, will sufficiently prove.
There were only 120 subscribers to the work ; of whom forty subscribed for large paper, at 21. 2s. the copy. Such a copy was purchased by the Hon. Mr. Finch, at a late sale at Mr. Evans's, for 10l.
At this moment, I find no traces of a small paper in the catalogues
of some of our principal booksellers.
XXVI. Otterbourne et Wethamstede Rer. Anglicar. Script. Vet.
Oxon. 1732, 8vo. 2 vols. One hundred and sixteen subscribers
only ; of whom nine subscribed for several small paper copies.*
There appear to have been forty-four copies on LARGE PAPER- of
which a very fine one was purchased at the sale of Mr. Watson
Taylor's library, by the Hon. Mr. Finch, for 171. As usual with the
publications of Hearne, these volumes contain a variety of miscellaneous matter exclusively of the text of the historians in question.
XXVII. Chronicon sive Annales Prioratús de Dunstaple. Oxon.
1733, 8vo. 2 vols . Only 112 subscribers ; but some for several
copies. Of the LARGE PAPER, only thirty- nine copies are indicated
as such. At a recent sale in Pall-Mall, a copy, on large paper, was
obtained for 141. and at that of Mr. Watson Taylor's library, a
similar copy was purchased by the Hon. Mr. Finch for 131. 2s. 6d.
This work is perhaps rather topographical than historical ; but it has
many curious details, † and is considered to be among the more
:
Among the subscribers for several copies was Lionel Walden, Esq.—“ juvenis
virtute pariter atque integritate spectabilis, qui ex summa sua in nos studiaq ;
nostra literaria benevolentia, ultimo suo testamento pecunias perquam generose
mihi legavit. Is autem magno cum nostro dolore fœda barbarie ac crudelitate interemptus est A. D. M. DCC. XIX. id quod jam nuper etiam in Adamo de Domerham innuimus. Satis vero opportune solutæ sunt pecuniæ illæ, ut ita fieret non
parum laborante Lionelli, quem diximus , sorore , conjuge lectissima Humphredi
Ormii, Armigeri. Sat dictum sapienti. Beneficiorum immemores esse pudet.
Idcirco nemo ægre feret, nosmet [ex adulatione minime aucupantes bonam gratiam] hæc de Waldeno, juvene plane egregio, prodidisse . " p. ci .
+ In conformity with the design mentioned at page 215, ante, I had prepared
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 227
business to record : only I will be free to observe, that
it is in the possession of such a treasure, that HONORIO
coveted productions of Hearne; especially on large paper. The
account ofthe mustering ofthe University of Oxford in 1642, is not
the least curious and interesting ; but the subjoined specimens are
quite sufficient to excite the antiquary's curiosity.
XXVIII. The last, and perhaps (intrinsically considered) the most
valuable of all Hearne's publications, is the following : Benedictus
a considerable quantity of materials for the illustration of the Annals ofDunstaple
Priory. It is just possible that the reader may not object to be made acquainted
with a portion of these Illustrations ; especially as they embrace some curious old
English poetry.
Antiquity of this Chronicle.
Page xxvii.-Lord Coke quotes it in expounding the Statute de Judaismo : (in
2 Inst. ) Stow, Holinshed, and other Chroniclers make mention of, or use,
it. Nicolson did not know the author of it : and the mss. which he consulted or
referred to, were discordant among themselves. Wanley had written his sentiments, knowing the authenticity of this Chronicle, that it should be made public.
Hearne put short explanatory notes (very properly) which were not in the original.
He avows his usual practice of copying mss. so rigidly, as to retain, purposely,
the very errors after the manner of Grævius in his Greek Inscriptions.
"Although many have praised this Chronicle in print, no one had accurately
described it ; or seemed to know any thing of its age and authenticity. Both
Stowe and Joceline and Tyrrell and White Kennett have acted thus. Richard de
Morins was its author-at least of the first part-and he died in 1242. He thinks
Leland* would have seen and noticed this ms. when he visited the public libraries,
ifsome private hand had not carried it away-through envy, or spite. " P. xxxi .
Wanley was clearly of this opinion that Morins was the author-especially
from comparing it with a ms. of the Chartulary of the same Priory-which was
deposited in the Harleian Collection - formerly one John Ward's-and purchased
byWanley-p. xxxiv. xxxv. Hearne then is clearly of opinion that Richard de
Morinst was an Englishman , the author of both Chronicle and Chartulary, and, as
such, that he ranks among the writers of British history, page xxxvi.
A slight notice of Dunstaple occurs in the Collectanea, vol. iii . xii. and
Itinerary.
+ Wanley describes him as " seeming to be a man of a griping and exacting
temper, which often brought him into troublesome suits of lawwith the townsmen,
and others his tenants and neighbours He was prior thirty- nine years. " H. Wanleii Notitia Chartularii de Dunstaple, p. xciii lix.
228 HISTORY
feels comfort, and LENTULUS supreme felicity. Indeed, apostrophising and mystifying apart, I know of
Abbas Petroburgensis de vita et gestis Henrici II. et Ricardi I., &c.
Oxon. 1735, 2 vols. Of the large paper copies, there were thirtyseven copies subscribed for; and their rarity may be presumed, when
the Hon. Mr. Finch was compelled to give 197. 10s. for a similar
Customs of Dunstaple Priory. (From the Chartulary. )
Hearne says that some of these are worth noticing-for instance :
" Item dicunt, ubi vidua dimittit francum bancum. (5)
(5.) Free Bench, Widow's Estate. Tis observed that in the Manors of
East and West Euborne and Chadleworth, in Berks, and in the Manors of Tor,
and some other places in the West, there is this odd custom, that if a copyhold,
or customary tenant dye, the widow shall have her Free- bench in all his copyhold
lands, dum sola et casta fuerit ; but if she commit incontinency, she forfeits her
widow's estate ; yet after this, if she come into the next court, held for the
Manour, riding backwards on a black ram, with his tail in her hand, and say the
words following, the Steward is bound bythe custom to readmit her to her Freebench.
Here I am,
Riding upon a black Ram,
&c. &c. &c.
[The remainder need not be repeated. ]
" I take notice, " (continues Hearne) " of these things, upon account of the
mention of Free-bench in this Chartulary of Dunstaple, where however I do not
think , that the custom of recovery of a widow's estate, by riding upon a black
ram, prevail'd, as it may be some will imagine it did. Had it so prevailed, 'tis
very probable it would have been mentioned in the Chartulary in this very passage
I now publish." Page xxxix-xl. (Blackstone, vol . ii . p. 132, edit. 1772 , does
not notice this. )
Dewes' Description of Charles the First's Queen, Henrietta.
" On thursday the 30 and last day of this instant Iune ( 1625 ) I went to Whitehall, purposelie to see the Queene, which I did fullie all the time shee sate at
dinner, and perceived her to be a most absolute delicate ladie , after I had exactlie
surveied all the features of her face: much enlivened by her radient and sparkling
blacke eye. Besides, her deportment amongst her women was so sweete and
humble, and her speech and lookes to her other servants soe milde and gracious,
as I could not abstaine from divers deepe fetched sighs , to consider, that shee
wanted the knowledge of the true religion." Life of Simon D'Ewes, written by
Aimself, in the Harleian Library, f. 79, b . p. lxiv. D'Ewes was a Puritan.
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 229
no collection of works which is more thoroughly inviting to perusal, than that of Hearue, on large paper,
in primitive calf or morocco binding.
copy at a recent sale at Mr. Evans's. I suspect the small paper to
be also scarce ; and that Messrs. Longman and Co. have not greatly
overcharged it by the price of 41. 4s. the sum at which Gough's
copy was, if I remember rightly, sold. Mr. Thorpe has however
Verses concerninge the Name and Armes of Dunstaple.
ByHoughton Regis there, where Watling Street
Is cross'd by Icknel way, once grew awoode
Withbushes thicke orespred , a coverte meete
To harbour such as lay in waite for blood
There lurkte of ruffians bold an hideous route
Whose captain was one DUNNE of courage stoute.
No travailer almost could pass that way,
But either he was wounded, robbd or kill d,
Bythat lewd crew, which there in secret lay,
With murders, thefts and rapes their hands were fild.
What booties ere they took, ech had his share :
Thusyeere by yeere they liv'd without all care.
At last Kinge Henrie, first kinge of that name,
Towards the Northerne parts in progresse rode :
And hearing of those great abuses came
Unto the thicket where the theeves abode :
Who on the cumminge of the kinge did flee,
Each to his house or to his friend did hie.
Wherefore the Kinge, such mischiefs to prevente,
The wood cut downe, the way all open layd,
That all trew men, which that way rode or wente,
Of sodaine sallyes might be lesse afrayde,
And might descrie their daunger ere it came,
And so by wise foresighte escape the same,
This done, he reard a poull both houge and longe
In that road high way, where so manie passe,
And inthe poull let drive a STAPLE stronge
Whereto the Kinge's owne ring appendante was.
And caus d it to be publisht, that this thinge
Was done to see, what thiefe durst steal the ringe.
230 HISTORY
But I am rambling somewhat. Reverting to Hearne,
and to the critical value of his historical labours, it
may be safely affirmed, that, for fidelity, and frevalued it at 31. 3s. Whoever has leisure, may examine a few of the
odd things (such as " Tales of the Mad Men of Gotham, Scoggan's
Jests, Robert Burton, Tom Thumb, and the Mylner of Abingdon" )
which Hearne has contrived to incorporate in these volumes, in the
Yet for all that, the ringe was stole away,
Which when it came to learned Beauclark's eare,
By skylfull arte to finde he did assay,
Whowas the thiefe, and first, within what Shyre
His dwellinge was, which this bold act had done,
And found it to be Bedfordshire anon.
Next in what Hundred of that Shyre might dwell
This ventrous wighte, Kinge Henrie caste to finde,
And upon Mansfield Hundred straight it fell,
Which being founde , he after bent his minde,
Tolearne the parish, and by like skyll tride,
That he in Houghton Regis did abide.
Lastlie, the parishe knowne, he further soughte,
To find the verie house, where he remayned,
And by the preceptes of his arte was toughte
That by one widow Dun he was retayned
The widowes house was searcht ( so wild the Kinge)
And with her sonne was founde staple and ringe.
Thus Beauclerke by his arte founde out the thiefe
Alusty, tall young man, of courage good :
Which ofthe other ruffians was the chiefe ,
That closelie lurked in that waylesse wood,
Then Dunne this captain thiefe the widow's sonne
Was hanged for the facts which he had done.
And where the thicket stoode the kinge did builde
Amarket towne, for saulfetie of all those,
Which travailed that way, that it might them yielde
Asure refuge from all thievish foes.
And there Kinge Henrie of his greate bountie
Founded a church, a schole, and prioric.
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 231
quently for intrinsic worth, they are in all respects
admirable. Hearne's judgment in selection may be
extracts given in the British Bibliographer, vol. ii . p . 65-70.—
As to the text of the Historian, which is carried down to the year
1178, it is not only highly praised by Tyrrell, but according to the
higher authority of the authors of the Recueil des Historiens des
Gaules, it seems of almost inestimable value. Let no Collector of
our early history, in whose library Benedictus Abbas is not to be
found, suffer a copy to escape him which can be obtained at any reasonable price. Perhaps, to the preceding, as strictly connected with
the department of HISTORY, I ought to add the Ductor Historicus of
Hearne, printed in 1704, 2 vols. 8vo. and several times reprinted ; a
work, which Gibbon did not disdain to read, in forming his mind for
his great historical labours. Misc. Works, vol. i . p. 41 .
Such are the PUBLICATIONS OF HEARNE, more especially connected
with BRITISH HISTORY. The candid critic, and the intelligent
reader, will throw out of the scale all considerations of the particular
bias, or even the palpable credulity, which distinguish the Editor of
these publications, from a consideration of the absolute value of
the ANCIENT TEXTS which he has collected, and most faithfully
printed. They will separate the ore from the dross in which it is
embedded Meanwhile let the curious consult Fabricii Bibl. Med. et
Inf. Ætat. vol. i . p . 276, edit. 1734, about a reprint of the more valuable of Hearne's works. I do not despair of seeing, at least, the
BUST of HEARNE in one of the public repositories at Oxford. That
University yet owes something to one of the most dutiful of her
And for that Dunne before the wood was downe
Had there his haunte, and there did steal away
The staple and the ringe, thereof the towne
Is called Dunstaple until this day
Also in Armes that Corporation
The STAPLE and THE RINGE give thereupon. Byme John Willis.
These verses were sent to Hearne in Oct. 1733, by the Rev. Mr. John Jones,
Curate of Abbot's Ripton, in Huntingdonshire-to whom they were sent , and
transcribed from an old Register of Dunstaple church, by a friend -
who assured
Mr. Jones that the author of these verses was " sometime curate of that place,"
-and that the hand writing bore a resemblance to that whichbegins the Register
inthe year 1558." Vol. ii. p. 727-729. Was Mr. Jones quizzing Hearne ?
232 HISTORY
sometimes very justly questioned ; and his frivolous
digressions, and half crazy conclusions, must inevitably provoke the laughter, if not the wrath, of the
critic . Yet our obligations to him are great. He has
rescued much from oblivion, if not from perdition ;
and forgetting all the peculiarities and even weaknesses of the man, we must unite in bestowing our
heartiest commendations on the Editor. More than
the lapse of a century (that test of reputation) has
confirmed the fame of Thomas Hearne.
Reverting to the regular order of published histories, I must make but slight mention of the antiquarian-historical labours of SAMMES and LEWIS, * in
children:-who may be said to have died in the act of paying her
homage, by the publication last described ; and which he survived
but a few weeks . In the same year appeared the Ectypa Varia, or
a collection of all his plates, from his different publications, in one
folio volume. Mr. Triphook has, at this moment, a very fine copy
of this work. And now, a word as to the fortunate Owners of a
complete large paper set of Hearne's publications. But, in truth, I
know of no such " fortunate owner" Earl Spencer, Mr. Grenville,
and Mr. Hibbert, possess such a series complete, with the exception of
the first edition of the Itinerary. Mr. Dent has many large paper
copies, and Sir R. C. Hoare yet more. At Oxford, they have a fine
sprinkling of them at Christ Church ; and nearly all of them are at
Blickling in Norfolk. At Althorp, they are separated, † according
to their respective classes.
I hardly know why Sammes's Britannia Antiqua Illustrata, or
the Antiquities of Ancient Britain, as derived from the Phoenicians,
"
"
+ I remember, some seven or eight years ago," a good saying " about the separation of these Hearne's. Onhunting down some bibliographical question, connected with this series, a distinguished Collector discovered their separation.
What, (said he, with becoming emphasis) , the Hearne's separated ! I could not
SURVIVE such a separation an hour." Note. May I be forgiven a bad pun ? Lord
Spencer is doubly blest in Hearnes : for he has a Hernery in his park !
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 233
order to do more ample justice to the General History
of CARTE, who put forth four ponderous folio tomes
in 1747, and who, in his title page, probably with as
much affectation as simplicity, styled himself " AN
ENGLISHMAN." Never was an history more anxiously
expected, and more zealously supported. The City
of London and the University of Oxford seemed to
vie with each other in their acts of generosity. Although the author died before the publication of the
last volume, in 1755-intending to bring his work
down to the Restoration-yet he lived long enough to
witness its success, * and the victory which he had obtained over its numerous opponents, and the shame
attached to those who had withdrawn their original
patronage. This work will live long and always be
1676, folio, is here introduced-unless it be to exhort the curious
collector to secure, without delay, the extraordinarily fine copy of
this not uninstructive volume, on large paper, bound in red morocco,
by C. Lewis, which is now in the possession of Mr. R. Triphook,
bookseller. In the same bookseller's collection is a similar choice
copy of J. Lewis's " Ancient History of Great Britain, with the Breviary of Bretayne, by H. Lhuyd. Lond. 1729, folio—a book, (and
especially such a copy of it ! ) of which the possession shall not cause
the purchaser to repent his bargain.
Mr. Chalmers, in his edition ofthe General Biographical History,
vol. viii. p. 292-299, has given us a very interesting article upon
CARTE and his history is there said to be " written with eminent
exactness and diligence, and with a perfect knowledge of original
authors ; and has of late years risen considerably in reputation, as
well as in price, especially since it was discovered how much Hume
was indebted to it. " Yet I have heard competent judges speak
of the infidelity of some of Carte's quotations. A neat copy may
be obtained for about 71. 178. 6d. The LARGE PAPER copies are of
late becoming somewhat common ; and are cumbrous in the extreme. The small paper is excellently well printed. Messrs. Arch
234 HISTORY
consulted. Hume has been more indebted to it than
he was disposed to acknowledge. Carte is also the
author of the well known " History of the Life of
James Duke of Ormonde, " in 3 folio volumes, 1735-6.
But Carte had been preceded by the partial history
of RALPH ; who had confined his labours to the reign
of William III. , with an introductory review of the
reigns of Charles II . and James II. This work appeared in 1744-6, in two folio volumes ;* and since
the publication of Mr. Fox's incomplete history of
the reign of James II. , it has been very much sought
after.
The progress of these researches has at length
brought me to the labours of HUME, SMOLLETT, and
HENRY. Upon such works it were idle to bestow
and Messrs. Longman and Co. mark a copy of Carte's Life of the
Duke of Ormond, (the companion to the History) in calf, at 71. 78.
This work is also to be had on large paper.
* It was Mr. Fox's character of Ralph which, in a great degree,
contributed to the recent enquiries made after his history. A copy
of it is obtainable for about 4l. 14s. 6d.
Every literary man knows that Hume wrote his history, as it
were, backwards : beginning with the reigns of the Stuarts. The
first volume appeared 1754, or 1755 ; the second and third, in 1756-7,
the fourth and fifth, in 1759 ; the sixth and seventh, in 1761 : each
in 4to. These are the original impressions of Hume's celebrated
History of England ; and as the work is certainly a Classic, in its
way, and portions of the text differ from those of the subsequent text, I recommend a copy of this EDIT. PRIN. to be in the
ibrary of every curious Collector. The best octavo editions—
or rather those which received the last corrections of the author,
with a short account of his life, written by himself-are of the dates
of 1778 and 1786, in 8 volumes. To describe subsequent editions ,
which of late are become almost innumerable, * were a waste of words
Among the most celebrated for ornament, was that published in 19 vols. (con-
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 235
many words.
of our history.
They are comparatively the text-books
They are in every collection ; but no
and of paper. And equally so would be any elaborate appreciation
of the style of the work-" the careless inimitable beauties " of
which, have elicited the warm commendation of Gibbon. But, up
to the commencement of the Tudor Annals, or the reign of Henry
VII. the text of Hume has been pronounced to be " ingenious but superficial. " The author indeed wanted that resolute spirit ofindustry
and research, which alone can lead an historian to become thoroughly
acquainted with the valuable writers of the middle ages. It is, I
submit, in the reign of ELIZABETH, that the true genius of Hume
may be said to shine forth. Here we have pathos, and argument, *
vigorous delineation of character, and statesman- like views of policy :
but the reign of Elizabeth was worthy ofthe exercise of such talents .
Hume was a Tory; he was also a Scotchman : -this renders the
almost uniform absence of scotticisms, from his style, a subject of
surprise-if not of astonishment.
The first edition of SMOLLETT's Continuation of Hume, was printed
in 1763-5, in 5 octavo volumes. Of his own regular History of
England, the first impression appeared in 1757, in 4 quarto volumes ;
reprinted in 1758, in 11 octavo volumes. But it is of HENRY'S
history that I would speak in the warmest language of approbation. The plan need not be here mentioned . Its imperfect state,
and the want of a copious and accurate Index to the 12 octavo votaining the continuation by Smollett) in the year 1803, in 8vo. It exhibits a scries
of most spirited engravings on wood ; and is now become rare. The printer was
Bensley. My friend, Mons. Delançon, an active member of the Society of Bibliophiles, at Paris, was too happy to secure a copy of it on LARGE PAPER, from the
catalogue of Messrs. Arch, for 237. 10s. The royal folio edition , published by
Bowyer, and embellished with elaborate engravings by our principal artists, has
of late ( I know not wherefore) " hung down its head" in the market. The most
coveted 8vo. edition, for the sake of the copper plates, is that of 1789. The portraits are here first impressions.
* Read the account of the execution of Mary-beginning with her leaving her
private apartment for the block. Read also the summary of the arguments, pro
and con, respecting her execution . Hume has shewn himself a perfect master of
analysis, in compressing these arguments. Never was a point more delicately
poised in the discussion.
236 HISTORY
one, unluckily, has yet had the courage or good sense
to complete the plan of Dr. Henry. The continuation of it by JAMES PETIT ANDREWS, extends only to
the period of Henry VIII. Of all plans, that of Henry,
is surely the best-especially for the Students of our
History. The names of Mr. SHARON TURNER* and Mr.
lumes* already published, are truly lamentable. But ere he come
to the perusal of these valuable volumes themselves, I earnestly recommend the gallant-spirited and warm-hearted " young man,"
to read with attention (as he can scarcely fail to do) the SECRET
HISTORY of this publication, as developed in the instructive pages of
Mr. D. Israeli's Calamities of Authors, vol. ii . p. 64, &c. He will
there see how malicious, and yet how impotent, were the efforts of
one Gilbert Stuart -by pen, and by word ofmouth-to blast the reputation, and with it, the peace of mind, of the author of this history
ofEngland. He need not be told that Stuart is forgotten-and that
Henry will live for ever. Such instances of fiend-like persecution
are not peculiar to the age of Gilbert Stuart. How incomparably
more judicious, as well as candid and happy, is the criticism upon
Henry's history, in the Monthly Review, by the philosophical Hume.
-Asthis history, with its continuation by Andrews, is to be obtained
at all prices, varying according to the quarto or octavo size, it is not
necessary to particularise further.
The foundation of Mr. SHARON TURNER'S History of England,
was laid in that of the Anglo- Saxons, published at various times,
from the year 1799 downwards. It has appeared in 2 quarto, and
4 octavo, volumes; and being a standard book, editions of it are in a
regular state of succession. The last of 1820, in three 8vo. vols. is
certainly the best. The matter is highly curious and instructive ; and,
compared with it, one may fairly state, that all previous accounts
ofthe same period were not only superficial, but erroneous. In 1814
Mr. Turner gave us his first volume of an History of England ;
in the year 1815 the second volume appeared ; and very recently
The last octavo edition, or the last but one, has an Index ; but not a very
good one, as I learn.
OF GREAT BRITAIN. 237
LINGARD,* are among the most eminent of those of our
living historians.
(1823) the third volume made its appearance. Each volume is in
quarto. A great portion of this work is devoted to the history of
Religion and Literature ; † and in that which relates to civil history, I know of no portion, in any writer, in which the character of
Thomas a Becket is more vividly and powerfully delineated.
* Mr. Lingard's labours have been so far crowned with success,
that an octavo impression of his history has already appeared.
There will be few, who, on account of the religious creed (of the
church of Rome) of the author, alone, will deny this history a place
on their shelves. The style is clear, vigorous, and unaffected ; the
facts are, upon the whole, fairly developed, and the authorities faithfully consulted. Nor is Mr. Lingard, like David Hume, afraid of
encountering the tough and prolix Latin authors of the middle ages.
His notes bear evidence of his research and although his colouring
of some characters will necessarily be seen with different eyes by
Papist and Protestant, yet it must be fairly acknowledged, that the
cause of historical truth (if TRUTH there be in HISTORY?) is in all
respects promoted by the cautious investigations, and dispassionate
remarks, which characterise by far the greater portion of his work.
Mr. Lingard has caused the historical critic to examine anew, the
data, from which his inferences have been drawn respecting the
reigns of Henry VIII. , and Queens Mary and Elizabeth.
The labours of BERTRAND de MOLEVILLE (A Chronological Abridgement ofthe History of England, 1811 , 4 vols. 8vo. ) ought not to be
forgotten. The author's plan is ingenious, and his work is at once
luminous and compressed. I am not sure whether young people
can commence their acquaintance with our history, by the aid of a
better guide.
+ In the second volume, among the specimens of Gower's poetry, p. 491 , it had
escaped the learned author, that precisely similar specimens had appeared in vol. i.
p. 181-4, ofthe recent edition ofour Typographical Antiquities. The horrible story
of Canace is indeed thrillingly described by the muse of Gower.
[ 238 ]
HISTORY OF IRELAND.
HAVING dispatched those histories, which, with that
of England, comprehend some accounts, more or less,
of the transactions of Ireland and Scotland, I now
come, naturally as it were, to the mention of a few
historical works, exclusively devoted to the two latter
countries. And first, in its proper order, of IRELAND.
But the reader is previously warned, not to expect
anything like methodical details of ALL the works
connected with this subject ; and in the second place,
he is equally cautioned not to anticipate a descriptive
catalogue of the Lives of the Irish Saints, * whose
I willingly consign the pages of the Acta Sanctorum (that inexhaustible repertory of legendary lore and saintly romance ! ) to the
investigation of the curious, for the fullest biographies of St. Patrick,
St. Brandon, St. Rumold, St. Columba, and other similar worthies.
The first, the tutelary Saint of Ireland, has been the object of the
most unbounded veneration , and the theme of the most unlimited
praise. No romance, in wildness or variety, exceeds the narrative of
the fabled deeds of St. PATRICK. I am ignorant of the first separate
edition of his life ; but presume that re-impressions of it are innumerable. Ofthese, I will mention the only four which I have seen :
"De Vita S. Patricii Hiberniæ Apostoli. Libr. II . Auctore Richardo
Stanihursto Dubliniensi. Ant. ex Off. C. Plantiniana, 1587, 12mo.
The second is called " The Life of the Glorious Bishop St. Patricke,
Apostle and Primate of Ireland," &c. At St. Omers, 1625. 4to. This
biography is followed by the lives of St. Bridget and St. Columba,
Patrons ofIreland. The third, " The Delightful History ofthe Life
and Death of St. Patricke." Lond, 1685, 12mo. It is a chap book,
printed in rather a neat black letter, and embellished with several
spirited and not ill-drawn wood cuts. The only copy which I have
seen, is that in the library of the Right Hon. Thomas Grenville : a
library, to which, as the reader will presently observe, I am under so
IRELAND. ]
HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. 239
supposed miracles seem to have involved the earlier
periods of Irish history in darkness almost impemany obligations for my account of the rarer books relating to Irish
history. The fourth life is a similar chap book, published in French
at Rouen, in 1685 ; but in a much less desirable state : being
wretchedly printed, with a rude whole length portrait of the Saint,
as a frontispiece. It may be as well to notice, that, in Carve's Lyra
Hibernica, (presently to be described) there is a small copper plate
representing the Island of Purgatory, in which St. Patrick tarried,
and where he saw such wonderful sights. It is, I think, the second
plate.
ST. BRANDON's biography first appeared in the English language,
in a very scarce little quarto volume, printed by W. de Worde, without date, but early, and described in the Typog. Antiq. vol. ii . p. 345.
It contains 10 leaves, having 33 lines in a full page. A copy is in
the library of Mr. Grenville, who oberves, that " he knows of no
other copy. " This copy, therefore-neatly inlaid, and bound by
Charles Lewis, is in Venetian morocco-was in all probability Thane's,
as described in the Typog. Antiq. St. RUMOLD is connected with
one of the scarcest pieces of Irish biography : but we may first notice
the " Vita, Passio, et Miracula S. Rumoldi. Arch. Dubl. J. V. W.
Decano Capituli Metrop. Mechlin, Autore." Mechliniæ, 1634, 4to.
A scarce book : by Hugh Ward, Dean of Dublin, who was an
assistant to Colgan. Consult Ware's Irish Writers ; vol. ii. p. 114.
Mr. Grenville's beautiful copy is bound in blue morocco. But the
scarcest of the biographies of St. Rumold, is that entitled " Sancti
Rumoldi Martyris Inclyti, &c. Opus Posthumum. Dissertatio Historica." Lovan. 1662, 4to. A prefix, in the pencil mark of Mr. Triphook, calls it, " an uncommonly rare work on Irish history." The
price is a demonstration of the truth of the remark. At page 366,
there is a duplicate, folio, folded leaf, containing the names of ancient Irish kings, in Irish characters. At the end, are three short
Indexes ; 1. Of Authors consulted : 2. Of Irish Saints ; 3. Of things
mentioned.
Those, however, who may give up the pursuit of such rare separate pieces of Irish biography in despair, will do well to solace
themselves with the " Florilegium Sanctorum, &c. seu Vitæ et Acta
240 HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. [IRELand.
netrable, and with doubts scarcely less unsolvable.
Beginning, therefore, cautiously, with our old friends,
Sanctorum Hibernia ; 1624, folio : of which " THOMAS MESSINGHAM,
an Irish priest, and Moderator of the Irish Seminary at Paris, " was the
author. In the title page, there is a neat copper cut of the whole
figures of Saints Columba, Patrick, and Bridget. In the whole, 441
pages. Mr. Grenville's fine copy of this most indifferently printed
book, is bound in red morocco, by Lewis. In Mr. Thorpe's recent
catalogue, I observe the copy which had " belonged to Geo. II.
with Ware's Autograph, " marked at 31. 3s. This book, by no means
of extreme rarity, has escaped Brunet ; as have indeed almost all the
rarer volumes connected with Irish history. Even the works of Lynch
and Carve are not to be found in the Manuel du Libraire. And yet,
what work advances nearer to perfection than that of BRUNET ?
But the most copious and valuable work relating to the biography
of the Irish Saints, is by JOHN COLGAN, an Irish Friar Mendicant,
and Divinity Lecturer in the University of Louvain-under the title
of Triadis Thaumaturga, sive Divorum Patricii, Columbæ et Brigida,
&c. Acta. Lovan. 1647 , vol. ii . folio : his third volume, printed first,
(in 1645) is called " Acta Sanctorum Vet. et Major Scotiæ," * seu Hiberniæ Sanctorum Insula, &c. The first volume, properly so considered, never appeared, This third is executed upon the plan of the
Bollandists ; and contains the Lives of the Irish Saints for the
months of January, February, and March. " In this last book (says
Bishop Nicolson) Colgan has hooked in most of the old holy men and
women in England and Scotland : so that even Dempster himselft
(in his Historia Ecclesiastica Gentis Scotorum Libris xix. Paris, 1624,
folio) could not be more intent on multiplying the Scotch army of
In the first edition of the Irish Common Prayer, 1608 , folio, edited by Daniel,
Archbishop of Tuam, it is said, in the dedication to Sir Arthur Chichester, knight,
Lord Deputy of Ireland, “ Though this kingdom were sometimes called Scotia,
that is, in Greek darkness — and now may justly recover the ancient title of Scotia
Major, (being in greater darkness ) & c. "
† As connected with the DEMPSTERIAN CONTROVERSY, there are few pieces, I
apprehend, rarer than that entitled " Hiberniæ Sive Antiquioris Scotia Vindicia
adversus Immodestam Parecbasim Thomæ Dempsteri, &c. Antv. Apud Herman
Copman, 1621 , 8vo. Strangely enough, Mr. Heber, who has an almost innate
abhorrence of widely extended margins, possesses this very rare book on LARGE PAPER.
IRELAND. ] 241 HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN.
Girald Barry, and Ware, and Stanihurst, ** as the
more ancient and regular historians of Ireland, we have
Saints and Martyrs, than Colgan of raising recruits for that of his
own native country." Irish Hist. Library, p. 40. A perfect copy of
Colgan's work is so rare, that Mr. Thorpe marks such a one at
£20. Mr. Grenville's is in the finest possible condition.
The reader will remember that some curious similar biography may
be seen in Pinkerton's Vitæ Antiquæ Sanctorum. Lond. 1789 , 8vo. :
only 100 copies printed. See the Life of St. Columba. But in the
incorporated biographies of Saints, let me not omit the mention of the
"Lives ofSaints, written in Spanishe, by the Rev. J. Alfonso Vallegas,
Dominican, faithfully translated into English, &c. with the Lives ofSt.
Patrick, St. Brigid, and St. Columba ; Patrons ofIreland. All newly
corrected, and adorned with many brazen pictures in this last edition.
Printed by John Cousturier, 1636. 4to. pp. 945 : then a leaf of " approbation," and 179 leaves of Appendix. My friend Mr. Heber
possesses a beautiful copy of this uncommon book, in his extraordinary collection of works appertaining to Irish history. St. Bridget
has, perhaps, few works connected with her biography more choice
and rare, than that entitled " Brigida Thaumaturga, sive Dissertatio
Encomiastica in laudem ipsius Sanctæ : partim archaica ex sacra et
antiqua historia Ecclesiastica : partim etiam parenætica ad alumnos
Collegiorum. Paris, 1620, 8vo. In Mr. Heber's collection .
* GIRALD BARRY, (Giraldus Cambrensis) Topographia Hibernia,
and Historia Vaticinalis de Expugnatione Hiberniæ, &c. The latter was
published in the Anglica, &c. of Camden, at Franckfort, 1603, folio:
see p. 150, ante. G. Barry's work, which gives an account of Ireland in the 12th century, was answered by Lynch, under the title
of Cambrensis Eversus, &c. for which, see post. But Barry's topographical labours appear to the best advantage in Holinshed's Chronicles, translated and improved, with occasional notes, by John
Hooker, alias Vowel : vol. 2, edit. 1586.
RICHARDI STANIHURSTI De Rebus in Hibernia gestis Libri IV.
Antv. apud C. Plantinum, 1584, 4to . Concerning this work, consult
Harris's Ware, vol. iii . p 38 : Nicolson's Irish Hist. Library, part iii .
p. 21, edit. 1736 ; Keating's Pref. to his Hist. of Ireland, 1723, folio.
Messrs. Arch mark a copy at 11. 1s. It is rarely found in good conR
242 HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN [ IRELAND.
.
few similar works to notice, (if we except the brief account of Spenser the poet) till we reach the middle of
the following century ; when the labours of Messingham, Colgan, Lombardus, Hanmer, Campion, Stafford,
Carve, Lynch, Caron, Sirinus, and others, mentioned
below,* furnish us with curious and copious details
dition, although I was fortunate enough to pick up a fine and perfect
copy at Nancy, bound in red morocco, for five francs. The reader
may not object to know that Stanihurst was the uncle of Archbishop
Usher.
* Before I dispatch the above list of old Irish historians or annalists, let me make brief mention of a few rare historical pieces, not
incorporated in the text. 1. Historia Catholice Iberniæ Compendium,
aD. Philippo Ossullevano Bearro Iberno, Ulyssippone excusum a Petro
Crasbeeckio Reg. Typog. 1621 , 4to. The arms of Austria in the titlepage. Mr. Grenville and Mr. Heber each possess a copy of this
rare book. The paper and type are rather indifferent. 2. Paraineticorum Veterum Scriptores VIII. Insulæ ad lacum Acronium Permissu Superiorum, 1604, 4to. This is a very curious volume, and
Mr. Bohn has availed himself of Mr. Clarke's reference to this very
copy, as one of the bijoux of the library of Mr. Grenville, which
has encouraged him to affix the price of 11. 16s. to a good copy
of the work. The second part is full of curious old Irish poetry ;
and we observe a copper cut of " Köning Tyro Von Schotten," with
some poetry by that monarch. The pages run consecutively to
p. 499. Then " Omissa" and " Index, " separately. 3. Analecta
Sacra Nova et Mira, De Rebus Catholicorum in Hibernia. (Colon.
1617, 8vo. ) To which, add De processu Martyriali Quorundam Fidei
pugilum in Hibernia pro complemento Sacrorum Analectorum. A long
preface, on sign. a. e. i . unpaged : then a new title, as it were ;
Catalogus Sacratorum Antistitum, &c. on sign. o and u : next, De
Richardi Creaghi, Arch. Armac. Prim. Reg. Heb. vita et morte Notationes Mnemonicæ, pp. 385. " The three parts (as here-observes
Mr. Grenville) are of the greatest rarity. * The author was David
tract.
It is clear that Bishop Nicolson was ignorant of the publication of this latter
He speaks of it as if in MS.
IRELAND. ] HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. 243
respecting the proceedings-mostly of a melancholy description-which took place during the same
Rooth, Bishop of Ossory, highly praised by Usher, to whom he supplied some documents for the " Primordia. " Rivius published an
answer to this book, so scarce that I have seen no copy except my
own. This answer was published at London, in 1624, 4to. (and
dedicated to Charles Prince of Wales) under the title of " Regiminis
Anglicani in Hibernia Defensio adversus Analecten. Autore Tho. Ryvio. J. C. Regis Advocato. Libri Tres." Each book has separate
paginal numerals. Mr. Grenville's copy is clean and most beautiful.
Consult Nicolson's Irish Historical Library, 1736, folio, p . 5.
I now come to the notice of the authors above particularly mentioned ; in the chronological order in which their works appeared.
LOMBARDUS, de Regno Hiberniæ, Lovan. 1632, 4to. One of the rarest
of the Irish histories. This book was ordered to be suppressed and
prosecuted by Lord Deputy Strafford, at the direction of the King, in
1633 ; but the author was already dead. See Harris's Ware, vol. iii .
p. 103. Mr. Grenville's copy of this indifferently printed book is
fine and spotless ; in venetian morocco, by C. Lewis.
A short account of the life and writings of Dr. Peter Lombard, Roman Catholic Primate of Armagh, was published in the Anthologia Hibernica,
vol. i. P. 33. HANMER, CAMPION, and SPENSER, &c . —Histories of
Ireland. Dublin, 1633, folio . There are three separate titles and
paginations. Hanmer and Marleburrough occupy 223 pages ; Campion, 138 ; with one of " faultes escaped ;" and Spenser, 119 ; with
15 pages of annotations and poetical addenda. THOMAS STAFFORD
was author of " Pacata Hibernia ; Ireland Appeased and Reduced,"
1633, folio. This volume contains a fine portrait of Earl Carew, by
Voerst, and another of Queen Elizabeth, with some verses printed
beneath. These precede the title. The dedication to the King is
signed by Thomas Stafford. The Maps are the chief treasures of
this volume ; of which there should be 18 to be complete. Some of
these maps, in giving bird's- eye views of battles, sieges, camps, and
ofcastles and fortified towns-many ofthe originals no longer existing
-are very curious. Messrs. Arch value a perfect copy, in russia
binding, at 71. 78. NOTE : The five last mentioned works, with
a Life of St. Patrick, were handsomely reprinted, under the title
of Ancient Irish Histories, at Dublin, in 1809, in five quarto
244 HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. [IRELAND.
century, in the sister kingdom. But while it ought
to be duly noticed, that the greater number of the
volumes. The " Pacata " was separately published in 1820, 8vo.
2 vols.
We are now to mention a few of the principal labours of CARVE, a
native of Tipperary. His Itinerarium, or rather the first part of it,
was published at Mentz, in 1639 ; the second part in 1641 ; the third,
at Spires, in 1646. The first was reprinted in 1640 : * but the first
edition of the first part, and the possession of the second and third
parts-the whole forming 3 small duodecimo volumes, -is a circumstance of very rare occurrence, even with the most indefatigable and
fortunate book- collector . Even the second part has made a copy
mount to the price of 71. 17s. 6d. The three parts have produced, I
think, £21 . Mr. Grenville possesses two copies : one, in 3 vol. in red
morocco, including the original edition of the first part : the other,
3 vols. in 1 , in venetian morocco. Mr. George Hibbert also possesses the three parts complete : from the Macarthy Library. Of
scarcely less rarity is the " Lyra, sive Anacephalaosis Hibernica," &c.
of the SAME AUTHOR : printed at Sulzbach in 1666, 4to . † This indifferently printed book contains 5 plates : 3 topographical : the 4th, a
portrait of Charles I. (apparently copied from that in Heath'sChronicle)
and the 5th, a portrait of Carve himself; with a long bushy beardand altogether of a " wild " aspect. Of this portrait there is a poor
* Mr. Grenville remarks, that the reprint is the same as the first edition of
1639 ; page for page, and word for word ; excepting that it has an additional dedication, and at pp . 113-114, two additional epitaphs to Wallenstein, and an additional 35th chapter at the end of the first part. I may add, that the mistake of
Tripperariensis, in the first edition , is corrected to that of Tipperariensis in the
reprint.
It was first published in 1660, in the 70th year of the author's age, when he lived at Vienna, and where he died a Vicar-Choral of St. Stephen's Cathedral,
in 1664. Carve was a priest and apostolic notary. Nicolson : Irish Hist. Libr.
P. 12.
But in regard to portraits, whether true or false in resemblance, I know
of none (unless those in a scarce little volume entitled Certamen Triplex, 1645,
be excepted) like that which adorns almost the first leaf of a very scarce tract entitled " R. P. Petri Writi Sacerdotis Angli E Societ. Jesu. Mors quam ob fidem
passus est Londini, xxix Maii, M.DC.LI." It is a portrait of the authr, by Galle.
It is brilliant even to dazzling. Why will not many of our able artists do the like ?
Mr. Heber's copy of this interesting book is " de toute beauté !"
IRELAND.] HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. 245
books, from the authors just mentioned, are of an extreme degree of RARITY- and therefore covetted with
and faithless copy, which Mr. Grenville has inserted into his own book
-besides having the genuine impression. Mr. Hibbert also possesses
this scarce piece of Carve ; and Mr. Heber possesses it uncut.
rare ! Aremarkably clean and sound copy of it is at Althorp.
We are now to treat of LYNCH, one of the most celebrated of the
Irish RomanCatholic writers and controversialists. His latinised name
is usually Lucius ; and his principal work is a sort of indirect attack
against Girald Barry's, under the title of " Cambrensis Eversus ; seu
potius Historica Fides, in rebus Hibernicis, Giraldo Cambrensi abrogata,
&c. In quo, &c. plerosque nævos inesse ostendit Gratianus Lucius Hibernicus," &c. an. 1662, folio. A long dedicatory epistle to Charles
II., and an Index of chapters (one leaf) precede the text. The text
occupies 356 pages. Addenda 2 leaves. Index Rerum, 7 leaves. It
appears from Croft's catalogue, p. 371, nº. 7397, (as inserted by Mr.
Grenville in his copy) that the greater number of copies ofthis work
seems to have perished by the fire of London. The book was, doubtless, published abroad . Mr. Grenville's copy is a fine one, in venetian
morocco binding. Lynch (according to Bishop Nicolson) " accuses
Girald Barry of maliciously destroying a great many of the old Irish
Annals, whereof he had the perusal ; and it is thence justly observed
by Bishop Stillingfleet, ( Orig. Brit. p. 268, ) that, if so, he had better
advantages, and more authorities than Keating. " Irish Hist. Libr.
page 2.
Of infinitely greater rarity than the preceding, is the work of
Lynch entitled "Alithinologia, sive Veredica Re[s ] ponsio ad Invectivam
Mendacijs falacijs, &c. fœtam in plurimos Antistites, &c. Hibernos. Eudoxio Alithinologo Authore. Impress. 1664, 4to. "One of the dearest
and most rare of all the Irish tracts, " says Mr. Grenville. I find no
mention ofit in Nicolson or Watt. A supplemental volume was printed
in 1667, containing a title, 13 prefatory leaves, 228 pages of text, and
9 leaves of index and errata. This first part contains 144 leaves,
and 7 leaves of index, &c. Mr. Grenville's copy is most perfectand brilliantly bound, by C. Lewis, in red morocco, with vellum insides.
But perhaps the VERY RAREST of ALL Lynch's pieces, is that entitled " Pii Antistitis Icon, siue De Vita et Morte Rmi. D. FRAN-
246 HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. (IRELAND.
avidity by the historical antiquary, and keen collector of scarce and curious volumes-it must also be
cisci Kirovani Alladensis Episcopi : Autore Joanne Lynchæo Archidiacono Tuamensi. Maclovii, 1669, 12mo. Mr. Heber's unique copy
of this slender duodecimo volume, (which is replete with interesting
details, ) has a portrait of Kirwan, (wholly unknown to all the Collectors) executed by C. Hilaer, in the line manner, very rude, out of
drawing, and yet strongly indicative of a resemblance. It represents
the original in his 72d year : adding, that he died in 1661. An original letter of Dr. O'Conor, of Stowe, accompanies this copywritten to the owner of it, in confirmation of its wonderful rarity.
The place where this book was printed ( St. Malo) was the rendezvous of the expatriated Irish in their way to France and the Netherlands-according to the author of the letter. Who shall have the
courage to set a price on such a piece of biography ?
Of almost equal rarity with the latter of Lynch's performances, is
the " Remonstrantia Hibernicorum contra Lovanienses Ultramontanasque Censuras," &c. of which R. P. F. R. CARON, " Theologus Emeritus, " was the author ; and which was published " Cum Lic. et Priv.
Superiorum. A. D. 1665, in folio. This work was, doubtless, printed
abroad. Caron and Walsh* were two of the Catholic clergy, who,
in opposition to the fierce writings of Nicholas French, ( and especially to his Bleeding Iphigenia, † published in 1674, 8vo. ) qualified
their submission to the Pope, by their abhorrence of the principles
* History ofthe Irish Remonstrances : Lond. 1674 , folio.
+ Who, I desire to know, is the happy, the enviable possessor of this " bleeding" treasure ? —a treasure-for which my Lord Arundel, the Right Hon. Thomas
Grenville, and Richard Heber, Esq. would cross the roughest ocean, even agitated
by equinoctial gales ! Tis , as I conceive, the rarest of Irish pieces. " This
honest FATHER WALSH ( as Bishop Nicolson remarks) is that same modern historian upon whom Mr. O'Flaherty has let fly a whole chapter of remarks-in his
Ogygia, pt. iii . c. 27." However, among the rarer of his pieces is the following, of
which a copy will be found in the libraries of Mr. Grenville and of Mr. Heber.
“ Causa Valesiana Epistolis Ternis Pralibata, &c. Authore F. Petro Valesio, &c.
Lond. 1684, 8vo. A perfect copy of a very scarce work, by Peter Walsh, which
is much oftener looked for than found (says Mr. Grenville) . The whole appendix
being unpaged, must be carefully examined. This is quite compleat. The pagination extends to p. 350. Then the " Appendix Instrumentorum,” beginning on Z.
and extending to P, each letter in eights : a blank leaf forming the last of P. The
" Instruments" are numerous with several titles. A beautiful copy is at Althorp.
-
IRELAND. ] HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. 247
as duly noticed, that the majority, if not almost the
entire number, of these writers, were of the Roman
Catholic faith; and therefore their narratives, or
their conclusions, must be received with a mixture
of more than " one grain of salt. " Most of the foregoing authors had their works printed abroad, as if by
stealth, and in a very sorry garb ; but their rarity and
of the Irish Rebels, and disclaiming the Pope's supremacy in temporals. Caron's book is of prodigious rarity. Mr. Grenville supposes
the entire impression of it to have been nearly destroyed in the fire of
London ; and knows of no copy of the book, besides his own, except
that at Stowe. His own copy was presented to him by Thomas Cholmondeley, Esq. of Vale Royal. The work is dedicated to Charles
II. and the first four parts run through 266 pages, consecutively
numbered. The first XI. chapters of the 5th part occupy 94 pages :
from the XIIth to the XVIIIth chapters inclusively, there are 102
pages the paginary numerals recommencing at ch. XII. An index
of 4 leaves concludes the work.
The work of SIRINUS* ought probably to have been noticed under
the account of Irish Saints. It is so rare, as to have escaped Nicolson. The title is thus : " Patricii Flemingi Hiberni &c. Collectanea
Sacra seu S. Columbani Hiberni Abbatis &c . Necnon Aliorum Antiquorum Sanctorum Acta et Opuscula, nusquam antehac edita . , &c. Per. Thomam Sirinum." Lovanii, 1667, folio. A dedicatory epistle to Cardinal
Dubois, 2 leaves : privilege of publication, 1 : contents, 1 : followed
by a Brevis Notitia de Collectore, and other pieces, 3 leaves : ad
Lectorem, 2 : Elogia de S. Columbano, 4 : Hymni, 1 : all unnumbered. Then 454 pages consecutively, to the end of the work : including the index. The paper and print, as usual, are indifferent.
Mr. Grenville observes, that " this is one of the rarest and most valuable books of old Irish history : he knows of no other copy, except
that at Stowe." Respecting the author, see Ware's Writers, vol. ii.
It may be as well to notice here a work of R. BELIN, entitled " Vindiciarum
Catholicorum in Hibernia, Rerum in Hibernia Gestarum ab anno 1641 , ad annum
1649." Paris, 1650 , 12mo. A rare book ; unknown to Nicolson, and the generality of Bibliographers. I find a copy of it marked at 21. 12s. 6d. in Mr. Rodd's
Catalogue of 1823 .
248 HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. [ IRELAND.
intrinsic worth, render them acceptable under any
aspect, provided they be perfect.
Meanwhile, requesting the inquisitive reader to
avail himself of the labours of Camden and Baxteras not wholly irrelevant to the present subject - I recommend him to the sober and intrinsically valuable
publications of Lord Castlehaven, Davis, Cox, Capell,
and O'Flaherty ; * and, in the ensuing, and last cenwere.
* CAMDEN and BAXTER may be only incidentally mentioned, as it
The labours of the former are topographical, and will be
best understood in the editions of the Britannia, by Gibson or Gough.
Those of the latter are paleological, or glossarial -under the
well-known title of " Glossarium Antiquitatum Britannicarum, sive
Syllabus Etymologicus Antiquitatum Veteris BRITANNIE atque IBERNIE temporibus Romanorum. Lond. 1719. 8vo. With an excel.
lent head of Baxter, by Vertue, in the frontispiece. A most beautiful copy of this book, on large paper, in old red morocco binding,
is marked by Messrs. Payne and Foss at 31. 3s. It was the presentation copy to Dr. Meade, and has an additional ms. dedication
by Baxter. The Memoirs of James Lord Audley, EARL OF CASTLEHAVEN, his Engagement and Carriage in the Wars of Ireland : from the
year 1642, to the year 1651. Written by himself. Lond. 1680, 12mo.
pp. 136. The Earl of Castlehaven's Review : or his Memoirs, &c. :
enlarged and corrected, with an Appendix and Postscript. Lond.
1684. pp. 177, (not 161 . )- with an Appendix of seventy- three pages.
Reprinted in 1815. Dublin, 8vo. of which there were thirty copies
on large paper. Mr. Grenville has one of these-the gift of Sir W. W.
Wynne, Bart.: gorgeously bound in green morocco, by George
Mullen of Dublin.
Historical Relations : or, a Discovery of the true Causes why Ireland
was never entirely subdued nor brought under obedience ofthe Crown of
England until the beginning of the reign of King James ofhappy Memory. Dublin, 1664, 12mo. Second edition. " The author of the
work, was SIR JOHN DAVIS, a learned man, and an excellent orator,
who, for his great abilities, was by King James the First made his
Solicitor, and afterwards his Attorney General in this kingdom of
IRELAND.]
HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. 249
tury, to those of Keating, Ware, Warner, Musgrave,
Leland, Thomas de Burgo, O'Halloran, and Vallancey.
Ireland. " Preface. Lord Chatham, in his Letters to his Nephew,
p. 81 , calls this, " a great performance, a masterly work, containing
much depth of knowledge of state matters, and settling of countries,
in a very short compass. " It is a small duodecimo of 255 pages.
But of all the smaller and more important pieces of this period,
there is not ONE which can come within MANY degrees of rarity of
that entitled " Unkind Deserter of Loyal Men, " Anno 1676, 12mo.
This " Unkind Deserter " was the Duke of Ormond. What though
Mr. Heber's copy be bound in its pristine garb, of sheep skin-where
shall we find a morocco volume, ofthe same dimensions, to come up
to it in price ? Note : the interior of this same copy is white throughout, and the condition even crackling.
The work of RICHARD COX, Esq. is entitled Hibernia Anglicana,
or the History of Ireland, &c. to the present time. London, 1689,
Folio. This book, to be perfect, contains two parts : the first part,
having a Map, comprehends 456 pages, besides an Index : the
second, 206 pages ; then the reign of Charles II. , with a separate
pagination, of 211 pages, besides four pages of a table. Mr. Grenville possesses this work on LARGE PAPER, which is of very rare
occurrence. CAPELL'S Letters, written by A. C. the Earl of Essex
when Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, in the year 1675, were published
at London in 1770, 4to. More curious, and certainly much more
uncommon, than either of the preceding works, is that published
by RODERICK O'FLAHERTY, Esq. called " Ogygia, seu Rerum Hibernicarum Chronologia. London, 1685, 4to. The whole of the
text, 700 pages ; with forty- four pages of preliminary matter. In
praise of this work, consult Harris's Ware, vol. iii . 271. But Bp.
Nicolson disports in a very facetious vein concerning it. *
The work is partly topographical, and partly historical : for the former, sce the Irish Hist. Library, p. 9.: for the latter, consult p. 23. " The author's
patron, the then Duke of York, afterwards king James II . , is encouraged to expect a complete chain of his Royal Ancestors, in a right line, of an hundred and
twenty-four generations, from Adam : whereof, eleven were before the flood ;
twenty-six between that epoch and their settlement here ; fifty-one in Ireland ;
and thirty-six in Scotland. But afterwards, he seems not to be sure of making
out the regal stem, without interruption, for above 2700 years." Ibid.
250 [IRELAND. HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN.
The present century has been enriched by the productions of Plowden, Gordon, and Wakefield. This is a
sort ofprécis of the chief historians of Ireland ; * but to
* KEATING'S General History of Ireland, by Dermod O'Connor,
Dublin, 1723, should be in every library ; but it is by no means a
common book. Mr. Grenville possesses it on large paper. WARNER'S History of Ireland, including the History of the Rebellion,
London, 1763-7, 4to. 2 vols. may be obtained for about two or three
guineas, according to the condition. But, in chronological order,
I ought to have mentioned rather an uncommon book called “ Jus
Primatiale Armacanum in Omnes Archiep. Epis., " &c. assertum per
H. A. M. T. H. P. Anno Dom. 1728, 4to. From a curious and
valuable letter, by the present Dr. O'Conor, to Mr. Grenville
inserted in Mr. G's copy of this book-it should seem that these
initials indicated " Hugo Ardmachanus Macmation Totius Hiberniæ Primas." The first piece includes 222 pages, besides an Index ; the second, Prosecutio ejusdem Argumenti, 125 pages : then
eleven pages, with a prefix " In nomine Domini, " and three leaves
of Memoranda et Corrigenda.
No library, especially as relating to IRISH literature or history,
can be considered as complete without the labours of SIR James
WARE: who is justly styled by Nicolson " the CAMDEN of Historians, or Annalists." His earlier works are entitled " Rerum Hibernicarum Annales, regnantibus Hen. VII. Hen. VIII. Eduardo VI. et
Maria." Dublin, 1664, folio : " Antiquitates Hibernica, " &c. Londini,
1658, 8vo. Edit. secund. et auct. But it is more in the character
of old Anthony à-Wood, that Ware will go down to posterity—
especially in the publication under the title of " The whole Works
of Sir James Ware, concerning Ireland. Revised and Improved : "
and published in three volumes, or parts, (usually bound in two)
at Dublin, in 1739-1745, under the editorial care of Walter Harris.
The first volume is devoted to Ecclesiastical History, and contains 660 pages, besides an Index and seventeen plates. The
first part of the second volume, containing 286 pages, relates to
the Antiquities of Ireland : the second part of the same volume, has
twenty-one plates, and 362 pages. Mr. Grenville possesses this desirable work on LARGE PAPER, of which he conceives there are only
six copies. It is splendidly bound in red morocco by C. Lewis. I
IRELAND.]
HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. 251
such publications, I am compelled, bibliographically
speaking, to add the mention of a number of minor
very curious and interesting tracts ; of which the celeremember to have seen another large paper copy in the library at
Hafod. The large paper contains Parry's dedication in Latin, and
also Harris's dedication to the Archbishop of Armagh, which Mr.
Grenville has not discovered in the small paper copies inspected by
him . A good copy of the small paper is worth 71. 78. Musgrave's
History of the Irish Rebellion, 1743, folio ; was reprinted in 1801 , 8vo.
2 vols. In the year 1762 appeared a work of THOMAS DE Burgo,
entitled " Hibernia Dominicana ; sive Historia Provinciæ Hiberniæ Ordinis Prædicatorum . Colon. Agrip. " 1762, 4to . There are xvi. pages,
of introductory matter. Then, 797 pages of text. A " Supplement, "
of the same date and place, carrying on the pagination to 950 pages
concludes. This " Supplement " is of extreme rarity.
In the year 1778 appeared a General History of Ireland, by Mr.
O'HALLORAN ; in 2 4to. volumes : preceded by an Introduction in
1772, 4to.: three volumes in the whole. These were reprinted at
Dublin in 1803, 8vo. in three volumes. But perhaps, of all the writers
upon Irish affairs, philologically or historically considered, few have
written so much, or conjectured so hazardously, as the late COLONEL
VALLANCEY ; a writer, nevertheless, of considerable acumen, and
originality of thinking. His Collectanea de Rebus Hibernicis, in
several parts, are to be had in four, or six volumes ; and I find a
copy ofthe fourteen parts in four volumes, dated 1786 , marked at
61. in the catalogue of Messrs. Payne and Foss. * Yet the account of
the publications relating to Ireland, in the xviiith century, cannot be
said to be complete without the notice of a few more works-or, indeed, ofmany-which do not come within the scope of this publica.
tion to record : as " Hibernica, or, some ancient pieces relating to Ireland, &c. Dublin, 1747, folio. These pieces are eleven in number, to
render the first part of the volume complete-comprising 150 pages.
The second part, with 131 pages, is sometimes wanting. Both parts
were reprinted in 1770, 8vo. 2 vols. but with no additions. See the
contents enumerated in Mr. Harris's Catalogue of the Library ofthe
Vallancey published his Vindication of the Ancient Kingdom of Ireland, in
1786, 8vo. which has a Map at the beginning, and ten plates at the end.
252 HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN.
[IRELAND.
brated Barnabe Rich was the first and principal
author. Towards the middle of the seventeenth cenRoyal Institution , p. 394. LELAND's History of Ireland, 1773, 4to. in
3 volumes, is the one most usually read. PLOWDEN'S, in the same
numberofvolumes, appeared in 1804, 4to. Mr. GORDON wrote both a
history of the Irish Rebellion in 1798, published in 1801 , 8vo. , and a
general history of Ireland till the Union of 1801. Lond. 1806, 8vo.
2 vols. The labours of Mr. WAKEFIELD, which are rather statistical,
and extremely valuable, were published in 1812, 4to. 2 vols. I
affix no prices to these books, as they are obtainable in almost every
bookseller's catalogue.
* The earliest, and in all respects the most curious, of the pieces
of BARNABE RICHE, relating to Ireland, is that of the date of 1578,
called " Allarme to England, foreshewing what perilles are procured
where the people live without regarde of Martial lawe," &c. in a small
4to. volume, printed by Henrie Middleton, for C. B. (perhaps Christopher Barker.) As there is a particular account of this volume in
the British Bibliographer, vol. i . p. 508, &c. given by Mr. Haslewood,
I shall here only content myself with the following interesting extracts, and somewhat sensible remarks therefrom. † It should seem
that the government of Ireland, and the System of the Poor Laws,
were for ever to be the CRUCES to baffle the wisdom, as well as
to exercise the ingenuity, of British legislators.
+In his dedication to Sir Christopher Hatton, Knight, captain of her Majesty's
train bands, Barnabe Riche observes, " I have here rashly and aduenterously
taken upon me to become a writer, wherein a great number ( I knowe) will likewise condemne me, and the rather considering my simplicitie and trayning vp,
which hath not bene so much with my penne, but more with my pyke, nor in the
scholes amongst learned clarkes, but rather in the fields amongst unlettered companions, or, as some will terme them, amongst a company of rustike souldiers. "
In his address "to the gentle reader " he says " Such is the delicacie of our
readers, at this time, that there are none may be allowed of to write, but such as
haue been trained at schoole with Pallas, &c. - and for my parte (without vaunt
be it spoken) I have been a trauayler; I have sayled in Grauesende barge as farre as
Billingsgate, I haue trauelled from Bucklers bery to Basingstocke, I haue gone from
S. Pankeridge church to Kentish towne by lande, where I was combered with many
hedges, ditches , and other slippery bankes, but yet I could neuer come to those
learned bankes of Helicon , neither was I euer able to scale Parnassus hyl, although
I have trauailed ouer Gaddes hyl in Kente, and that sundrie tymes andoften. "
-
IRELAND. ]
HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. 253
tury, when Ireland exhibited a picture of the most
frightful desolation -- especially between the years
On the reverse of Diij . there is this sensible remark about the ruling
of Ireland. " In like manner it hath been often seene, that when a
rascall (a rebell I would tearme him) hath done many spoyles, and
committed many outrages, yet in the end hath been receiued vpon
composition, and many times haue their pardons begged, by some
that be about the Lorde Deputie : and many times they haue frends
in England to purchase them pardons, and to send them ouer : and
this is the uery cause that giueth them boldnesse to doe yll, so that
there is no assured trust to be founde in the greatest numberof them :
but when they may see time and occasion to doe a shrewd turne,
then they get them a cōpenie of breechless beggers, (folowers they
cal them) when they haue plaid their parts to the uttermost,
they assure themselves that a hundred of stolen cowes will buy a
pardone: where, otherwise, if all hope were cut fromthem, and that
no pardons might be granted vnto them, might without fauoure
feele the force of the lawe, without any exceptions from the best to
the worst, and that every one, like dutiful subjects should put to
their helping hande, to the suppressing of them, there is no question
but Irelande would soon waxe ciuil, and the countrie would quickly
growe to be quiet. " Sign . Dij. rev.
On Diij,
-
" How lamentable is the case of those that be honest, and
suche as would gladly indeuour them selves to liue orderly, whiche
can not so much as enioy a poore flocke bed to lie upon, but
must content themselues with homelier beds than a bundle of
sweete strawe : and, instead of other cates, do only liue by gross
herbs and roots : and then to see what labour, what toil, and
what pain they endure, but to get some small portion of money,
wherewith to buy a loaf of bread, of the which, neither he, his wife,
nor his children, shall neuer eat so much as one crum, but must serve
to content those idle rogues-where the poor man himself, if he be
able to keep a cow for his better relief, letteth her blood in a vein in
her neck, the which blood, being boiled in a clod, serveth his turn
instead of the finest manchet." Sign . Diij. A little before, Riche
observes - "Whosoever will think to prevail in Ireland, it must be
254 HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN [IRELAND.
.
1640 and 1650 -a swarm of fugitive publications
made their appearance ; which were only calculated
by using justice with extremity, and not with lenity. " Our friend
Barnabe perhaps always rode with " a tight curb."
Riche's other pieces (though these are by no means the whole) relating to Ireland, must be summarily despatched : " A short Survey
of Ireland." London, 1069 for 1609, 4to. pp. 56. " A Catholicke
Conference betweene Syr Taddy Mac Mareall a Popish priest of Waterforde, and Patricke Plaine, a young Student in Trinity Colledge by
Dublin in Irelande," &c . London, 1612, 4to. The subjoined extract
may be worth perusal : it must be confessed that Sir Taddy and
young Patrick speak plainly with each other. This tract was not
known to Mr. Haslewood when he made his list of Riche's pieces in
the preface to the Paradise of Dainty Devises. The Irish Hubbub,
or the English Hue and Crie. London, 1619 , 4to. pp. 56 : followed
by one leaf of " Aphorismes, with other witty sentences," the 24th
of June, 1618 : but I confess that these sentences do not strike me
as either witty or wise. Mr. Grenville's copy, which concludes with
the comparison of " a wanton wench " to a trout, strikes me as being
imperfect. A new Irish Prognostication or Popish Callender. Wherein
is described the disposition ofthe Irish, with the manner of their behaviour, &c. (A very full and curious title) London, 1624, pp . 116 :
-qu. by Rich ? A True and a kinde excuse written in defence of
Sir Taddy introduces the prayer for salvation ofsouls, thro ' the intermediation
ofSt. Thomas à Becket, the Martyr : -adding " for here we make intercession
unto Christ that by the bloud which Thomas shed, we may come where Thomas is.
To which Patrick the Student replies, " And that is to the infernal pit of hell : O
doctrine of diveles, that doth teach the silly people to fly from the bloud of Christ,
to seek their salvation in the bloude of a Traytor !·- a seditious wretch, that was
only canonyzed by the Pope for his trayterous demeanure and disobedience to his
lawfull prynce" A little further, after mentioning the mediation of the Virgin,
the Student replies : " Idoe notso much wonder at that, Sir Tady, when now, in the
hottest sunne shine of the Gospell, wee see almost every day whole Lordships to be
sould, and but to uphold Ladyships : " fol. 20-21 . The conference has this angry
termination. Patr. Syr Tady, when I meane to turne traytor to the King, I will
follow your counsayle -I will turne Papist. " Tad. " And until thou dost show thy
selfe to be a professed Papist indeede, thou shalt find little friendshippe in Ireland.
And so farewell."
IRELAND.]
HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. 255
to put the peaceful in a state of excitation , and to
enflame the restless and turbulent with desires of yet
greater spoliation. These ephemeral productions were
usually accompanied I hardly know how to say
decorated with coarse copper cuts *-descriptive of
that Booke, intituled a New Description of Irelande. By Barnaby
Rych, Gent. Servant to the Kinge's most excellent Maiestie. Lond.
1612, 4to.: twenty- five numbered leaves.
-
*As to the Pamphlets, Fugitive Pieces, &c . relating to what was
called the IRISH MASSACRE and alluded to in the text the task
were equally wearisome and fruitless to enter upon any thing like an
enumeration or list of them. I will mention only three with which
the richly furnished shelves of Mr. Grenville's library supply me :
Ireland's Ivbilee, or Ioyes Io Paan; for Prince Charles his welcome
home, &c. By Stephen Ierome, Domesticke Chappleine to the Right
Honourable Earle of Corke. Dublin, 1624, 4to. Sect. IV. Part I.;
Sect. IV. Part II. There are few pious readers, and hearty wishers
to their country's welfare, who would not unite their prayers to the
following: " Oh, that as we professe, confesse one God, the father of
all, one Christ the Redeemer of all, one spirit, the sanctifier of all
the Elect : yea, one faith, one baptisme, one hope, one life, one way
to this life, as one Sunne, but one soule in man, one Phoenix in the
world, &c. so that wee would as one, in one minde, by one rule,
worship this God in spirit, in truth, in unitie, in uniformiție ofjudgement and affections &c. ! " p. 81. There are many wild and involved,
as well as bold and striking, passages : as thus, at p. 111 : " Oh
doe I beleeve mine eyes and eares, that lions, eagles, panthers, yea
dragons, elephantes, aspes, dogges, wolves, apes, have been thankfull to their Eupaters and Benefactors, and shall man, their pettie
soveraigne, be claudicant and heteroclite ?" The instances of supposed fidelity in brutes, which follow, are curious and comical
enough. But, the second of the above alluded to works, is of such
price, that I will not venture upon naming one third of the sum for
which it must be obtained. The title is thus : The Teares ofIreland :
wherein is lively presented, as in a map, a list of the unheard of
cruelties and perfidious Treacheries of bloud-thirsty Iesuits and the
Popish Faction. London, printed by A. N. for Iohn Rothwell, 1642,
256 HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. [IRELAND.
the cruelties which were said to have been committed by the Catholics on the Protestants. Some of
12mo. The author appears to be JOHN CRAUFORD. Three introductory pieces, without numbers to title pages, precede the text,
which has eighty numbered pages. Thomas Partington's letter,
sworn to be true, before a Committee of the House of Commons, is
the last of these introductory pieces ; and a perusal of it is enough
to make the blood curdle. The PRINTS, the great attraction of the
volume, illustrate most of the cruelties described in the text.
These prints are twelve in number ; having letter press at their
backs. They are rather etchings than finished plates, and one plate
contains two subjects : such subjects, as one desires never again to
see as the representation of FACTS ! They have, in themselves, very
trifling merit on the score of art. They are executed in a freer and
looser manner than if they were done by Hollar : and with infinitely
less ability. Mr. Grenville properly suspects their being the production of Hollar ; but as " resembling rather those engraved in the
small historical tracts by Jenner. " Mr. G. observes, very justly, that
" the tears of Ireland, by Crauford is, perhaps, the rarest of all the
historical tracts of this time." This was Mr. Bindley's copy. Mr.
Thorpe possesses a copy of it, wanting the last leaf. It is a wretchedly printed performance.
A third similar tract, but of infinitely less rarity and price, is
thus entitled " The Barbarous and Inhumane Proccedings against
the Professors of the Reformed Religion within the dominion of Savoy,
April 7, 1655 " also, " A true Relation of the Bloody Massacres,
Tortures, Cruelties, &c. committed upon the Protestants in Ireland, &c.
Oct. 23, 1641." Lond. 1655, 4to. A most miserable performance, in all respects. The copper cuts are worked on the pages of
text ; some half dozen like those in the Tears of Ireland. The
others are quite barbarous : but the large whole length of the Vienna
Lady, "who from eleven till twelve at night yelled out woe unto
you, woe unto you, often repeating those words, and nothing else”—
while " the bells, without help of man, rung suddenly, to the great
affrightment ofthe people "-at p. 49- is something of an exception
to the general barbarity of the art. In the whole, fifty- four pages,
with eight further pages of Names
Parliament of 1656.
of Members returned to the
IRELAND. ] HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. 257
these " cuts " are literally too dreadful to look upon,
except that the extreme coarseness of their execution
renders them little attractive in the estimation of the
curious in graphic lore. Women and children, butchered or burnt, and sometimes both ; parents viewing
the deliberate murder of their offspring by fire and
sword, or themselves rendered a similar spectacle to
their children : villages and towns on fire : the rivers
choked with drowned carcases-the cross, the gibbet,
and the rack -in short, every species of refinement
on cruelty seems, if such representations can be
trusted, to have been practised in these recriminating
and rebellious times. But a love of truth compels me
to declare, that these facts are handed down to us by
exparte evidence. The Protestants are the sufferers ,
and the Protestants are the authors of these publications. It is possible that the Catholics might have
had to complain of occasionally similar, atrocities inflicted on themselves ; and yet the voice of history
seems to be silent thereupon-and the philosophical
The last which I shall notice, is the following : " An Accompt of
the Bloody Massacre in Ireland, &c. executed by the Irish Papists upon
the English Protestants in the year 1642. London, licensed 23d December, 1678, and printed for R. G. 1678, " 4to. Only eight pages. *
Take a specimen of the Monstrosities detailed in these , and similar, publications. " Some English men's heads they cut off, and carried them to Kilkenny,
and on the market day set them on the cross, where many, especially the women,
stabb'd, cut, and slash'd them. A poor Protestant woman, with her two children,
going to Kilkenny, these bloody miscreants baited them with dogs, stabbed them
with skeins, and pulled out the guts of one ofthe children, whereby they died : and
not far off they took divers men, women and children, and hanged them up ; one of
the women being great with child, they ripped up her belly as she hanged, so that
the child fell out in the cawl alive. Some, after they were hanged, they drew up
and down till their bowels were torn out." Page 7. But enough of such ATROCITIES
-yea, more than enough !
S
258 HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. [IRELAND.
Hume, relying mainly on the unimpeached authority
of Sir John Temple, * indulges in a strain of impassioned eloquence on this occasion, which appears to
have been dictated by the mixed feelings of sympathy
and horror. There are few portions of his Historyt
in which the language of pathos and commiseration
is more powerfully displayed.
But great and execrable as might have been the
spirit of persecution among the Irish Catholics, it
must not be forgotten that something like a similar
spirit manifested itself among those of a very opposite
religious persuasion ; so that it should seem as if, at
that hapless period, men had transformed themselves
into blood-hounds of prey. The Presbyterian soldiery of Cromwell, about eight years after what is
called the Irish massacre, slaughtered, without hesitation and without remorse, the Protestant garrisons of
Tredah and Wexford ; leaving only one man alive, of
the former town, " to be a messenger of this universal
havoc and destruction . " A truce, however, to these
heart-aching reminiscences.
I
I must not close this account of publications relating to the History of IRELAND, without the mention
of a living author who has long and justly borne the
character of an upright and intelligent writer.
allude (as the reader will immediately suppose) to the
Rev. Dr. CHARLES O'CONOR, librarian to the late Marquis, and to the presentDuke ofBuckingham, at Stowe.
* His account of the Irish Rebellion is one of the most exact and
authentic extant. It was republished, in an improved state, by
Baron Maseres, in a thin quarto volume, in 1812.
† Vol. vi. p. 436. Edit. 1812.
HUME : vol. vii . p . 170. Edit. 1812.
IRELAND. ] HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. 259
This gentleman, a Roman Catholic priest - exclusively of various publications of a temporary nature, *
written with a view to soften the asperities, and reconcile the differences, existing, at one period, pretty
strongly between the Protestant and Roman Catholic
parties has more recently put forth the first volume
ofa work, which is intended to accomplish for Ireland,
what Bouquet has done for France. The first volume
of his " Rerum Hibernicarum Scriptores Veteres" appeared, with copious prolegomena and indexes, in the
year 1814. It is accompanied by plates of fac- similes
-chiefly of early Irish MSS. —and is, on the whole, a
very creditable production for a provincial press . ‡
Though deeply sunk into the vale ofyears, and afflicted
with frequent and severe infirmities, the ardour of
this venerable critic and antiquary is as keen as
ever : and we may yet hope for a second volume of
similar matter, as ponderous and as valuable in all
respects .
It will not be presumptuous to say, that, after all, a
FULL and COMPLETE History of Ireland, is " a consummation devoutly to be wished ;" but he who shall
* Among these, are his tracts, or octavo volumes, entitled " Columbanus ad Hibernos ; and an instructive volume, entitled " Narrative of the most interesting Events in modern Irish History ; from
original MSS. and some Tracts. Lond. 1812, 8vo.
† At Buckingham, in the immediate vicinity of Stowe, and published by Messrs. Payne and Foss. Of a volume, so intrinsically valuable, and of such limited notoriety and circulation, it is fitting that
a brief outline should be here submitted to the public. After a short
address to the Reader, and a dedication to the present Duke of
Buckingham, (then Marquis) there is an " Epistola Nuncupatoria de
Fontibus Historia Genuina Hibernorum, Eorumque Chronologia, deque Antiquissimis Codicibus Literis Hibernicis ante Annum X, exaratis. ”
260 HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN [IRELAND.
.
embark in this laudable undertaking, must give very
many of his days and nights to the volumes of an
O'CONOR.
This epistle contains cclvi pages, followed by an index, which concludes at p. cclxxvi.; and is replete with much curious, recondite,
and interesting lore. It contains five plates of fac- similes of Irish
MSS. beginning with one of the VIIth century. The " Epilogue" to
the Epistle, devoted to an account of the latter moments and dying
injunctions of the author's late noble patron, does equal honour to
the head and heart of the author himself. We have, next, the first
part of the Prolegomena, occupying clxxxiv. pages ; replete with a
varietyof historical and philological intelligence. The second part of
the Prolegomena ensues : " in qua Domesticorum Annalium Chronologicæ Rationes, Codices, Carmina, et Scriptorum Tempora ad Trutinam
revocantur." This extends to clxxxvi. pages : an index, terminating
at p. ccvii, concluding the volume. These portions, separately, make
the volume extend to about 650 pages. From which the reader perceives that the text of the ANCIENT HISTORIANS is yet to commence.
SCOTLAND.] HITORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. 261
HISTORY OF SCOTLAND.
THE account of the more ancient and popular histories of Scotland is attended with fewer difficulties
than that relating to the Sister Kingdom ; while, in
the investigation of this subject, we become acquainted
with more interesting and romantic details. Scotland
has found nearly as many old chroniclers in verse as
in prose ; and her BORDER HISTORY* is one which
equally interests the reader on either side of the
Tweed. Her mountains, her crags, her castles, and her
fortresses, have been all immortalised in poetry—
while the hardy achievements of their possessors have
alike formed subjects for the drama and romance.
Yet, in the number of her more ancient historians,
Scotland is neither fertile nor particularly distinguished. Making only brief mention of the Chronicles ofHOLYROOD and MAILROS, we may consider JOHN
BARBOUR, (who flourished in 1380, ) as the father of
regular Scotch history ; although that history be known
to the world as a metrical composition, under the name
* Read Mr. Ridpath's Border History, 1776, 4to. 17. 118. 6d. as a
good introduction to this subject ; and, above all, let " the Young
Man" feel his imagination warmed, as well as his curiosity excited,
by the perusal of the interesting notes of Sir Walter Scott, in the
Minstrelsy of the Scotish Border, published in three octavo volumesand frequently reprinted. I consider these notes as a most admirable,
and hitherto unrivalled, style of HISTORICAL ILLUSTRATION ; and we
occasionally discover in them, more than faint gleams of that information and " incidental story, " which burn so brightly, and warm
us so thoroughly, in the Scotch historical novels ... now pretty generally supposed to be by the hand of the same writer.
262 HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN [SCOTLAND.
.
of The Bruce.* JOHN FORDUN is the next chronicler,
and the first legitimate historian of Scotland, in prose.
His Scotichronicon (for the publication of which Bishop Nicolson was exceedingly anxious) has been
twice edited. The Chronicle ofWYNTOWN, in Scottish verse, may be the next history deserving notice.
* First, of the chronicles of Holy Rood and Mailros. Wharton
published the former in the first volume of his Anglia Sacra, under
the title of Chronicon S. Crucis Edinburgensis ; and Fulman the latter,
in the first volume of what is called Gale's Scriptores, &c.: but I recommend the READING Collector to throw an eye of curiosity over
what Nicolson has written in his Scottish Historical Library, p . 28 :
edit. 1736. Secondly, of Barbour. The best edition of the Metrical
Chronicle, above alluded to, is that by Pinkerton, under the title of
"The Bruce ; or, the History of Robert I. King of Scotland." Written in Scotish verse, by John Barbour. London, 1790, 8vo. 3 vols . :
"the first genuine edition, published from a MS. dated 1489, with
notes and a glossary : " Mr. Pinkerton's preface tells us that twenty
editions had been published since the first impression of it, in 1616, at
Edinburgh : but all, more or less, inaccurately. Mr. Ellis, in his Specimens, &c. has done this work greater justice* than either Warton or
Henry; while the researches of Lord Hailes impress us with a very
favourable notion ofthe veracity of the text.
+ When Bishop Nicholson wrote his account of the existing MSS.
of Fordun-earnestly wishing for a printed publication of the Chronicle-only a small portion of it had appeared in the third volume of
Gale and Fulman. His account is, in other respects, sufficiently interesting. On consulting the note at p. 220, the reader will observe
that the best edition of Fordun is that edited by Goodall, at Edinburgh, in 1759, folio, 2 vols. ; of which a good copy may be obtained for about 17, 10s.; but Mr. Rodd marks it, in his catalogue of
1823, at 18s. half-bound, uncut.
* The opening of it is very fine and animating :
Ah, FREEDOM is a noble thing !
Freedom makes man to have liking.
Freedom all solace to man gives,
He lives at ease that FREELY lives !
SCOTLAND. ] HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. 263
MAIR OF MAJOR follows ; and HECTOR BOECE, very
much his superior, is the next in succession. Below,*
I have given a brief account of the publications of
* First, ofWYNTOWN. The only edition worth possessing-and that,
as remarkable for the beauty of the printing as for the accuracy ofthe
text-bears the following title :-DE Orygynale Cronykil of Scotland, be Androw of Wyntown, Priowr of Sanct Serfis ynche in Loch
Levyn. Now first published with notes, a glossary , &c. By David Macpherson. London, 1795, royal 8vo. 2 vols. This edition contains
an elaborate glossary, learned notes, and an index. The printer was
Bensley. It is by no means rare. Messrs. Payne and Foss mark a
copy of it, in russia, at 31. 10s. There were some few impressions
struck off on LARGE paper, of a quarto size ; —similar to those of the
reprint ofthe Complaynt of Scotland, by the late John Leyden. Secondly, of MAJOR. His " Historia Majoris Britanniæ, tam Angliæ
quam Scotia," was first printed by Badius Ascensius, at Paris, in
1521. The best edition is that published by Freebairn, at Edinburgh,
in 1740, 4to. Prefixed to this edition, and probably to that at Paris
also, are some monkish Latin rhymes, by William Baston, an English Carmelite monk, upon the battle of Bannockbourn. † Major's
book is of ordinary occurrence, and worth about 10s. 6d.
Thirdly, and somewhat more copiously, of HECTOR BOECE, or
Boethius. " Scotorum Historia, Libr. xix. Hectore Boethio Auctore."
Paris, Jacob du Puy, 1575, folio : but first published at the same
place in 1526, by Badius Ascensius, having only xvii. books. The
second impression, contains the continuation of John Ferrers, a
Piedmontese. This work was translated into the Scottish language
by John Bellenden, between the years 1530 and 1533, and printed
* From a MS. in the British Museum. " I wish it were in my power (observes
the Editor) to give any thing which might deserve to be called the Life of Wyntown : but, from want of materials, I can do little more than draw into one point
ofview, what may be gathered from his own work." Pref. ix.
+ The metrical colophon of the poet is thus :
Sum Carmelita , Baston cognomine dictus.
Qui doleo vita, in tali strage relictus.
Si quid deliqui, si quæ recitanda reliqui
Hæc addant hi qui non sunt sermonis iniqui.
264 HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. [SCOTLAND.
the works of these writers . GEORGE BUCHANAN is
justly considered one of the brightest ornaments of
by Davidson, royal printer to James V. somewhere about the year
1538-40, under the title of the History and Chroniklis ofScotland ;
for which the reader may consult Herbert's Typog. Antiq. vol. iiii .
p. 1474. This work, or translation, is printed at Edinburgh ; in a
coarse gothic type, having the arms of Scotland rudely cut as a frontispiece, and a composition of a religious description+ at the end. Few
copies are exactly alike, even in the phraseology. They are of excessive rarity ; and Lord Spencer could not obtain his copy, from the
Roxburghe Collection ( Bibl. Roxburgh. n°. 8687, ) under the sum of
65. That in the library of Mr. Towneley was purchased by Mr.
Laing, of Edinburgh, for £85. Mr. Heber and Mr. G. Chalmers,
each possess a copy. It was in the Harleian Collection, but does not
appear to be in the British Museum. Scotland boasts, (and with equal
propriety and justice) of possessing two copies ON VELLUM- which are
thus described in the advertisement to the beautiful reprint of this
work, published at Edinburghin 1823 .-"Of Bellenden's Boece, there
are two copies in Scotland, printed UPON VELLUM : one is preserved in
the library of the Duke of Hamilton, " and a more splendid specimen of early typography, and of antique binding, cannot well be
imagined. The vellum upon which it is printed, is stainless, and
the breadth of the margin would satisfy the most fastidious and
Ofthefirst set of STATUTES , or BLACK ACTS, as they are called--- (and I entreat the reader's attention to Bishop Nicolson's account of them, p. 100. ) printed
by Davidson, for King James, only one copy is known ; and that copy is upon
VELLUM : -preserved in the Advocate's Society, at Edinburgh . My friend , Mr. G.
Chalmers, possesses (with the exception of this first set) a comely collection of
these black acts-down to the date of 1593 , by Waldegrave : viz. from 1566-7 :
1576-81 : They are thin small folios and were once inspected by that gallant
Bibliopolist Mr. Constable, of Edinburgh, with a hundred guinea cheque ready to
lay down, by way of exchange : --but " Procu! o procul, este profanum !” —ex- claimed their veteran possessor.
-
+ I cannot unite in the very warm praise bestowed upon this cut by the editor
of the Edinburgh reprint of the book. Many past and present " Xylogaphers "
(or wood- cutters) could do infinitely better ; although I admit that Mr. Lizars
has made an admirable copy of it , on a reduced scale. There is great spirit in the
general design of the original ; but greater delicacy and truth are frequently displayed in the wood- cutters of Basle and Lyons, about the same period.
SCOTLAND.]
HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. 265
his country, both as a poet and an historian ; but a
good deal before the appearance of his history, * there
were published two or three historical pieces of a contemporaneous character, which are now sought after
with uncommon avidity. The antiquarian reader will
probably anticipate the Expedicion into Scotland, published in 1544-48 : of which PATTEN was the author
ofthe latter. How shall I venture upon an outline,
princely Collector. The boards bear the following incription : JACOBUS QUINTUS REX SCOTORUM, and on the title- page, the initials
I. R. appear in MS. They are, in all probability, in the hand-writing
of that monarch, to whom the volume appears to have belonged . ” —
Advertisement, p. vii. The other copy, miserably " cobbled " in the
binding, is in the library of the University of Edinburgh ; and is, in
all respects, of an inferior description . But the vicinity of our own
metropolis boasts of another membraneous copy. At Ham- House,
near Richmond, (the residence of the Countess of Dysart) there is a
third, and a not inglorious copy, of Bellenden's Boece, UPON VELLUM !
And in what Book- Company does this gem disport itself? !!!
The REPRINT of this scarce volume, (comprehending Bellenden's
translation of Titus Livius) is one of the most beautiful productions
of the BALLANTYNE PRESS. It forms three quarto volumes, of the
size of the Palace of Pleasure, and Mirror for Magistrates. Let me
trust that there is at least one copy of it UPON VELLUM.
* Thefirst edition of George Buchanan's history was printed by
Arbuthnot, at Edinburgh, in 1582, folio ; and, again, fuller and
more correctly, at Geneva, in the following year : but the best edition is, doubtless, that published at Leyden, in 1725, 4to. 2 vols.
under the editorial care of Ruddiman and Gronovius, on the basis of
the previous folio edition of 1715, exclusively edited by Ruddiman.
These two latter editions of Buchanan, of which copies on large
paper are not very common, contain ALL his works. Let Nicolson,
however, p. 40, by no means be overlooked ; as he balances the
praises and censures of critics, respecting Buchanan, with an even
and pains-taking hand. A copy of the folio edition may be worth
Il. 1s.
† Mr. Beloe, Anecdotes of Literature, &c. vol. ii . p. 345, notices
266 HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN, [SCOTLAND.
even, of the numerous, or rather innumerable pamphlets, tomes, and broadsides, relating to the fate of
the unfortunate QUEEN MARY ? * The invincible
only one edition-of the date of 1544 -of this work ; but there was
a second edition in 1548-under the title of the " Expedicion of the
Duke of Somerset, by W. Patten :" both impressions being in the
Roxburghe Library : the former selling for 30 guineas, and the
latter for 21. Mr. G. Chalmers possesses a copy of the latter.
Mr. Beloe tells us that, at the sale of West's library, the first tract
was bought for 18s. 6d. : and at that of a portion of Mr. Wodhull's
books, in 1803, for 167. 16s. -the identical copy purchased by the
Duke of Roxburghe. Mr. Isaac Reed had a copy, obtained, as Mr.
Beloe imagines, for the very diminished sum of 2s. 6d. Copies of
both editions are in the library of Mr. Heber. See Typog. Antiq.
vol. iii. p. 458. iv. p. 8. These rare books were unknown to Nicolson.
The work was reprinted in 1798, 4to. among the " Fragments of
Scotish History. ”
* Ofthe well known black letter tract of Buchanan's Detectioun of
the Duinges ofMarie Quene ofScottis, there were at least two editions :
one printed in 1572, the other without date. The Roxburghe copy of
the former was sold for 21. 12s. 6d. , the latter for 21. 10s. In Mr.
Rodd's last catalogue, I find several of these pieces thus described-
" 1404, MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS. Ane Detectioun of the Duings of
Marie Quene of Scottes, touchand the Murder of hir Husband, by G.
Buchanan, black letter, no date-The Copie of a Letter written byone
in London to his Friend concernying the credit of the late published
Detection of the Doynges of the Ladie Marie of Scotland, no dateThe effect of the declaration made in the Guildhall, by M. Recorder
ofLondon, concerning the late attempts of the Quenes Majesties evill,
seditious, and disobedient Subjectes, 1571.-ALetter concerning the
Marriage of the D. of Norfolk to Quene Mary, by R. G. 1571.-A
Discourse touching the pretended Match betwene the Duke of Norfolke and the Queene of Scottes, 1571 ; (these two last want the titles)
a rare and curious collection in blue morocco, 6l. 6s. 12mo. Yet must
the reader not fail to bear in mind " The Scottish Queen's Buriall,”
1587, Lond. 12mo. no date : (£9. 98. at the Roxburghe sale) and
the very rare Latin piece relating to Mary, of whichOBERTUS
SCOTLAND. ] HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. 267
perseverance and gallant spirit of such men as Mr.
George Chalmers and Mr. Richard Heber, have not
yet, I suspect, enabled those gentlemen to admit that
their Scottish Collection, in this department, is complete ! LESLEY, as much the friend , as Buchanan was
the enemy, of Queen Mary, put forth his work a few
BarneStaple was the author, and which was published at Cologne
in 1627, 8vo. Mr. Thorpe bravely marks a copy of it, bound in
morocco, at £4. 4s.
I have above mentioned the publication ofprinted BROADSIDES, &c.
It is here in my power to make mention of a volume-beyond all
praise and beyond all price - containing official instruments, in the
black letter, relating to almost all public topics in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth. This volume is in the Bodleian library, and has been of
comparatively recent discovery. My friend Dr. Bliss, one of the
librarians, in displaying its cHARMS, expatiated upon it with the
correct taste and natural enthusiasm of a well- versed English Bibliographer ; and the public will shortly be benefitted by some curious
excerpts from it, in his Reliquiæ Hearniane. Tom Hearne himself
would have gone half crazed at the very sight of it — and especially
at the extraordinary PORTRAITS * which it contains. But my more
immediate business is with Queen Mary. Among these broadsides,
is a Proclamation against her, and the house of Guise, for supporting
her claim to the crown of England. " And consyderyng the sayde
house of Guise, for theyr owne priuate aduauncement, hauynge no
other meane to practyse the same, but by exaltyng of theyr nece the
Quene of Scottes, in whose respect they intermeddle with the gouer-
-
* These portraits are, Elizabeth, by Delarum ; Lord Darnley and M. Queen of
Scots, by Elstrack : Mary, an oval, in a large broadside , on the top and bottom of
which are printed epigrams, " In effigiem Mariæ, &c. Londini, typis I. Norton .
The Earle of Nottingham, 1588, very large broadside ; no name, but " To be
soulde at ye horse shew in pater noster row : " Robert, Earl ofEssex ; on horse
back, and very large and fine : Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk, between the
pillars, a print of extraordinary rarity. I will not pretend to fix a price for such
graphic gems. Mr. Woodburn, as he once gazed upon them with a throbbing
heart and a well replenished purse, " sighed and looked, sighed and looked, and
sighed ...IN VAIN ! "
268 HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. [SCOTLAND.
years before the appearance of the History of Buchanan; namely, in 1575, and 1578, at Rome ; and, in fact,
he should have here taken precedence. Bishop Nicolson gives us encouragement to peruse Lesley with
more than ordinary interest. * On entering the seventeenth century, we must begin with the notice of
MELVIL, followed by that of SPOTISWOOD ; although
proper attention should be paid to the careful researches of JOHNSTON, and to the humbler chronicle
of MONIPENNIE.
naunce of Fraunce at this present, haue thus iniuriously and insolently set forth , and in tyme of peace continued in publyke places the
armes and clayme of these kyngdomes of Englande and Irlande, in
the name of their nece the Quene, " -&c. &c. Now, prefixed to this
Proclamation, in the Bodleian volume, is a drawing of the arms of
Mary, quartered with those of England and France, which purports
to be one of the copies " sent out of ffraunce in July 1559, " In a
metrical inscription at the bottom, Mary is called
" Off Scotland queene, and of Ingland also,
Off Ireland als' God haith providit so. "
If my memory do not deceive me, I have somewhere (either in the
Bibliomania or Decameron) noticed this very book ; as being in the
possession of some one to whom Lord Oxford offered 100 guineas for
it-but ineffectually.
* A good copy of Lesley, " de moribus, &c. Scotorum," 1578, 4to.
is marked at 11. 7s. in the recent catalogue of Messrs, Lackington
and Co. If however the reader happen to get possession of the same
author's work on the Right and Title of Mary Queen of Scots, 1584,
8vo. let him know that Mr. Laing not only calls it " VERY RARE,"
but affixes to it the price of £5. 15s. 6d.
+ In order of time we should notice MONIPENNIE ; the more so, as
he seems to have escaped Watt. I find his Chronicle and Description of Scotland, Lond. 1612, 4to.; Short Description of the Isles of
Scotland, (" very rare ” and a MS. Chronicle of him, selling at the
Roxburghe sale (nº . 8697) for £3 . 6s. A copy of the first work,
SCOTLAND.] HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. 269
It was not, however, till the eighteenth century, that
the History of Scotland received its due and full share
of investigation. The names of Mackenzie, Wodrow,
Anderson, Lindesay, Maitland, Robertson, Guthrie,
Dalrymple and Pinkerton, are familiar to the collectors of Scottish history ; and have been more or less
perused by the assiduous student in the same depart-
(called " scarce ") is marked at £1 . 1s. in Mr. Rodd's last catalogue ;
and a copy of " Certaine Matters concerning the realme of Scotland,
composed together as they were, A. D. 1597, " Lond. 1603, with a
morocco back, is valued at £2. 2s. in the last catalogue of Messrs.
Arch. It is the first edition of the work. Let DAVID HUME'S
" General History, continuing to the Death of James VI. " Lond.
1657, folio, (first published at Edinb . in 1617) have also a place in
a library tolerably complete with Scotch history. Bishop Nicolson
calls it " the best in this class "-but falling far short of the spirit
of that author's other works. The Memoirs of Sir JAMES MELVIL,
of Hall Hill, Lond. 1683, is important in very many repects to
possess. Burnet calls the author a generous and virtuous man.
A good copy may be had for 12s. Spotiswood's Church History,
Lond. 1655 ; again 1677- must, on no account, be omitted in
the historical department of Scotland ; and let MIDDLETON's appendix to it, incorporated in the latter edition, always be found in your
copy of the work. Messrs. Payne and Foss mark a copy of it, bound
with Burnet's Memoirs ofthe Dukes ofHamilton, * 1677, folio, in one
volume, at £2. 5s.
Let me here briefly mention DRUMMOND's (of Hawthorden) History ofScotland, Lond. 1655, with plates of James I., II . , III . , IV. ,
V., by Gaywood. A good copy may be worth £1.5s. It is reprinted in the collection of Drummond's Works, published in 1711 ,
folio.
* By Gilbert Burnet, Bishop of Salisbury : having a portrait of James Duke of
Hamilton as a frontispiece ; and another of Charles I. , by Faithorne, opposite
p. 153 one ofthe commonest, but nevertheless one of the most spirited , of that
engraver's productions. This book contains Letters, Instructions, and other papers
written by the unfortunate royal author. Copies on LARGE PAPER usually present us with fine impressions ofthese portraits.
270 HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. [SCOTLAND.
ment. I have endeavoured, below,* to give the best
editions of the labours of these respective writers ;
(6
I will first dispatch, and as courteously as possible, the two
MACKENZIES ; each christened George. The first, who published the
Lives and Characters of the most eminent Writers of the Scots Nation.
1708-22, three vols. folio, was a Physician. His work, found complete, is not of very ordinary occurrence : the third volume being
usually missing. Messrs. Arch mark a perfect copy in three vols. ,
at 41. 4s.; and Mr. Laing marks a similar one new bound in
russia, extra " at 71. 7s. After all, they are unseemly tomes; and the
third is compelled to walk on stilts to keep pace with its companions. The other Mackenzie ( Sir George) was an eminent lawyer,
and historian. He is called, in the title- page of his works, “ eminent and learned," and his works were published in two folio volumes, in 1716.† There has been recently put forth, from the MS.
of this author, his " Memoirs of the Affairs of Scotland from the Restoration of King Charles II .," &c . Edinb. 4to.; edited with great
care, and printed with considerable elegance. The MS. was brought
to the shop of a grocer in Edinburgh, and purchased by him for the
humblest purposes of his trade ; but owing to many entire leaves
having been cut out, there is a lamentable hiatus in the history, from
the year 1663 to 1669. See Pref. Edinb. Monthly Mag. No. III. ,
June 1817 ; and Edinb. Mag. April, 1820. A masterly and highly
interesting criticism on this valuable work appeared in the Edinb.
Review, No. LXXI.
Briefly noticing " the Martial Atchievements of the Scots Nation, "
by PATRICK ABERCROMBY, M. D. Edinb. 1711 , folio, 2 vols. (now
an uncommon work) I proceed, not only to the notice, but to the
strong recommendation, of WODROW's History of the Sufferings ofthe
Church ofScotland. Edinb. 1721, folio, 2 vols . Considering that,
+ In this edition of Mackenzie's works, are omitted his earliest publication
entitled " Aretina, or the Serious Romance, " 1661 , 12mo. and a political tract " on
the discovery of the Fanatick Plot," 1684, folio. Among the miscellaneous contents of these volumes, it will be difficult to find any number of original articles at
all approaching to that of the manuscripts stated to have been in the possession of
the publisher. Preface, (p. iv. ) to Sir G. Mackenzie's Memoirs of the Affairs of Scotland, 1821 , 4to.
SCOTLAND. ] HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. 271
adding, here, that there are several minor authors,
which, from their omission, must not be supposed as
even without the warm eulogy pronounced on this work by Mr. Fox,
in his historical labours, these volumes have long richly deserved
republication, one is surprised that so valuable a work, in so repul.
sive a garb (for it is most wretchedly printed) has been suffered to
remain without improvement. A new edition of Wodrow (now
becoming excessively rare) may be no unprofitable, as well as a
highly creditable, speculation to a Scotch bookseller : the more so,
as Wodrow (according to Dr. Watt) " left numerous mss. behind
him, which are preserved in some of the public libraries of Scotland,
and testify his pre- eminence and research. " He was Minister ofthe
Gospel at Eastwood. ANDERSON's Collections relating to the History
of Mary Queen of Scotland, were published in four quarto volumes,
in 1727 with an explanatory index of obsolete words. A friend of
mine once bought a copy out of sheets and bound the work " in
BLACK Morocco, with BLOOD coloured insides. " Such was his order
to the binder ; and poor George Faulkener was that binder. Mr.
Laing marks a copy, in calf gilt binding, at £1 . 14s. LINDESAY'S
(of Pitscottie) History of Scotland, Edinb. 1728, folio, may be worth
1. 1s. in good condition. MAITLAND'S History and Antiquities of
Scotland, 1757, folio, are worth £2. 2s. in a sound condition ; but
the same author's History of Edinburgh, with map and plates, 1753,
folio, is worth full as much money ; owing to its comparative
scarcity.
The name of ROBERTSON as an historian, whether of Scotland,
America, or Charles V., need only be mentioned to insure it due attention and respect. His History of Scotland is doubtless, by far, the
most popular history extant ; and first appeared in 4to. in 1759, in
2 vols. The reimpressions have been, I had almost said, innumerable; but it may be as well to notice and recommend the seventeenth
edition, with corrections and additions, and to which is prefixed an
account of the life and writings ofthe author by Dugald Stewart ; in
1806, 8vo. 3 vols. GUTHRIE'S General History of Scotland came
out in numbers, and appeared complete in 1767, 8vo. ten volumes.
It was reprinted in 1771 ; but is now rarely consulted. DALRYMPLE'S Annals of Scotland, from the accession of Malcolm III, to that
272
HISTORY
OF GREAT
BRITAIN
. [ SCOTLAND
.
excluded from the legitimate list of Scotch historians.
Descending to our own times, we are at once instructed and gratified by the successful labours of
Laing, M'Crie, and Cook ; and descending yet more
closely upon recent publications, we cannot fail to
offer the meed of praise to the truly gigantic labours
of Mr. GEORGE CHALMERS ; who, in his Caledonia,
(now pursuing its steady course through the press)
seems disposed to leave no department untouched,
and no event, historical as well as local, unrelated
or unnoticed. This gentleman is the Atlas of Scotch
antiquaries and historians ; bearing on his own
shoulders whatever seems to have been collected,
and with pain separately endured, by his predeces-
* whom, neither difficulties tire nor dangers
daunt: and who, in a green and vigorous old age, is
sors ;
:
of the House of Stewart, was published in 1776, in two quarto
volumes again, in the same form, in 1779 ; and latterly in 1797,
8vo. three vols. The historical, philological, and antiquarian labours of Sir David Dalrymple, Bart. afterwards LORD HAILEs, are
such as entitle their author to the foremost rank among his highly
distinguished contemporaries. PINKERTON'S Enquiry into the History
of Scotland, Lond. 1789, 8vo. 2 vols ; was reprinted at Edinburgh,
with improvements, in 1814 : but it is an inferior work to his History of Scotland, from the accession of the Stuarts to Mary, 1797, 4to.
2 vols. His Iconographia Scotica, 1797, 8vo. and Scottish Gallery of
Portraits, 1799, 4to. must of course, in chronological order, be
added to the preceding. I have not affixed prices to these works,
because they are generally of ordinary occurrence in the shops of our
principal booksellers.
* To begin with Mr. LAING. The best edition of his History of
Scotland is that of 1819, 8vo. four vols. with a preliminary Dissertation respecting Mary's participation in the murder of Darnley. It
is a work particularly rich in illustrative notes. The Rev. Mr
M'CRIE'S Life of John Knox, Edinb. 1813, 8vo. 2 vols ; and his Life
SCOTLAND. ] HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN. 273
yet laying the foundation of works for the enlargement of a legitimate fame, and the edification of a
grateful posterity. His Mary Queen ofScots is the
last, and a very recent production of his pen, connected with the history of his country.
of Andrew Melville* with ecclesiastical and literary illustrations relating to Scotland, 1819, 8vo. 2 vols . must undoubtedly find places
in
every well chosen collection of Scottish literature.
DR. COOK's History ofthe Reformation in Scotland, published at
Edinburgh in 1811 , 8vo. in three vols . is a work which cannot fail to
be gratifying to all lovers of that branch of historical enquiry ; especially as it is allowed to be executed with equal talent and impartiality. In the last place, I have to notice the Caledonia of Mr. GEORGE
CHALMERS, of which three stupendous quarto volumes have already
appeared ; and of which a fifth will complete this gigantic undertaking. The late Dr. Whittaker, himself an accomplished antiquary,
reviewed it in the ivth volume, (p . 342, ) of the Quarterly Review. The
" VIRIDIS SENECTUS " ofthe Author leads us to hope that he will give
us yet some further " by play," in addition to his Life of Queen Mary
—a work, upon which Mrs. Benger has drawn more largely than its
learned author was disposed to expect or is prepared to approve.
" Dr. M'CRIE, the well-known author of the Lives ofKnox and ofMelville,
whose curiosity in whatever concerns the history of this country is for ever active and indefatigable, and whose distinguished intelligence and sagacity are united to
the most liberal and communicative spirit." Pref. p. vi. to the newly printed
"Memoirs of the Affairs of Scotland by Sir G. Mackenzie, Knight.
T
[ 274 ]
HELPS TO BRITISH HISTORY.
Having, in the more immediately preceding pages,
furnished both " THE YOUNG " and " THE OLD " with
tolerably full particulars respecting the various Collections of History, and Histories themselves, connected with Great Britain, Ireland, and Scotland-it
remains, as a sort of necessary supplemental matter,
to furnish the studious, in this department of bookcollecting, with a few HELPS to BRITISH HISTORY, by
means of Acts of Parliament, Records, and State
Papers, &c. OfWALES, no particular mention need
be necessary ; except to observe that the histories of
that country by LLOYD and ENDERBIE are the almost only exclusive works connected with it. It
must however be conceded, that much of historical
information is conveyed in the pages of Pennant and
Dr. Meyrick. *
* LLOYD'S Historie of Cambria was published in the black letter,
in a 4to. volume, 1584, with wood- cuts, spiritedly designed :
and I find, what is called a LARGE PAPER Copy of it, marked at
51. 5s. in Mr. Thorpe's catalogue, no. 12294. The best edition is
that of 1774, 8vo. worth about 14s. ENDERBIE'S Cambria Triumphans ; being the ancient and modern British History, 1661 , folio,
was, in former times, of exceedingly high price ; but Mr. Baxter's
beautiful reprint of it in 1810, folio of which there are copies on
LARGE PAPER, (of truly gigantic dimensions) has materially contributed to lower the price. Messrs. Payne and Foss mark a copy
(" very neat ") of the first edition at 57. 58. and ofthe reprint on
large paper, in boards, at 4l. 14s. 6d. Messrs. Arch diminish the
price of the latter to 41. 4s. and mark an " Index to complete the
former edition, " at 17. 1s. To these, add Warrington's " History of
-
-
ACTS, &c. ] HELPS TO BRITISH HISTORY. 275
Reverting therefore to these general historical
Helps, let us begin with Acts of Parliament and Year
Books, publications of these appearing in the infancy
of the Art of Printing. But I will not insist upon the
securing of specimens of this kind from the presses of
Caxton, Machlinia, Wynkyn de Worde, and Pynson : *
Wales," 1786, 4to. and Mr. Robert's " Chronicle of the Kings of Britain, 1810, 4to. about 17. 15s. each. Dr. MEYRICK'S History and
Antiquities of Cardiganshire, published in 1810, 4to . is replete with
much interesting intelligence. Of PENNANT'S Tour in Wales, 1778,
4to. two vols. it were idle to speak in commendation.
* Brief and imperfect notices of the Statutes printed by Caxton
appear in the recent edition of the Typographical Antiquities, vol. i .
p. 354 ; but, since the publication of that work, a perfect set of the
Statutes, passed in the reign of Henry VII. , up to the death of
Caxton, (1490-1) was obtained by Lord Spencer, and will be found
particularly described in the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. iv. p. 344, &c.
Machlinia printed the Statutes in the first year of Richard III., of
which a copy is in the library of the Inner Temple. I know of no
other. What are called the Nova Statuta, printed by the same
printer, in one thick folio volume, has been described in the Typog.
Antiq. vol. ii. p. 11, with a fac-simile of one page of the types. The
fine copy of it, described in the Bibl. Spencer. vol. iv. p. 384, was
purchased by me, of Mr. Clarke the law bookseller, some ten or
twelve years ago, for 71. 7s. His Grace the Duke of Devonshire
purchased his Lordship's duplicate, in 1814, for 271. 6s. Messrs .
Payne and Foss mark a copy at 131. 13s.
WYNKYN DE WORDE published a small folio volume, of twentyseven Acts passed in the eleventh year of Henry VII. , of which a
description appears in the Bibl. Spencer. vol. iv. p. 415 : but he also
published other Acts-as late as the nineteenth year of Henry's
reign ; for an account of which, consult the Typog. Antiq. vol. ii.
p. 391-2 . PYNSON was a more voluminous printer of these early
Statutes, as his situation of " King's Printer " would lead us to
expect ; and in his time began the publication of YEAR BOOKS -or
Reports of law proceedings in the several terms throughout the year.
Consult the Typog. Antiq. vol. ii . p . 570-4. Lord Spencer possesses
276 HELPS TO BRITISH HISTORY
. [ACTS, &c.
it being sufficient to avail ourselves, in order to maintain the characters of antiquaries, with the Collection
some specimens of his Statutes and Year Books (see Bibl. Spencer.
vol. iv. p. 431-2) which I should not pronounce to be of excessive
rarity. My friend Mr. Douce possesses a noble copy of the former :
but I strongly recommend an inspection of the list of Statutes, of
this period, to be found in the Biblioth . Harleiana, vol . ii . p. 648 , and
in the law catalogues of Messrs. Worrall, Clarke, and Butterworth.
Messrs. Payne and Foss mark Rastell's Collection of Statutes, a fine
copy, at 17. 11s. 6d. Printed for the Societie of Stationers, 1615,
folio.
But, to the professed Collector of STATUTABLE LORE, it will of
course be material to enrich his library with the publications recently
put forth, under the authority of Parliament, beginning with the year
1810 ; and of which nine volumes have already appeared. These
are cumbrous tomes for a limited collection ; and will be exceedingly costly into the bargain, if they are accompanied by the Rotuli, *
and Placita, and Calendaria, contemporaneously published by the
same authority. The " Rotuli Parliamentorum " being the Rolls of
Parliament from Edward I. to Henry VII. , in six folio volumes, are
doubtless very important " HELPS " to the history of our country.
See Clarke's Cat. p. 158. The Parliamentary Debates and State Trials
will necessarily be found in every senatorial library. The Taxatio Ecclesiastica, 1802, folio, and the Valor Ecclesiasticus, 1810-17, 3 vols. ,
folio, may also be thought necessary to a well furnished historical
library ; and although these be dear volumes, separately to purchase,
yet they often come in " at the fag end " of a sale by auction, so as
to be procured in boards at a very moderate sum. But then, the
binding this is indeed " THE RUB ! "
But whether the whole, or any, of these ponderous folios find
admittance into the libraries of " the Young " or " the Old, " let me
* Of exceedingly great intrinsic worth are the Rotuli Scotia, published under
the care of Thomas Thomson, Esq. at Edinburgh, in two folio volumes, 1814-1819 :
and the Acts of Parliament of Scotland, edited by the same gentleman, in seven
folio volumes-wanting the first. May this great undertaking soon reach its completion. Scotland may be justly proud of the Editor, under whose eye it moves
leisurely, but cautiously and correctly along. See p. 264 , as to the BLACK ACTS.
ACTS, &c. ] HELPS TO BRITISH HISTORY 277
of the Statutes published by William Rastell, towards
the middle of the reign of Queen Elizabeth ; a collection , which well-read judges of this lore have pronounced to be essentially necessary to the library of
an Antiquary as well as Lawyer. I will descend at
once to comparatively modern times; and recommend the edition of the Statutes by Ruffhead, continued by Runnington.
I now come to RECORDS : and where is the experienced bibliographer who, standing at my elbow, would
not immediately exclaim " begin with PRYNNE !"
entreat ALL denominations of sensible Collectors to purchase the
most important work which has yet been published, with reference
to British history, antiquities, laws, and customs. I mean the recent
edition of DOMESDAY BOOK, 1783–1816, in 4 folio volumes, with
indexes, and a general introduction, by Henry Ellis, Esq. keeper of
the MSS. in the British Museum. The praises bestowed upon the
value of the PRECIOUS ORIGINAL MS. , from Spelman down to Blackstone, are sufficient to make every enlightened Collector anxious to
possess it . I find a copy of it, in 3 vols. with russia backs, marked
at 91. 98. in the last catalogue of Messrs . Arch, no . 248, where a
tolerably copious list of parliamentary publications, with their prices,
will be found : but Messrs. Payne and Foss, as the regular publishers,
necessarily possess a more extensive collection . The history of these
public records is given in the first and third volumes of Savage's
Librarian. The good taste of Miss Currer has led her to enrich her
fine library with most of these Helps to British History.
* Ruffhead's edition was published in 1763, in nine volumes ; to
which Mr. Serjeant Runnington added a sequence of volumes, in
1800, forming eighteen vols. 4to. in the whole. This original edition, brought down to the present times, with the continuations of
Messrs. Tomlins and Raithby, forming twenty- six vols. in the whole,
is now worth 6ól. An entire edition was published by Mr. Runnington in 1786, &c . in fourteen volumes, down to the Union : valued
at 211. by the booksellers .
PRYNNE shall have his due ; as far as relates to his Records.
278 HELPS TO BRITISH HISTORY. RECORDS,
His monitory voice shall be obeyed : but is he aware
of the niceties, and difficulties, and even contradicLet the reader first consult Oldys's British Librarian, p. 11-21 : for an
account of the plates, abridgements of prefaces, and summaries of
chapters. Both Oldys and Mr. Harris (Catalogue of Royal Institution
Library, p. 390.) quote the quaint language of Bishop Nicolson's
English Historical Library, p. 165, respecting the third volume of
Prynne : not necessary to be here repeated . The first volume of
Prynne was printed in 1666, the last in 1670. The greater part of
the first volume perished in the fire of London ; as an advertisement
to the reader, added to those copies which escaped, testifies. This
advertisement, as below, is copied from Oldys. It has been supposed that not more than twenty perfect copies of this work are
known to exist. Such was Tom Rawlinson's observation to West :
but, like many similar remarks, appertaining to bibliography, it requires something of more substantial proof to confirm it. † Almost
all our great private collections contain this work. Perhaps the most
perfect and desirable copy in existence, is that in the library at Worlingham, in Suffolk, now the residence of Lord Gosford, which
*
"Atthe end of this volume is an advertisement to the reader, intimating, that
the late fire (of London) having, in three days space, turned 88 parishes and their
churches, with the cathedral church of this glorious city, to ashes ; and among
other losses and mischiefs to the several Companies of the city, most ofall endamaged the Company of Printers and Stationers, most of whose habitations, storehouses, shops , stocks, and books were not only consumed, but their ashes and
scorched leaves conveyed aloft and dispersed by the wind, to places above 16
miles distant, to the admiration of beholders ; and that among millions of other
books, thus suddenly destroyed, while our author was busy in securing the public
records of the kingdom, his printer's house, with most of the printed copies of this
tome, when finished at the press (all except the tables to it) , as likewise the second
tome, formerly published, and of the first book, and third tome, (wherein he had
made some progress) were there burnt together with it ; not above 70 ofthem
being rescued from the fire, to the author's damage near 20007.;whereforehe did not
print his intended tables for so few copies of this tome, till God should enable him
to reprint it, especially since the pages of the reprinted volume, (by reason ofsome
additions) will vary from these already printed, so make the tables unsuitable
thereto."
By the way, if 70 copies of the first volume (by much the SCARCEST of the
three) were preserved, there is surely every reason to conclude that there are at
least 50perfect copies of Prynne's Records yet in existence ?
STATE PAP.] HELPS TO BRITISH HISTORY. 279
tions, which attend the enquiry into a legitimate copyof
Prynne's Records? Is he aware that there are, even yet,
library (mentioned more than once in these pages-see p. 27) was
first collected by Sir Francis Bernard, during the time of Cromwell.
The copy in question was given to the Earl of Anglesey, according
to the following autograph of the Donee.-" Anglesey, Aug. 1 , 1665,
Given me by my worthy friend the author." This first volume is
bound in blue morocco, with gilt leaves, having the royal arms on
the outside of the cover.
""
The second volume has the Earl's inscription, as to its being given
to him by the author in November, 1666. It is bound in calf, with
the leaves speckled, and has the royal arms on the outside. The
third volume bears this inscription, in the Earl's hand-writing :
Anglesey, July 28, 1670. 18. Mr. Prynne's owne corrected booke. "
The CORRECTIONS appear to be few and unimportant ; accordingto the
three places, or passages, to which I have referred by the insertion of
slips of paper. At pages 773, 775 the original or UNCUT MARGINS are
preserved ; from which the full width appears to be ten inches, and
(as at p. 775) the full length about fourteen five-eighths ; but the second volume measures only fourteen one- eighth, by nine one-eighth.
This third volume, which is dedicated to the Earl of Anglesey, Sir
Harbottle Grimston, &c. is in calf binding, without the royal arms.
Tom Osborne marked a copy, (which he chose to call large paper) in
his sheet catalogue of 1759, at 217.: and the second and third volumes,
alone, at 61. 6s. Amore recent catalogue (that of Mr. Triphook, of
1822) marks the second and third volumes at 127. 12s. with an offer
of 201. for the procuring of the first . Thus the collector will immediately perceive that the FIRST Volume of Prynne's Records is the great
rarity to possess. At public auctions, the prices for perfect copies
have a good deal varied : that of the late Right Hon. Denis Daly, in
1792, having " the frontispiece complete, gilt, broad border of gold, "
was sold for 80l. 15s. See the Bibliomania, p. 554. At the sale of
the Merly Library, in 1813, it reached its highest, and a most extravagant price : namely, 152l. The copy was handsomely bound in
russia, and I purchased it for the late Sir M. M. Sykes, Bart. who
was so anxious to possess it, that he authorised me to go as far as
200 guineas. There is a noble copy of it at Althorp, in the Bodleian
Library, in the library of Lincoln's Inn, and in that of the Royal
Institution. The Duke of Devonshire possesses a fine copy of these
280 HELPS TO BRITISH HISTORY. [RECORDS,
many who are sharpening their swords of controversy,
and contending for certain and certain desiderata, to
identify, what they are pleased to call, a complete copy
of these very desirable, but most exceedingly scarce,
volumes ? No matter : let it be roundly asserted,
and as roundly received, that there exists but one
paper of Prynne, and that the scarcity of the copies is
not so tremendously great as overheated Prynnites
have imagined. I have said every thing in the preceding note to stimulate the curious to the search,
and to comfort those in the possession, of this extraordinary production.
Of the works which, about the period of the Civil
Wars, detail important events, it is right to mention
that by THOMAS MAY ; whose History of the Long
Parliament, 1647, folio, is pronounced, by Lord
Chatham " to be a much honester and more instructive book of the same period of history, than Lord
Clarendon's. "*
Mr. Records, magnificently bound by C. Lewis, in blue morocco.
Grenville's beautiful copy (recently bound in red morocco,bythe same
skilful artist) came from the Duke of Grafton's library, where it was
purchased for 761. 13s. Mr. Dent is also the fortunate possessor of a
copy ; and another is in the Archiepiscopal Library at Lambeth.
At a recent sale of Sir Eardley Wilmot's books, at Mr. Evans's, a
copy attained the sum of 100 guineas. The reader may consult the
Bibliogr. Decameron , vol. iii . p . 400, and Mr. Clarke's Repertorium
Bibliographicum, p. 254, respecting the only copy that is known to
exist (at Stowe) of a portion of the Ivth VOLUME of these Records.
I imagine that many of the great private libraries especially old
family ones contain them and yet, that of Blickling, in Norfolk,
(so rich in Prynniana) has only the two latter volumes. More surprising still, the British Museum has it only in this imperfect state :
see the Catiaogue of that library, vol. v. sign. 3 E.
-
--
* Letters to his Nephew ; p. 59. 1809. But this opinion is much
qualified, if not a good deal neutralised, by the criticism of the noble
STATE PAP. ] HELPS TO BRITISH HISTORY.
281
Contemporaneously with Prynne and May, toiled
several very wonderful antiquaries and collectors in
the cause of BRITISH History. The names of Rushworth, Rymer, Spelman, Digges, D'Ewes, and Nalson,
adorned the latter half of the seventeenth century ;
and their publications, as briefly stated below, * evince
editor (Lord Grenville) of this instructive little volume. That authority remarks, that May's book " cannot by any means be consi→
dered as an impartial work. It is, however, well worthy of being
attentively read ; and the contemptuous character given of it by Lord
Clarendon, (Life, vol. i . p. 35) is as much below its real merit, as
Clarendon's own history is superior to it. " When the observations
at p. 131 , were written, respecting the great work of Clarendon, the
masterly estimate of the author's character, by the noble editor (see
p. xix. &c. ) of these Letters, had escaped my recollection . A good
copy of May's book is worth about 11. 6s.
* " RUSHWORTH and RYMER, to whose collections our history
stands so deeply indebted, must have strongly felt this literary ardour,
for they passed their lives in forming them : till Rymer, in the utmost
distress, was obliged to sell his books and his 50 volumes of MSS.
which he could not get printed ; and Rushworth died in the King's
Bench, of a broken heart ; many of his papers remain unpublished.
His ruling passion was amassing state papers, and he voluntarily
neglected great opportunities of acquiring a large fortune, to this entire devotion of his life." D'Israeli's Calamities of Authors ; vol. i .
p. 262. First, of Rushworth. The earliest editions of his Historical
Collections, from 1618 to 1648, including Lord Stratford's trial, appeared in 1659-82 : in 8 folio volumes. They were re- printed in 1692,
1701 and again, for the third and last time, in 1721 , in the same
number of volumes. This last is considered to be the best edition
and a good copy of it may be worth 81. 88. At Althorp, and in many
other private collections, it is on LARGE PAPER. Messrs. Lackington and Co. mark a copy of this kind at 31. 10s. I know not,
wherefore-but so it was-that, when at College, I used to devote
many a day, and frequently the greater part of a night, to the reading of RUSHWORTH. The account of the travels of Prince Charles
and the Duke of Buckingham in Spain, and of the intrigues of
;
282 HELPS TO BRITISH HISTORY. [ RECORDS,
the extent of their diligence, and the value of their
collections.
At the opening of the eighteenth century, we are
Gondomar, in promoting and thwarting, by turns, the intended
match of the former with the Infanta-is not a little amusing : while
the speeches of King James, to his parliament, paint the speaker to
the very life. One day or other the pages of Rushworth may be
made instrumental to the semi-fictions ofthe author of Waverley ; as
they are, so constantly and so abundantly, to the facts of Hume.
OfRYMER, who was a sort of philologist* as well as antiquary,
it will be only necessary to observe, that the first edition of his
Foedera was published at London, in 1704-35, in 20 folio volumes :
a second, and a much better, edition appeared in 1727, in the same
number of volumes : a third, and by much the best, as having a
complete and useful index to the work, was published at the Hague,
in a smaller type, in 1745, in 10 folio volumes ; and I observe a
"neat " copy of it marked at 12l. 12s. in the last catalogue of
Mr. Thorpe. A fourth, and doubtless the best edition (with additions and corrections) is now in progress, under the editorial care of
Dr. ADAM CLARKE and Mr. HOLBROOKE ; of which four parts are
already published. The printing of this costly and elaborate work is
greatly to the credit of the press of Messrs. Strahan and Spottiswood,
the now reigning royal printers. With Rymer, is usually procured
the " Acta Regia ; " being Rapin's extracts from that work, for the
Among the miscellaneous pursuits of Rymer, dramatic criticism seems to have
had peculiar charms for him. He wrote upon the Tragedies ofthe last Age, 1678,
1692, 8vo. and a Short View of Tragedy, 1693, 8vo. In the latter performance,
he ventured to " deal damnation" upon Shakspeare—and, in particular, criticised
his Othello. The judicious editor of the Retrospective Review, 1820 , 8vo. commences his work with a lively notice of these performances of Rymer. The very
first extract will afford a most amusing specimen of what may be found in this review. "The chief weight of Rymer's critical vengeance (says the editor) is wreaked
on Othello. After a slight sketch of the plot, he proceeds at once to speak ofthe
moral, which he seems to regard as of the first importance in tragedy. Rymer's
words are these : " Whatever rubs or difficulties may stick on the bark, the moral
use ofthis fable is instructive. First, this may be a caution to all maidens of quality, how, without their parents ' consent they run away with blackamoors. Secondly, this may be a warning to all good- natured wives, that they look well to
their linen. Thirdly, this may be a lesson to husbands, that before their jealousy
be tragical, the proofs may be mathematical !! "
STATE PAP.] HELPS TO BRITISH HISTORY. 283
struck with those labours-deviating from their respective professional pursuits-which have, in some
sort, consecrated the names of Burnet and Somers ;
the former, Bishop of Salisbury ; the latter, Lord
High Chancellor of England. It would be foreign to
my purpose to enumerate even a fifth part of the multifarious labours ofBurnet ; but his History ofhis own
Times, must, next to that of the Reformation, (al- *
History of England-in one folio volume, 1732, edited by Stephen
Whatley. A good copy may be worth 21. 2s. There is also an edition of it in 4 vols. 8vo.
The best edition of SPELMAN'S Concilia, &c. is that by Wilkins, in
1737, in four vol. folio, and worth about 41. 4s. The work itself is
beyond all praise. Sir DUDLEY DIGGES'S Compleat Ambassador, 1655,
folio, may be obtained for about 18s.; and with this work, the " Cabala sive Scrinia Sacra, " being letters of Illustrious Persons, &c. from
thereign ofHenry VIII. , to Charles, 1663, folio, may be procured at
about 128. Sir SIMONDS D'EWES' Journal of all the Parliaments during
the reign of Queen Elizabeth, &c . 1708, folio- best edition , with
frontispiece is worth about 17. 8s. It is a truly excellent performance.
A report was not long ago current, that some original MS. matter
had been discovered, as likely to form a valuable acquisition to it.
NALSON'S Impartial Collection of the Great Affairs of State, from
1639, to the death of Charles I. was published in 2 folio volumes, in
1682 ; of which a good copy is worth about a guinea and a half
BURNET'S History of his own Times was first published in 1724-
32, in 2 folio volumes, after the death of the author. Of this edition
there are copies on LARGE PAPER, somewhat common, and sufficiently
cheap. To enumerate the succeeding editions, till the recent one
edited bythe Rev. Dr. Routh, and published at Oxford, in 6 volumes,
8vo. were a fruitless and indeed unnecessary task ; since this last
edition is so improved, in additions and corrections, by the notes of
Lord Dartmouth, Lord Hardwicke, Speaker Onslow, * &c. ( to say
nothing ofthose of the learned Editor) that it must necessarily superIt is true, there are notes by DEAN SWIFT; but, in general, they are so trashy
284 HELPS TO BRITISH HISTORY. [ STATE PAP.
ready noticed) be considered as his most important
legacy to posterity : and whatever be its defects, it
cannot fail to be always esteemed as a popular and
instructive performance. The Collection of Tracts
relating to the Constitution of this country, of which
LORD SOMERS was the avowed Editor or Collector, *
sede every preceding impression. I must however inform the
curious that, of Mr. Evans's reprint of the original text, in 1809,
there were fifty copies struck off on LARGE PAPER, of an imperial
octavo size ; which are now become so scarce, that I know not when
a copy of this kind has occurred for purchase at a public sale. It is
found splendidly bound in russia, in the Althorp library, and another similar copy graces the shelves of that of the Right Hon. T.
Grenville. But the LARGE PAPER of the Oxford edition of 1823 will,
in a few years, be as scarce : since, of the fifty copies printed, one
half of that number were disposed of as presents : and, at this
moment, the very few purchasable copies in town cannot be procured under 121. 12s. The book is, in all respects, most creditably
and even handsomely published.
* I refer the diligent reader to Mr. Chalmers's account of this Collection, in his Biographical Dictionary, vol. xxviii. p. 214 : from which
it appears that the Pamphlets, reprinted in this Collection, were
selected by Lord Somers, and published by Cogan in 1748, in
sixteen 4to. volumes : about thirty-two years after the death of his
Lordship. They used to be the “ great guns " of all the old extensive private libraries ; and I have seen them in every possible form
or character of binding. Till the reprint, in 1809-16, in 13 4to.
volumes, under the editorship of Sir Walter Scott, they have been
known to bring upwards of sixty guineas. Now, they have sunk
and abusive , that I do fondly hope they will never be reprinted. They betray
the splenetic effusions of a thoroughly prejudiced, and in part, depraved mind.
Luckily, they are very short. Those of Lord Dartmouth are, occasionally, sufficiently caustic ; but they are curious and instructive ; while the observations of
Lord Hardwicke and Speaker Onslow evince the temper of a gentleman, and ...
almost the feelings of a friend. Why do we not oftener see the capital initial R.,
at the feet of the notes ? Dr. Routh is not less " VERSATISSIMUS " in the history
of Burnet's times, than in that of the Apostolical Fathers.
MISCELLAN. ] HELPS TO BRITISH HISTORY. 285
is, in truth, a splendid and lasting monument of the
judgment and patriotism of that great man. Voluminous as is this Collection, it was, till its recent republication, among the scarcest and highest priced
works of a well chosen library.
Not altogether foreign from the immediate object
of our pursuit, nor wholly dissimilar to the important
work just mentioned, is a publication, long and well
known under the title of the HARLEIAN MISCELLANY, * in eight quarto volumes. This work too, like
its predecessor, was, till the reprint of it, of excessive
rarity and price ; and as a considerable portion of it
may be deemed literary, I hardly know any one collection, or set of volumes, likely to be productive of
more varied entertainment-especially if the reader
have a philological turn. From my own experience,
I can assert that the pleasing and instructive variety
contained in it, has cheered the languor of sickness,
and enlivened the gloom of solitude . But let there
not be a moment's hesitation in securing the enlarged
reprint, under the editorial care of Mr. Park. The
comparatively very low in price ; and the reprint has, on this score,
much the advantage in having the pieces arranged chronologically
and according to their subject matter. The additional pieces are denoted by an asterisk . In no Collection, of the least historical pretence, let these Tracts of Lord Somers be found wanting. A neatly
bound copy is worth 211. There were six copies only printed on THICK PAPER.
* An historical account of this Miscellany will be found in the reprint presently to be mentioned. But it should be remembered, that
a collection of these Harleian pamphlets and tracts, relating to British History, was published in one vol. 4to. 1792 ; and is worth about 17. 10s.
† Of this re-publication, in ten handsome quarto vols. (and now
286 HELPS TO BRITISH HISTORY. [ STATE PAP.
eighteenth century was scarcely less fertile than
its predecessor, in the class of historical pioneers.
Then appeared the labours of Madox, Winwood,
Forbes, Thurloe, and the editors of the well known
Strafford, Burghley, Sydney, and Clarendon Papers ;
while the name of Hardwicke dignified the latter part
of the same century : and yet, nearer its close, the
taste and judgment of Mr. LODGE have shewn us,
how, in his " Illustrations of British History, "† during the sixteenth century, the Letters and Papers of
sinking gradually into a state of exhaustion, ) 500 copies were struck
off ; containing two volumes of ADDITIONAL matter, with a general
index to the whole. The reprint of the old tracts has also the advantage of exhibiting these tracts in the chronological order in which they
were composed. A well bound copy in calf is worth about two
guineas per volume. There is ONE copy, and one copy only, on
LARGE PAPER, of a folio form ; which is in the possession of Mr.
Joseph Harding, the projector of the reprint. This quarto reprint
was succeeded by another in 8vo. in 12 vols. : but without the additional matter. There are large paper copies of the 8vo. impression of Mr. Ion. With this work should also be found the Nugæ
Antiquæ, or a Collection of Historical Papers of HARRINGTON, in
1804, 8vo. 2 vols. edited by the same gentleman.
+ Let us begin with MADOX's Formulare Anglicanum, or a Collection of Ancient Charters and Instruments from the Norman Conquest
to the end ofthe reign of Henry VIII . : -published in 1702, folio: a
work of long established reputation, and worth about 21. 2s. , in
fine condition. To this may be added, by the same author, the
Firma Burgi ; an Historical Essay concerning the Cities, Towns,
and Boroughs of England, 1726, folio, of which I observe a fine
copy, on LARGE PAPER, in russia, marked at 6l. 6s. in the last catalogue of Messrs. Payne and Foss : on small paper, Mr. Laing values
it at 11. 10s. Madox wrote a History of the Exchequer ; of which the
best edition is that of 1769, 4to. 2 vols : but a new edition of this
work, or rather, an entirely new work on the same subject, is a
great desideratum with historical antiquaries. Next for SIR RALPH
MISCELLAN.] HELPS TO BRITISH HISTORY. 287
State may be made instrumental at once to amusement and instruction .
-
WINWOOD'S Memorials of State Affairs in the reigns of Elizabeth and
James, 1725, folio, three vols. : an exceedingly common book ; and
so moderate in price, on LARGE PAPER, that Messrs. Payne and Foss
value a copy of this description at 31. 3s. There is one of the best
portraits (of Winwood) prefixed to the work, which Vertue ever
engraved a little hard and metallic, but clear, bright, and apparently faithful exhibiting a countenance replete with shrewdness
and intelligence. FORBES's Letters and State Papers of Queen Elizabeth and her Ministers, 1740, folio, 2 vols. may be worth 17. 11s. 6d.
in good condition ; and I find a LARGE PAPER copy of it marked at
double this sum only in Mr. Laing's catalogue of 1822. THURLOE'S
Collection of State Papers from 1638 to 1660, with his Life by Dr.
Birch, 1742, in seven vols. folio, is perhaps among the commonest,
but most valuable of publications of this description. A good copy
is worth 41. 14s. 6d.—especially if it be in the fine, old calf, broad
border of gold, binding, with marbled leaves, as we sometimes find
them when obtained from old family libraries. At Althorp it is (as is
almost every thing else) on LARGE PAPER.
The EARL OF STRAFFORDE'S State Papers and Dispatches, were
collected and published by Knowler in 1739, folio, 2 vols. Those of
LORD BURGHLEY, from the reign of Henry VIII. to the year 1596,
were also published in 2 volumes ; one in 1740, by Haynes, and
the other in 1749, by Murdin. A good copy of either is worth about 11. 16s. LORD CLARENDON's State Papers, 1767, folio, 3 vols.
(see p. 210, ante) are worth about a guinea per volume : and very
little more on LARGE PAPER. † The SYDNEY FAMILY Collection of
+ I remember being mightily cheered, one morning, by the sight of a most
beautiful set of Thurloe, Burghley, Forbes, Clarendon, &c. bound out of sheets,
in white calf, by Charles Lewis, and standing on the shelves of Mr. Triphook.
Ere the shades of the evening of that same day had prevailed, these inviting
tomes had taken their departure ... for the well garnished library of ***. There
now stand-ready to march off, at the beck of the first gallant purchaser-in
the same sparkling attire , from their primitive condition …….the General Dictionary,
including Bayle, the Biographia Britannica, by Kippis and by Birch, with Welford's Memorials : the latter lots forming twenty- three folio volumes, the former
fifteen. Now, let the reader unite these thirty-eight tomes, in imagination ,
with the twenty- six folio volumes of the Universal Ancient and Modern History,
288 HELPS TO BRITISH HISTORY. [ACTS, &c.
Letters and Memorials of State, in the reign of Mary, Elizabeth, James,
and the two Charles's were collected and published by the well known
Arthur Collins in 1748, folio , 2 vols . : and are worth about 2l. 12s. 6d.
The Editor (says Mr. D'Israeli) " passed his life in rescuing these
wrecks of antiquity ; in giving authenticity to our history, or contributing fresh materials to it—but his midnight vigils were cheered by
no patronage, nor his labours valued, but when the eye that pored
on the mutilated MS. was for ever closed." Calamities of Authors,
vol. i. p. 262. The EARL OF HARDWICKE'S Miscellaneous State
Papers, from 1501 to 1726, were published by a descendant in
1778, 4to. 2 vols. of which a well bound copy is worth about
11. 16s. The Earl had himself printed, ( not published) Sir DUDLEY
CARLTON'S State Papers, in one 4to. volume, 1757 : which is worth
about 17. 18. Nor let MACPHERSON's State Papers, 1776, 4to. 2 vols.
be omitted ; for they contain matter of historical importance. A
good copy may be worth 17. 18s. The Illustrations of British History.
by Mr. LODGE, are now worth a guinea per volume, in fair calf binding. I remember them, twenty years ago, selling for one- third of
that sum the set complete. A more worthy feeling and a purer
patriotic taste now prevail, respecting these laudable efforts of
patient diligence and judicious selection. Such works are as the
pillars which serve at once to strengthen and adorn the edifices of
HISTORY and few countries can boast of such aids and embellishments as OUR OWN.
:
described to be in the same condition, at the same bookseller's, at page 131 ,
ante, and can he conceive a more comforting set of historical works, whether to
gladden the eye, or to instruct the understanding ?
[ 289 ]
HISTORY OF FRANCE.
As, on stepping across the Channel, we necessarily
land on the opposite coast of France, so, after enume-
´rating the chief historians, and Historical Helps of our
own country, I proceed to the enumeration of those of
our immediate Neighbours. It cannot however be denied, that, inimitable as those neighbours are in their
Memoirs, they are, comparatively with ourselves, deficient in the solid materials of HISTORY. Nor is it
agreed among themselves who is their best historian.
Mezerai and Daniel take the lead ; and Velly and
Anquetil are the chief recent historians ; but who will
presume to compare the text of the two latter with the
polished pages of Hume, or the instructive researches
ofHenry ?
In Collections, or Bodies ofHistory, the French are
rich and strong ; and very much our superiors. Duchesne was the Twysden, or rather Gale, of France ;
but when BOUQUET laid the foundation-stone, and
saw the rising walls, of his Recueil des Historiens des
Gaules, he planned a work, which places him, if we
except Muratori, quite at the head of all antiquarian
historians ; and it is gratifying (and to myself, in particular, most delightful) to add, that his labours are
continued with equal spirit and success, by the present venerable and truly learned Dom Brial : a
name, which ought to be dear, as it is highly honour-
* I look back upon the few hours, cut out of a busy sojourning in
Paris, devoted to this amiable man, as among the most pleasing of
those consumed in France. - See Tour, vol. ii . p. 423 .
U
290 HISTORY OF FRANCE.
able to France. I entreat both " the Young and the
Old," never to allow themselves to be satisfied until
they have the Historia Francorum Scriptores coetanei
(1636, folio, 5 volumes) of Duchesne ; or ratherprovided it make not too desperate an inroad on the
purse to possess themselves of the work of Bouquet,
now increased to 18 folio volumes-1738-1822.* I will
not insist upon both ; because I know that Bouquet
must be an imported work, and because huge folio
volumes are not imported without a weighty expense.
Bouquet is however common at Paris, and generally
bound in handsome mottled calf, with gilt on the
leaves ; and purchasable for about £21 .
If, however, neither the one nor the other suit the
taste or the purse of the Collector, let there be an
effort made to catch hold ofthe Collection Universelle
de Mémoires relatifs à l'histoire, 1785, 8vo. 72 volumes.
With these desultory volumes, the lover of ancient
history may lounge as he list : may take up one, and
gently or roughly lay down the other, without doing
injury to the tomes, or breaking materially the thread
of his narrative, -unless he take a stride from Charlemagne to St. Louis at one effort. And most particularly would I recommend the Tables chronologiques
de Diplomes, Chartres, &c. concernant l'histoire de
France by De Brequigny, 1769, 3 vols. folio. But the
recommendation of this latter supposes the Collector
to be something of a determined historical antiquary.
I come to particular histories of France. Passing
over the six folio volumes of Dupleix, Hist. Générale
de France, 1646-63, in 6 folio volumes-which is now
Consult p. 140, ante.
HISTORY OF FRANCE. 291
only read by the curious, and by those who love the
occasional satirical glances of the author, especially in
the history of Henry IV. -let me advise " the Young
Man," but at any rate " the Old Man"-to procure
the best edition of Mezerai, in 3 folio volumes, 1643 ,*
* Of MEZERAI, a few particulars may not be uninteresting to the
reader. He was bred to arms ; but an insatiable love of study converted his sword and carbine into printed books and manuscripts. Absorbed in this pursuit, he meditated his History of France, but an excess of application produced a dangerous disorder. Cardinal Richlieu,
who, midst all his intrigues and tergiversations, had the merit of projecting or patronising some of the most splendid publications inFrance,
patronized Mezerai. A donation of 500 crowns by him to the historian, stimulated Mezerai to redoubled exertions in the completion of
his history. He had, moreover, through the interests of the Cardinal,
a pension of 4000 livres, from the court ; and, on the death of Conrart, was appointed permanent Secretary to the French Academy. He
completed his history, which he began in his thirty- second year, and
afterwards worked at the Dictionary of the Academy. He died in
1683, in his 73d year.
Never was a man more singular, or fuller of bizarrerie, than Mezerai. His countenance, figure, and dress, were almost equally repulsive. He was once stopped as a vagabond, by the overseers of
the parish, and commanded to follow them. So far from being displeased at this adventure, it amused him, and he entered into the
joke exceedingly. " Gentlemen, (said he) I cannot well accompany
you on foot, but, as soon as they have put a wheel to my carriage,
I'll accompany you wherever you please." One of his oddities was,
to work by candle-light, even in the middle of the day, and in the
midst of the summer ; and he always attended his visitors to the
street- door, on parting-holding the lighted candle in his hand .
Strolling through the small village of Chapelle, in the way to St.
Denis, along with some of his friends, they all stopped at a publichouse, of which the master's name was Le Faucheur. Mezerai saw
in this man what none of his friends could perceive, and took a violent fancy to him. He used to go and spend whole days with him :
and, in his future habits of study, it was observable that a well
292 HISTORY OF FRANCE.
which contains many curious particulars ; but of
which the abridgement has nearly superseded the original impression. Mezerai loved truth, but would not
take much pains to discover it ; depending rather
upon the texts of his predecessors. Yet he had courage and integrity ; and gains in energy what he loses
in accuracy. There is, however, a coarse thread
which runs through all his narrative ; and those who
call him the Tacitus of France, seem to mistake
replenished bottle, as well as a lighted candle, was by the side of him.
He concluded his intimacy with his bacchanalian friend, by making
him his residuary legatee : to the great mortification of his relations.
Mezerai was extremely susceptible of cold. His friend Patru met
him one morning, when it was freezing very hard, and asked him,
" how he found himself? " " I must run away from you, immediately, (replied the historian) for I am at L." This enigmatical reply
was explained to Patru . Mezerai kept behind his arm chair, immediately on the setting in of winter, a dozen pair of stockings, ticketted from A to M. On getting out of bed he always consulted his
barometer and according to the greater or less degree of cold, put
on so many many more, or fewer, pair of stockings. Thus, he had
on eleven pair when he met his friend Patru.
Of his HISTORY, it should seem that the second edition, in 1683,
is more ample and correct ; but the text does not display so many
bold and hardy sentiments. The collector will necessarily consult
Brunet for the particulars of a perfect copy of the first edition, of
1643. The curious in fine books bite greedily at LARGE PAPER copies
ofthis first edition , especially when in a splendid state. The ne plus
ultra copy ofthis kind is supposed to be that in the collection of Mr.
Beckford-obtained at the sale of the Duke of Grafton's library, for
£105. See Clarke's Repertorium Bibliographicum, p. 223. Earl
Spencer and Mr. Grenville possess, each, a fine similar copy. The
small paper may be worth from about 67. 16s. 6d. to 10l. 10s. according to its condition and binding. Messrs. Bosange and Co. mark a
fine copy, in French calf binding, quite complete, at £12. The
second edition, although, strictly speaking, in an historical point of
viewperhaps more valuable, scarcely brings 31. 13s. 6d.
HISTORY OF FRANCE. 293
vulgarity for strength. His work may be thought, in
some measure, a reflex of the motley features of his
life.
After Mezerai, comes FATHER DANIEL ; whose history of France, in 17 quarto volumes, 1755, does not
seem, in the estimation of French critics, to entitle
its author to a very great share of praise. Daniel is
considered to be a very common-place historian, sufficiently sensible, but sufficiently plodding ; and better
versed in military than in civil affairs. His style is
without animation, and his sentiments without force.
His mistakes in the names of small towns and villages, and in the minor operations of armies, are perhaps venial ; but the false colours in which he paints
battles of great importance, admit of no apology.
Like his predecessor, his abridgment is more admired
than his unabbreviated text. This abridgment appeared in 14 volumes, in 12mo. Daniel Lombard
published a quarto volume in 1723, containing a comparison between these two historians.
Before I touch upon the performance of VELLY, it
may be as well briefly to notice, but with the warm
commendation which it merits, the Nouvel abrégé
Chronologique de l'histoire de France, by the President
HENAULT, which first appeared in 1768, 4to. 2 vols.
but of which there have been repeated reimpressions.
" There is no class (says M. Barbier) to whom this
work may not be useful ; the military, the civil, the
political, the magisterial, and the ecclesiastical," &c.
But that, which constitutes the chief charm of these
pages, is, the delineations of character, the reflections ,
and those notices-scattered with so much art- which
give a soul as it were, to a body, in other respects
292 HISTORY OF FRANCE.
dry and repulsive. * The joint productions of Velly,
VILLARET, and GARNIER, must now be noticed. Velly
died on the completion of the 8th volume ; † and
Villaret (whose love of reflexions would have made his
work almost interminable, ) followed his fate on the
completion of the reign of Louis XI. Garnier put the
finishing stroke to it in 1786, on carrying the work
down to the reign of Charles IX. The history was
published in 16 volumes in quarto, and 33 in duodecimo. In 1804, some Tables were published in one
volume 4to. and three volumes in duodecimo. No library indeed, which aspires to the character of being
properly furnished with French history, can be complete without the labours of Velly ; who, forsaking
the beaten path of detailing the mere personal histories of kings, struck out into a new road (in which he
was probably followed by our Henry) wherein the origin of parliaments, of laws, customs, manners, arts,
Bibl. d'un Homme de Gout, vol. iii . p . 376.
It must be remembered that the name of Velly appears to a
"Collection of Portraits of Illustrious Men, relating to the History of
France," in 4to. 8 volumes . And, while I am on the subject of
graphical illustration of French history, let the curious remember
David's work, in 5 quarto volumes, 1787, and Le Bas figures, with
explanations by Garnier, 1785, in large 4to. Montfaucon's Monarchie Françoise cannot fail to be in every well- stocked library ; but, if
ever such a work be republisqed in France, the engravings will,
doubtless, be executed with more attention to accuracy of detail .
Montfaucon's work, in 5 volumes folio, is usually found with the
Antiquités Expliqués, in 10 vols. by the same author. A good copy,
of both, on small paper, may be worth £35 . One of the finest copies
in England, on LARGE PAPER, is in the library of Mr. Dent ; but Mr.
Hayley's similar copy, bought by the Earl of Sefton for 1021. 18s.
was of a very extraordinary description.
HISTORY OF FRANCE. 295
and sciences, was explored. Garnier is thought to be
less brilliant, although he is less verbose than Villaret . * They were, on the whole, a most respectable
historical triumvirate.
To the foregoing I shall add the respectable name
of ANQUETIL ; who, at the command of Bonaparte,
and at the age of eighty, sat down to the composition of a History of France, which should treat
more particularly of national events, with an almost
entire exclusion of such as were connected with other
countries. The work appeared in 1805, in fifteen
duodecimo volumes ; and if the style of it be not the
most elegant, it is the most complete in itself, and the
most commodious to consult.
Of MEMOIRS, or partial Histories of France, the list
is endless. Nor can it be denied that many of these
Memoirs form by far the most interesting and instructive portions of French History. The names of
* FANTIN DESODOARDS continued the history of Velly and Villaret, &c. to the death of Louis XVI. in eighteen handsome 8vo.
volumes, 1819-worth about 71. 7s. These had previously appeared
in a duodecimo form, in twenty- six volumes, 1808 ; and sell for
about 47. 148. 6d. in boards. But MILLOT's elementary historical
works, relating to France, England, Germany, and the Troubadours,
&c. are worth possessing in part, or in whole ; and a complete collection of these works, handsomely printed by Didot, was published in
1820, 8vo. in twelve vols. 61.
It is necessary to make mention of a Collection Universelle de
Mémoires particuliers relatifs à l'Hist. de France-in sixty- seven vols .
8vo. to which add, Chronol. Septem. 3 vols.: Tables, 2 vols.: in
all, seventy- two vols. of which a fine copy, in French calf binding, marbled leaves, is marked at 45l. in the recent catalogue of
Messrs. Bosange and Co. A new edition of this work is in the
press.
-
296 HISTORY OF FRANCE.
Joinville, Godefroy, Gaillard, Lenglet du Fresnoy,
Castlenau,* Goulart, and Davila, (to mention nomore)
excite attention and respect towards every work to
which they are attached ; and, if we come to Histories
ofparticular periods, that of DE THOU in the " History
of His Own Times "† is alone entitled to enthusiastic
admiration. It is a work which can perish only with
the tongue in which it is written, and with the nation,
a portion of whose history it developes.
And thus much for the leading publications con-
* His work was published at Brussels, in 1731, in three folio
volumes, and is now quite common among us.
It is full of inany
curious particulars.
ተ " Historiarum sui Temporis Lib. cxxxviii. ab anno, " 1543-1607.
The best, and only estimable edition, is that of Buckley, in 1733,.
folio. This text was translated into French by I. B. Le Mascrier,
&c. in 1734, in sixteen 4to. volumes. The edition of Buckley merits
a little more notice. There is at Althorp a most magnificent copy of
it, in red morocco French binding, with gilt on the leaves, upon
LARGE PAPER ; from an inspection of which I gather the following
particulars. Among the contributors to the vignettes, or head and tailpieces, was Alexander Pope, the fruits of whose bounty appear at the
end of the first, third, fourth, and fifth volumes. At the end of
Buckley's Epistolary address to Dr. Mead, to whom the work is
dedicated with great propriety, the bard of Twickenham is designated as " Alexander Pope armiger, Anglicorum poetarum hujus
temporis facile princeps. " It appears further that Henry Woodfall
printed the first volume ; Samuel Richardson the second ; James Bettenham the third ; James Roberts the fourth ; and Thomas Wood
the fifth. I do not discover the name of any printer to the sixth and
seventh volumes. Prefixed to Thomas Carte's letter to Dr. Mead,
there is a vignette of the interior of a library. Does it represent that
of Dr. Mead? At the end of the seventh volume, there is a good
deal of pleasing, miscellaneous matter, relating to DE THOU, and to
he literature of the age : such as Letters, Memorials, Memoirs, and
Justificatory pieces. From this portion of the work, I availed my-
HISTORY OF FRANCE. 297
nected with the History of France. I say the leading
—or such as are more popular, and better known—
because it would be impracticable to embody, in the
pages of a work like the present, a twentieth part even
of essential works, connected with French history,
as an antiquary would consider them ; and because a
glance at Fontette's edition of Le Long's Dictionnaire
Historique de la France, in five folio volumes, 1768,
wholly devoted to a CATALOGUE of works appertaining to the History of France -under every possible
form and modification-will alone be sufficient to
justify the omission of a more particular account of
such works in the present publication . It may howself also of some curious particulars relating to De Thou's library,
which are mentioned in the Bibliographical Decameron, vol. ii .
p. 476-480. For a further notice of the " History, " consult the
Bibliomania, p. 486.
It may be worth adding, that Dr. Mead's own copy of the edition
of Buckley, which had been illustrated with prints collected by Gulstone, and was afterwards bound in green morocco by the latter, was
sold at the sale of Mr. Towneley's library, in 1814, (see no. 856 of
the catalogue) for 531. 11s . Mr. Payne has, at this moment, Count
Hoym's beautiful copy, on large paper) which had been Mr. Watson
Taylor's) marked at 211. Another thing may be worth briefly noticing. I learn, from the communication of a most intelligent correspondent, that there is only a very part al English translation of
De Thou's invaluable work. In the years 1729-1730, one Bernard
Wilson, Vicar of Newark and Prebendary of Lincoln, published his
version of only twenty- six books of De Thou's text, and is supposed
to have desisted from the remainder for want of sufficient encouragement. It may be as well to notice the best edition of the Storia delle
Guerre civili di Francia ofDAVILA ; namely, that of 1733, fol . 2 vols.
worth 21. 12s. 6d. Of course, the works of FROISSART, MonstreLET, and JOINVILLE, &c. ( all particularly noticed at page 160-5, ante)
must not fail to be especially procured and consulted.
298 HISTORY OF FRANCE.
ever be essential to mention, that six octavo volumes
of a History of France are already published, from
the popular pen of SISMONDI.
-
Of course, it is not my immediate province to touch
upon French TOPOGRAPHICAL works. These, however, form an essential feature of history, as much with
foreigners as with ourselves ; and the French may be
said to be rich in such a department. Among these,
I recommend to the attention of the curious reader
such as respect the triumphal entries or what we
call ROYAL PROGRESSES -of the French monarchs into
the several cities ; and especially those of Normandy.
One of the most pleasing, and at the same time most
splendid, works, would be that which should be connected with the triumphant entries of Francis I., and
the second, third, and fourth Henries ; and I do, in
particular, conjure my very excellent, and at the
same time, learned and competent friends, Messrs.
Le Prevost, De Lançon, Lair, Riaux, and others- to
set about such a work with all imaginable alacrity.
Nor let them doubt of its success. In such a performance, there will be a general rivalry for its support ; and our Norman neighbours will not be angry.
with us, if, in this respect, we give them more substantial encouragement than fair words.
Brief as may be the preceding Summary of the best
historical works relating to FRANCE, there are nevertheless few libraries which contain them all. And
yet, whoever casts even a cursory glance upon the
HISTORY OF FRANCE. 299
pages of Struvius, Buder, and Meusel, * will be surprised to find how exceedingly superficial such a summary is, and what infinite efforts are requisite for a
solid and complete body of Scriptores de Rebus Francogallicis. It may be doubted whether the Royal
Library at Paris contain one-third of the absolutely
requisite number.
* Bibliotheca Historica, 1783-1802 , 8vo. eleven vols. The second
of the sixth, and the whole of the seventh, eighth, ninth, with the
latter part of the tenth volume-each volume averaging 700 pagesare filled with an account of authors , and list of books, which relate
more or less to the HISTORY OF FRANCE ; necessarily including
public and private biographies, antiquities, &c. And then, when the
reader thinks of Fontette's Bibliothèque Historique de la France,
expanded into five folio volumes (1768-78) upon the basis of one
folio volume by Le Long in 1719-one is easily convinced of the difficulties even of collecting the knowledge which is abroad in the
world. Let it also be remembered that more than forty years have
already elapsed since the labours of Fontette, and about twenty since
those of Meuselius. What have not RECENT EVENTS called forth ?
The pamphlets relating to the French Revolution alone, would fill the
largest Diligence, in and out, which travels between Paris and Italy.
The late Marquis of Lansdowne possessed an almost incalculable
number of them. Mr. Perry was also rich in the same lore, as his
collection of them brought the sum of 64l. 1s . at the late sale of his
library.
The reign of Bonaparte produced marvellously splendid publications connected with the Empire over which he ruled ; and it has
often struck me, as at least an odd occurrence, that there should have
been no engraved series of his COINS and MEDALS. What would not
the pencil of Laguiche, and the burins of Girardet and Lignon have
effected with such a subject ?
[ 800 ]
HISTORY OF SPAIN.
In order to give even a tolerably complete outline
of the leading works connected with the History of
this interesting country, it would be requisite to seat
oneself in the library of Lord Holland, or of the Poet
Laureat, or of Mr. Heber, or ofthat of our Ambassador
at Paris ;* so richly furnished are these respective Collections in Spanish and Portuguese lore. There is so
much of a love of ancient Romance and Chivalry mixed
up with a study of this subject-the real or ideal heroes
of that country have so long engaged our attention and
perhaps won our hearts-add to which, the local character of either country, with its castles, mountains,
deep and lonely valleys, rushing torrents, and rapid
rivers that we take up its civil and military annals,
-
* Byafatality which I know not howto account for, but of which
the result chagrined me a good deal at the time of the publication , I
omitted to give an account of a few of the rarer books in the
library of Sir Charles Stuart, the British Ambassador, in my notice
of private libraries at Paris, in the Bibliographical Tour. Sir Charles
gave me free admission to his collection ; and my ms. notices are
rather full than scanty. But such an account would be now rendered superficial and unnecessary ; as I learn that his Excellency has
printed a Catalogue of his Library for private distribution only. His
Spanish and Portuguese books are at once numerous and choice.
And here I may be allowed to make something of an amende honorable, by the notice of a very beautiful, curious, and interesting
quarto volume, printed by Sir Charles at his own expense, from
the MSS. of Leonardus Chiensis, and Godefridus Langus, being an account of the Capture of Constantinople by Mahomet II. The only
copies of this work which I have seen in England, are those in the
libraries of the Duke of Bedford and Earl Spencer.
HISTORY OF SPAIN. 301
under the persuasion, or delusion, (if you will) of
finding them tinged with something of the romantic
cast of character of its ancient heroes, and of the
adventures in which they were engaged.
But this work is chiefly bibliographical : a truce,
therefore, to such a strain. Let us begin with the
mention of a publication, which will be found as a
sort of master key to unlock the treasures of many of
which it makes honourable mention. I mean the
Bibliotheca Hispana Vetus et Nova of ANTONIO, * in
four handsomely printed folio volumes ; and then
lay the foundation of the historical pile, by the first
printed labours of old RODERICUS SANCTIUS. Be it
however premised, that the immediately ensuing list
relates to works which exclusively belong to Spain.
And first, of Chronicles ; whether of the country at
• Morhoff considers the labours of ANTONIO as models of composition in their way. Polyhist. Literar. vol. i. p. 203-4 : edit. 1747.
Mém. de l'Inst. vol. i . 651. The first edition of the work above
mentioned was in 1672 and 1696 : the latter and best edition, in
1783-8, folio, 4 vols. But this work of Antonio, if it be valuable, is
unluckily rare and dear. A neat copy of it is marked at 127. 12s. in
the recent catalogues of Messrs . Payne and Foss, and Messrs. Arch. I
never saw but one copy of it upon LARGE PAPER ; and that one is magnificently bound in red morocco, in the library of Francis Freeling,
Esq. Tothe foregoing, let there be added the Bibliotheca Arabico-Hispana Escurialensis MICHAELIS CASIRI, Matrit. 1760, 2 vols.: a work
of equal interest and merit in its way ; and of which I observe avery
neat copy, with marble leaves, marked at 4l. 14s. 6d. in the catalogue
of Mr. Thorpe.
+ RODERICUS SANCTIUS. His Historia Hispanica was first published by Ulric Han, at Rome, in 4to. probably not long after the
death of the author, in 1470. A particular account of this edition
(which Meuselius says, " must be ranked among very rare books." )
will be found in the 5th or Supplemental volume of the Bibl. Spen-
302 HISTORY OF SPAIN.
large, or of a few of the more famous kings by whom
it was governed. * There is a very charm in that
ceriana, p. 254. The history has been considered " rather a work of
piety, than of elegance of composition," by Marian ; and will be
found reprinted in the collections of Biel and Schott : † of Meuselius's
Bibl. Historica, vol. vi. part i . p. 115, is sufficiently copious about
the author.
* "Notwithstanding the fortunate circumstances which combined
to revive the taste for historical composition in Spain, the noble
authors of the SPANISH CHRONICLES in very few instances rose above
the vulgar chronicle style. They faithfully adhered to the language
of the historical books of the bible. In nothing is their poetic talent
disclosed, except in a better choice of expression than is to be found
in the common chronicles, which were in general written by monks.
Spirited and adequate historical description was totally unknown to
them. They all wrote in nearly the same manner.
Facts were
heaped on facts, in long monotonous sentences, which uniformly commenced with the conjunction , and. Occasionally, indeed, the
writers of these chronicles seem to have made attempts to imitate the
ancient historians ; for at every favourable opportunity little speeches
are put into the mouths of the characters they record ; but these
speeches are given either in the language of Scripture or the law.
Thus wrote the illustrious Perez de Guzman, who was celebrated
among the poets of his age ; and thus wrote the grand Chancellor
of Castille, Pedro Lopez de Ayala, who is better known than the
former as anhistorian, in consequence of having compiled from ancient
chronicles a connected history of the kings of Castile of the fourteenth century. ‡-Bouterwek's History of Spanish and Portuguese
Literature, vol. i . p. 138, edit . 1823.
† Acopy of the “ Rerum Hispanicarum Scriptores Aliquot, of BELUS, 3 vols. in
1, Francof. 1579, folio , is in the library of the Royal Institution. Mr. Harris's
Cat. p. 330, where the writers are specified. SCHOTT's Hispania Illustrata, was
published at Francfort in 1603, in 4 folio volumes, and a copy may be worth 21. 12s. 6d
" One may become acquainted with these old Spanish chronicles with more
facility than formerly ; for during the last thirty years the greater part of them
have been re-printed . A folio edition of the copious chronicle of Peres de Guzman was printed at Valencia, in the year 1779 , with an elegance which proves the
HISTORY OF SPAIN. 303
word to the ear of a book-collector ; who, if he be of
the thorough bred English breed, neither eats, drinks,
I do not pretend to enumerate one-tenth part of these older,
rarer, and costlier Chronicles ; but as the curious " en font grand
cas," I must expatiate some little thereupon. One of the earliest is
that of " DEL REY D. PEDRO," by Lopez de Layala, at Seville, in
1493, folio ; exceedingly rare. Stepping over the threshold of the
XVth century, we notice the very rare Chronicle of the KING DON
RODRIGO, published at Seville, in 1511 , folio ; again at Valladolid in
1527 , folio ; concerning which I am at a loss to give one word of
advice as to price, or intrinsic worth, or curiosity ; only that a copy
of the second edition (but not of the first) was in the Harleian
Collection. Of the Chronicle of the CID, (so admirably made familiar to English readers by the translation of Mr. Southey, 1808, 4to.
and so ably criticised in the first number of the Quarterly Review) the
edition of 1593, printed at Burgos, was sold for 131. 5s. at the White
Knights sale : but Mr. Thorpe has more than once recently marked it
at 4l. 14s. 6d. Of King Pedro, &c. and Don Juan I. abovementioned,
the Pamplona edition of 1591 , folio, is marked at 41. 4s. by Mr.
Thorpe, and at 21. 2s. by Mr. Bohn : an edition of 1590, of JUAN
EL SEGUNDO, (appearing not in that of 1591 ) is valued at 31. 3s.
by the former bookseller : but see part iii. of his catalogue, nos.
1763-6. Then comes the Chronicle " DEL REY DON ALONZO EL
SABIO Y SANCHO EL BRAVO," printed at Valladolid, 1554 , folio ; with
bold and spirited wood- cuts, of which I observe a fine morocco, in
Lewisian binding, marked at 77. 17s. 6d. in part i . no. 6096. But
we must not forget a somewhat rarer volume in the chronicled
feats of ALONZO EL ONZENO, of which the Valladolid impression
of 1551 , folio, was sold for £20. at the sale of the White Knights
Library. A later edition, printed at Toledo in 1595 , folio, is marked
at 21. 2s. in Mr. Thorpe's catalogue, part i. n°. 149. But this
Chronicle, as well as most of the earlier ones, is reprinted in the
Madrid reimpression, published by Sancha, in 1787, 6 vols. 4to.
And then, what must be said of, or given for, the Chronicle of the
patriotic zeal of the editors : the chronicle of Ayala was printed at Madrid in the
same year. Literature is indebted for this revival of the fathers of Spanish History, to the efforts of the Historical Academy of Madrid. ”—Ibid.
304 HISTORY OF SPAIN.
nor sleeps, unless he have his " dear Chronicles " complete. The date of the oldest printed Chronicle of
Spain, is that of 1482, and the author was DIEGO DE VALERA. * This work was reprinted several times, in the
GREAT CAPTAIN GONZALO HERNANDEZ DE CORDOVA, printed in 1584,
folio, at Alcala? -and ofthe not less ferocious brandisher of the truncheon, ycleped DON PEDRO GONZALEZ DE MENDOZA, published by the
very erudite Doctor Pedro de Salazar, at Toledo, in 1625, folio, and
in his 79th year : ....
When spectacle on nose was seen,
And velvet cap of emerald green
Enclosed a scull as white as snow.
And silver beard did stream below,
As forked as Jove's bolt....
(Excerptiana.)
Mr. Thorpe fearlessly marks a fine copy of this picturesque- looking
old gentleman's labours at 31. 3s. It was in morocco binding in the
Harleian Library.
On retrospection, I am well nigh ashamed of this scanty list of
doughty Spanish Champions : well knowing what my friends ATTICUS, HONORIO, and PALMERIN possess, relating to the same heroes;
and how the modern PARUNZETTO is building a castle of granite, enclosing a chamber of porphry, scagliolo, and black marble, commixed,
in which to suspend the portraitures of these champions, drawnfrom
the life ; and to deposit choicest copies, UPON VELLUM, of the earliest
publications which record their mighty achievements. But, mypre.
sent work is any thing but a " BIBLOGRAPHICAL ROMANCE." Even
five weeks ago only, the same resistless Collector acquired a most exceedingly gorgeous and Grolierised copy, upon vellum, ofthat chivalrous tome which displays the coat-armoury of Spanish Knights, and
was put forth by Mendez Silva, under the title of " Poblacion General
de España, sus Trofeos, Blasones, y Conquistas Heroycas." Madrid, 1645,
folio of which I notice a good copy, valued at the unappalling sum
of 31. 3s. , in a certain catalogue recently put forth from Pall Mall.
* The first edition of Don Diego de Valera's " CRONICA DE
ESPAÑA, abridged by the command of Isabella, Queen of Castille, " was
published by Alonso del Puerto, in the black letter, in 1482, folio ; a
book of excessive scarcity. The second edition came out at Burgos,
HISTORY OF SPAIN. 305
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Then followed the labours ofCARBOnell, Beuter, DE OCAMPO, VASEUS and
GARIBAY, &c. with divers' others, * enriching the sixin 1487, folio ; the third at Toulouse, in 1489-of all which editions
Meuselius was ignorant. The fourth appeared at Saragossa, in 1493,
the earliest noticed by Meuselius : --the fifth was published at Salamanca, in 1495 ; the sixth at Seville, in 1527-both unknown to
Meuselius, It was republished at Seville in 1534, folio, of which
second edition Mr. Thorpe marks a copy at 4l. 4s.: a third impression came forth at the same place, in 1567 ; and precisely, in the
same year, at Saragossa, was published, what looks very much like
a similar work, under the title of " Chronica de Los Reyes Catholicos
Don Hernando y Donna Ysabel : a good copy of which very rare
book is marked at 97. 98. in the catalogue of Messrs. Payne and Foss.
Concerning Diego de Valera, ‡ Meuselius seems to regret that Antonio (Bibl. Vet. tom. ii . p. 206) has dwelt rather upon the life, than
the labours, of this ancient chronicler.
* P. M. CARBONELL : " Chroniques de Espanya, que tracta dels
nobles e envictissms Reyes de Gots y gestes de aquells y dels Contes de
Barcelona e Reyes de Aragō. Barcelona, 1536, 1547 ; each edition
in folio, and each (especially the first) very rare. Consult Antonio's
Bibl. Nova ; vol. ii . p. 175. BEUTER first came out with his " First.
Part oftheHistory of Valencia, treating ofthe Antiquities ofSpain, &c. "
at Valencia, 1538, folio. The author intended to add two other parts,
but he changed his mind, and remodelled the whole, much for the
better, in the Castilian language : calling it " Primera Parte de la
Cronica General de toda España : y especialmente del Reyno de Valencia," &c. En Valencia, 1550, folio : again, in the same place, in
1604. The second part appeared in 1556 : but the edition of 1563
should seem to be ideal. No copy of the labours of Carbonell and
Beuter appears in the Harleian catalogue : but I find there, (vol . ii.
nº. $481) " the twenty- two books of the Memorable Affairs of Spain,
by Lucio Marineo ; published at Alcala de Henares, in 1593, folio :
Meuselius mentions an earlier edition, at the same place, (Compluti)
in 1533. See his Bibl. Historica, vol. vi . part i . p. 118-120.
He put the finishing stroke to his Chronicle in the year 1481 , in the porch of
St. Mary, (at Cadiz ) when he had completed his 79th year.
X
306 HISTORY OF SPAIN.
teenth century with a great number of chronological
productions, which are now of the greatest difficulty
to find in an entire and sound state.
The name of FLORIAN DE OCAMPO is justly entitled to eminence.
This able and honest historian first edited the Chronicle of Spain,
compiled by MARTINI DE CORDOVA, which was published at Zamora
in 1541, folio, (a very rare book-a copy in the Harl. Libr. ) and
published his own "Five First Books of the General Chronicle of
Spain," at the same place, in 1544 ; and at Medina del Campo, in
1553 ; and again at Alcala, in 1578, each edition ( I believe) being
in 4 thin folio volumes. A copy of the last edition only was in the
Harleian Library. They are all scarce books, and written in the Spanish language. VASEUS wrote, in Latin, (" stilo haud ingrato") his
Chronicle ofthe Spanish Affairs, published at Cologne in 1567, 8vo.
enlarged in 1577, 8vo. -to be found in Bel's Collection. GARIBAY
published (in the Spanish language) " A Compendium, or Abridgement of the Chronicles and General History of the Kings of Spain ;"
at Antwerp, 1571, in four folio volumes ; a work of great intrinsic
worth, and rare occurrence in a perfect condition . It was republished,
in 4 folio volumes, at Barcelona, in 1628 ; and (says Meuselius)
whatever Antonio and Lenglet du Fresnoy may say to the contrary,
there never was a third edition of it. Meuselius's account (borrowed
from Antonio) of the plan, energies, judgment, and talents of Garibay, will make the " young man " sigh, and the " old man" weep,
if he do not speedily become master of one or the other of the editions here specified ; and yet I look in vain for a copy of Garibay in
many of our richest bibliopolistic catalogues.
But ere we turn our backs on CHRONICLES, let us bestow one
minute's attention on that ofthe " Coronica de los Moros de España,"
published at Valencia, in 1618, folio , of which JAYME BLEDA was the
author. The subject is full of frightful interest, and the author is
called by Meuselius " the torch and trumpet " by which the expulsion of the Moors was effected . Bleda was one of their most inveterate enemies. His book, nevertheless, contains some very curious
particulars ; which, (I suppose) together with its rarity, caused Col.
Stanley's copy of it " remarkably fine, splendidly bound in russia,
by R. Payne, " to produce the sum of 71. 10s. Messrs. Payne and Foss
HISTORY OF SPAIN. 307
Towards the middle of the sixteenth century, appeared a few of the multifarious productions of the
most accomplished, most courageous, but most tyrannical nobleman of the age. It is of DIEGO HURTADO DE
MENDOZA, author of the famous Life of Lazarillo de
Tormes,* that I would thus be understood to speak.
He was no professed chronicler or historian ; but his
account of the War ofGrenada, of which he was
almost an eyewitness, is considered, with great justice,
to be among the most valuable productions of that
period whether for purity of style, or importance of
matter.
But towards the end of the same century, appeared
the solidlyvaluable volume of MARIANA ; a name, which
mark a fine copy of it in russia, with joints, at 4l. 4s. Was not this
book translated into English by Taubman, in 1687, 8vo. ? And let
us not forget, that a 4to. volume, descriptive of the expulsion of the
Moors from Spain, was published at Pampeluna, in 1613, by Marco
de Guadalajara : See Bibl. Harl. vol. ii . nº. 8511 .
* Bouterwek (History of Spanish and Portuguese Literature, vol. i.
p. 205, edit. 1823) tells us, that the only editions of the " Vida de
Lazarillo de Tormes, " now in circulation, are printed after that published at Saragossa, in the year 1652, with De Luna's corrections
and continuations. De Luna added a second part to the story ; for
Mendoza, in his maturer years, never felt inclined to finish the comic
work which he had commenced in his youth. Was Bouterwek aware
that the FIRST EDITION of this brilliant little performance, by Mendoza, was published at Burgos, in 1554, 12mo. : —and that a certain
Noble Duke, at the sale of the library of a certain gallant Colonel,
gave thirty guineas for a copy of this little black letter bijou ?
↑ Guerra de Grenada, &c. Escrividla D. Diego Hurtado de Mendoza,
Valencia, 1776, 4to. Best edition : containing the best life of its extraordinary, but bloody-minded author. Gesner, in his Pandects, (if
my memory do not deceive me) has a dedication to him ; and so has
theyounger Aldus, in one of his portions of the Philosophical Works
308 HISTORY OF SPAIN.
reflects lustre on Spanish history.
"
The labours of
Mariana have been the foundation of those of many
subsequent publications-abridged or amplified, more
or less -under the name ofthe same historian ; and at
this day, I believe, those who possess what is called
the last and best edition of Mariana, possess a work
which is daily rising in estimation, price, and rarity.*
of Cicero. The preceding work obtained for the author the name of
the SPANISH SALLUST.
•MARIANA is the Father of SPANISH HISTORY-properly so called.
His work first appeared in the Latin language at Toledo, in 1592,
folio. According to the Harleian Catalogue, vol. ii . n° . S4S9, this
edition contained only twenty books, and the remaining ten books
were published at Franckfort in 1606. Yet Brunet says, some copies
have the date of 1592, with five of these additional books ; and other
copies a fresh title page, dated 1595, with the same five additional
books. And let the careful collector beware, that this EDIT. PRIN.
of Mariana ( 1592) is not only the rarest, but the most correct and
valuable, of all the impressions of the author, especially in the Latin
tongue. It was translated by the AUTHOR HIMSELF, with additions
and corrections, into the Spanish language, and published at Toledo, in
2 folio volumes, in 1601.† Of this edition, a copy, in red morocco, was
sold for 41. 10s. at the sale of the White Knights Library. Before the
year 1700, there were at least six reimpressions of this Spanish version;
of which the third reimpression, at Madrid, in 1623, folio, 2 vols. was
the last published during the life of the author. * In the year 1699,
Captain John Stevens translated this version into our language, in
folio, and a copy of it may be seen in the library ofthe Royal Institution. Messrs. Payne and Foss mark a copy of this translation, on
LARGE PAPER, at 21. 12s. 6d,
+ See an excellent account of the merits of Mariana's History in Bouterwek's
History ofSpanish and Portuguese Literature ; vol. i. p. 455 , &c. 1823. 8vo. 2 vols.
Mariana, after the example of Cardinal Bembo, in his History of Venice, wrote his
history first in Latin, and afterwards translated it into Spanish. Of the Latin edition,
a very elegant folio was published in 1738. The Spanish names of persons and
places are, however, latinized in a manner so artificial , as to render them no less
HISTORY OF SPAIN. 309
The very opening of the eighteenth century witnessed the labours of I. DE FERRERAS. His history
occupies sixteen quarto volumes ; but where one will
read this historian, one hundred will consult Mariana.
A yet more elaborate production appeared in the Historia de España of MASDEU, in 1783, in 20 vol. 4to. :
and this, I believe, is the last historical work* which
I pass by all reimpressions of the Spanish text, till I come to that
of 1780, published by Ibarra, at Madrid, in two folio volumes, with
the tables of Summaris. A more beautiful book has rarely issued
from the Spanish press and it is worthy, in all respects, of the reputation ofIbarra. There is a delicious copy of it at Althorp, upon fine
OF LARGE PAPER, bound in French red morocco. But by far the best
and most important edition of Mariana, is that with the "Critical Notes
and Chronological Tables " of NOGUERA Y RAMON, published by
patriotic subscription at Valencia, in 1783-1796, in 9 thin folio
volumes. Complete sets of this edition are difficult to find. The
magnificent set of Colonel Stanley, " bound in seven volumes ; in
black morocco, [wherefore black ?] by Walther, " was purchased by
Mr. Drummond, for £22. A perfect set is at Althorp. An edition,
most ably continued by I. M. Miniana, was published at Madrid in
1794, in 10 vols. 8vo. and may be had for a reasonable sum, according to the binding . See Meusel. Bibl. Hist. vol . vi . p. 137.
* I will briefly dispatch the above authors.
ras was published under the title of " Synopsis Historica Chronologica
de España, at Madrid, in 1700-1732, in 16 quarto volumes. This
is a work of more labour than intrinsic worth. In the same space
the author might have written a complete history of the Spanish
nation. De Ferreras was sorely beset by antagonists of various descriptions, during its progress ; but he defended himself with one of
Homer's sevenfold shields, and bade them defiance ; scribbling on,
doggedly and undauntedly, to the very last. His toil was his hapThe work of Ferreunintelligible than the names in Cardinal Bembo's history ... The diction of Mariana is perfectly faultless, his descriptions picturesque, without poetic ornament :
and his narrative style, may, on the whole, be accounted a model. " p. 457.
310 HISTORY OF SPAIN.
has been published on the Continent, exclusively relating to Spanish history. In our own country, in
the present century, we boast of the MOST SPLENDID
work, of any period, connected with that interesting
kingdom ; I mean, Mr. MURPHY's magnificent folio
volume, published in 1816, and devoted to the Antiquities ofthe Arabs in Spain : a work, beyond all price, if
the brilliancy and beauty of the plates be considered . *
The author published the History of the Mahometan
piness. The five latter volumes contain some valuable matter, from
an anonymous but erudite author.
Of MASDEU's " Historia critica de España, y de la cultura española," published at Madrid, in 1783-1797, in 20 vols. 4to. I am
not able to pronounce one syllable in commendation. On the contrary, Meuselius dismisses it-from what he had seen of it—in no
very courteous manner : Bibl. Hist. vol. vi. part i. p. 162 : and Brunet
merely gives the title.
* Too much can hardly be said in commendation of this extraordinary and most exquisite work ; which contains 100 engravings
(chiefly by Fittler and Landseer) illustrative of the most remarkable
remains of architecture, sculpture, painting, mosaics, &c. of the
Arabians in the Peninsula. The author devoted the best part of
an active life to researches in Spain and Portugal, connected with
the antiquities of either country ; but he did not live to witness the
publication of this his MOST MAGNIFICENT labour. At the present
moment, I hardly know any thing of the kind to compare with it.
The interiors, described both by the pencil and pen, have the effect
of enchantment. A delicacy, brilliancy, singularity, and even dazzling richness, are the characteristics of most of them. What has
been before said (Bibliogr. Decameron, vol . ii. p. 391 , ) may be repeated, in regard to this wonderful volume. The most melancholy
part of the history attached to it, is, the prodigious diminution ofthe
original price. It was published at 40 guineas. It may now be procured
for less than one half of that sum : but its merits continue to be of the
samehigh cast of character. Howmuch one of these interiors eclipses
the mongrel intermixture of gothic and semi-gothic, of all ages,
which we have been lately accustomed to behold in a certain edifice-
HISTORY OF SPAIN. 311
Empire in Spain, 1816, 4to. The History of the
Moors in Spain, by WILLIAM BOURKE, in 1811 , 4to.
may not be considered an inappropriate, or unprofitable work while the once highly praised, and yet
not forgotten, Travels ofWilliam Townsend in Spain,
should always be considered as of sterling and unchangeable value.
The name of SPAIN has been indeed of late years
familiarised to Englishmen, in a manner not to be
easily eradicated from the annals of either country ;
while that ofthe illustrious CHIEFTAIN, by whose unparalleled military talents the country in question has
been made the scene of so many splendid victories over
the first Marshals of the age .... will necessarily furnish hints, and lead to the collection of materials,
from which the more RECENT history of Spain cannot
fail to be rendered of the greatest possible interest to
posterity. Mr. Southey's History of the Peninsular
War has gallantly led the way to the completion of
a series of works, which may prove nearly as interesting to other countries as to our own.
built on the plan of an abbey, but, in fact, intended for the exclusive
domestic residence of a Gentleman and his Dwarf?
And here, ere we take leave of JAMES CAVANAH MURPHY, (a name,
united with all tender and all honourable reminiscences ! ) let me
notice his " Plans, Elevations, Sections, and Views of the Church of
Batalha, in the province of Estramadura, in Portugal ;" with the
history and description of the building, by F. L. de Souza : to which
is prefixed an Introductory Discourse upon the principles of Gothic
architecture. There are twenty-seven plates. Add to this, the same
author's " Travels in Portugal, in the years 1789-1790." Lond.
1795, 4to. , with twenty-four plates. These latter publications are
obtained at very reasonable prices, and should be in the libraries of
all men of cultivated taste, with well garnished purses.
* A SERIES OF WORKS, illustrated with engravings, (somewhat
312 HISTORY OF SPAIN.
:
after the plan of the Campaigns of Marlboro' and Eugene, ) devoted
to the PENINSULAR WAR, would indeed, if properly conducted and
executed, be productive of equally delightful and beneficial results.
Butthe expense must ever (I fear) deter from the undertaking ; unless
our government (as France did, in the time of Napoleon) in part
patronise it. I have seen sketches, and finished drawings, by a
Young Officer-himself a participator in every scene delineatedwhich would form admirable illustrations of Mr. Southey's pages :
if indeed they could be brought within the compass of a quarto
volume. The only work of any importance (which I have seen)
connected with this subject, and illustrated by plates, or rather
etchings, is that of CAPTAIN BATTY, under the title of " Campaign of
the Left Wing of the Allied Army, in the Western Pyrenees, and South
of France, in the years 1810-14." Lond. 1823 , 4to. I am, of
course, incompetent to pronounce judgment on the intrinsic value of
a work of this kind ; although it had such charms for me, that I
borrowed " an hour or twain" of the night, to add to the day—in
order to read it through at one sitting and I fancied that the Duke
of Wellington planned and conducted his marches, sieges, and battles,
with the same facility and success as Phillidor played his most brilliant
games of chess. And through what a ROMANTIC country was this
magnificent campaign conducted, and brought to a brilliant close ! ?
The views of Captain Batty are well chosen ; and although the
necessary effect of etchings (as in many of the best prints of Rembrandt) gives us too dense a shadow in some places, and too flickering a light in others, yet, on the whole, these plates are extremely
gratifying, and in some instances master-like. But in the account of
PICTURESQUE PUBLICATIONS relating to Spain, let me not omit to
mention -with the warmth of commendation which they merit-the
Views in Spain, drawn upon stone, by Messrs. Westall, Harding,
and Hullmandel, from Sketches made on the spot by EDWARD
HAWKE LOCKER, Esq. in the autumn of 1813- now in the course of
publication, at 16s. a number. Lovelier specimens of the lithographic art (against which, bythe by, few entertain stronger objections
than myself) or more romantic scenery, connected with great military events, have been rarely submitted to the approving voice of the
public. I strongly recommend these elegant numbers to all-interested in the recent history of Spain.
-
[ 313 ]
-
HISTORY OF PORTUGAL.
Brief as may be the preceding account respecting
the best Histories of Spain, I fear both the youthful
and elderly Collector will be disposed to censure the
more palpable brevity of that respecting PORTUGAL.
My object, in both instances, must be, exclusively,
utility ; and although a fuller detail might be yet more
useful it would be incompatible with the object
of this work to admit it . In regard to Portugal, therefore, after requesting my " young " reader to whet
his appetite for the keener relish of the belles-lettres
luxuries of both Spain and Portugal, by the perusal of
Mr. Southey's Travels* in these countries, I must exhort him to procure, with all imaginable earnestness,
anxiety, and delight-and with a fearless disregard of
its expense -the Bibliotheca Lusitana Historica, Critica, e Chronologica of BARBOSA MACHADO :† a work,
* " Letters written during a short residence in Spain and Portugal,
with some account of Spanish and Portuguese Poetry, " 1797, 8vo. A
fair copy may be worth 10s. 6d. Who does not wish such a work to
be enlarged, by a revisitation of the same countries, by the same
traveller?
† The very mention of this invaluable work throws ONE of my
most intimate bibliographical friends, and knight- companions of the
Roxburghe Round Table, into inconceivable ecstacies : the more so,
peradventure, because his copy of it (containing the fourth volume)
is the only complete copy in this country. Lord Holland, Mr.
Southey, and Mr. Frere, are not, I believe, blessed quite to this
extent of book- felicity. The work in question (in vain looked for
among the displays of auction rooms, and in the repertories of booksellers for which Mr. Bohn rummaged Bavaria, and Mr. John -
314 HISTORY OF PORTUGAL.
•
beyond all competition and beyond all praise ; but,
till of late years-and even perhaps at this present
moment of the most extreme difficulty of acquisisition . This is the great Oracle for him to consult ;
especially if he be deeply versed in the Portuguese
language.
Secondly, as to HISTORIES, I shall mention only
three ; but the first of these, (of which the foundation
was laid by DE BRITO) complete in all its parts, and
in good preservation, will make the reader thoroughly
versed in the history of Portugal, down to the year
1423. From that period, the labours of La Clede
and of Antonii Caietani de Sousa will carry his
acquaintance with it down to the middle of the eighteenth century. Hence, to the present times, the
helps are neither few nor uncommon. To begin with
Bernardo de BRITO. His portion of the work about
to be described, comprehends only two parts, or volumes ; of which the first bears the title of " Monarchia Lusitana composta por Frey Bernardo de Brito,
&c. the first part appeared in 1597, the second in
1609. The second and third parts were compiled and
published by ANTONIO BRANDAO, in 1632 : the fifth
and sixth parts by FRANCISCO BRANDAO, in 1650-
Payne, Italy, to no purpose) has the general title of " Bibliotheca Lusitania Historica, Critica, e Chronologica. Na qual se comprehende
a Noticia dos Authores Portuguezes, e das Obras, que compuseraō
desde o tempo da promulgaçao da Ley da Graça até o tempo prezente, &c. por DEOGO BARBOSA MACHADO. Lisboa ; 1741-1759,
folio. The seven indexes in the fourth volume are the ne plus ultra of
diligence, exactness, and general utility. Meuselius, Bibl. Hist. vol. v.
parti. p: 104, is at once copious and encomiastic respecting this
work, Brunet calls it " rare in France. " Rare indeed it is- not
in France only, but in England, in Germany, and Portugal itself.
HISTORY OF PORTUGAL. 315
1672 : the seventh, by RAPHAEL DE IESUS, in 1683 :
the eighth part appeared in 1729, with many improve .
ments and corrections of the seventh part, by EMANUEL DOS SANTOS the most learned and competent
of all the successors of Bernardo de Brito. * Emanuel
also composed a ninth and tenth part ; neither of
• I will here briefly give an account of this valuable performance.
BERNARDO DE BRITO was a Cistercian monk. The first part of his
work (above entitled ) was printed in 1597, in the Monastery of Alcobaça, a town in the province of Estramadura, and famous for the
sepulture ofthe ancient Kings of Portugal. + Some copies of this first
volume have the title of Geografia Antigua da Lusitania, with a different pagination, and the same date, with the word Alcobaça, only.
The second part or volume was published at Lisbon, in 1609 ; and
both parts were reprinted there in 1690, folio. The third and fourth
volumes were compiled by ANTONIO BRANDAO, also a Cistercian
monk ; and were printed at Lisbon in 1632, folio, 2 vols. This
brings the history down to the year 1279, only. FRANCISCO BRANDAO contributed the fifth and sixth parts or volumes, published at
Lisbon in 1672. This brings the history down to 1325. The
seventh part was composed by RAPHAEL DE IESUS, a Benedictine
monk, at Lisbon, in 1683. The same writer (who died in 1693) also
compiled the eighth and ninth parts, but they were deemed unworthy of publication ; and indeed the seventh part, published by
him, is the weakest portion of the whole performance. Superior to
all his predecessors, with the exception of Bernardo de Brito, was
the continuator EMANUEL DOS SANTOS, who compiled the eighth,
ninth, and tenth parts, which bring the history down to the year
1423, but of which, it should seem, only the eighth part was published, under the title of Monarchia Lusitania, Parte VIII. Lisboa,
1729, folio. Thus the ninth and tenth parts are yet desiderated in
print. The work is pronounced by G. Ernesti de Franckenau to be
" monumentum ære perennius." A complete copy of it, as far as it
goes, may be worth 127. 12s.
+The history of this celebrated monastery was published at Coimbra, 1710,
folio, parti. : - the second part at the same place in 1724. The first, under the
title of Alcobaça Ilustrada : the second, of Alcobaça Vindicada.
316 HISTORY OF PORTUGAL.
which, it should seem, has been committed to the
press. At least, Meuselius, in his Supplement (Vol.
xi. p. 78) adds nothing to his previous intelligence
on this subject. The same Meuselius has marshalled
the authorities of Antonio, Schmauss, Barbosa Machado, Freytag, and Clement-to say nothing of that
of Gerhard Ernesti de Franckenau in the warmest
commendation of this elaborate performance.
DE LA CLEDE's Histoire Générale de Portugal was
published in two volumes quarto, and in eight volumes Svo. , 1735. As this work appears to have met
with considerable approbation in the Nova Acta Erudit. An. 1744 (from which Meuselius borrows his criticism ) and as the price of it is sufficiently reasonable.
I recommend its purchase to all classes and all ages
of readers. * The work of ANTONII CAIETANI De
SOUSA is of a more important cast ; comprehending a
greater quantity ofmatter, displaying a greater range of
research, and evincing a more intimate acquaintance
with the laws, customs, antiquities, and earlier records
of the country. It appeared in twelve large quarto
volumes, at Lisbon 1735-47, under the title of " Historia Genealogica da Casa Real Portugueza desde a
sua origem até o prezente com as Familias illustres,"
&c. to which work was added a very extraordinary
supplement, by the same author-called " Provas
da Historia genealogica da Casa Real Portugueza,
tiradas dos Instrumentos dos Archivos do Torrè do
Tombo, " &c.; published at Lisbon, in 1739, in six
quarto volumes. Barbosa Machado (vol. i . p . 228 ;
* This useful work was translated into the Portuguese language,
and published, with notes, at Lisbon, in 1797, in sixteen octavo
volumes.
HISTORY OF PORTUGAL. 317
vol. iv. p. 28) is full of commendation upon this very
admirable genealogical and diplomatic performance.
Lastly, be who wants to dig deeper into Portuguese
History, by exploring inedited or unpublished materials, will do well to possess the Colleçao de livros
ineditos de historia Portugueza, publicados por lose
CORREA DE SERRA, at Lisbon, in 1790, in three folio
volumes. And thus much for the histories of Portugal.
[ 318 ]
HISTORY OF ITALY.
Mr. D'Israeli, in his New Series of Curiosities of
Literature, * has devoted a short but animated chapter
to THE ITALIAN HISTORIANS. It is clear that Machiavel is a mighty favourite with him ; and his attachment to that historian seems, in some measure, to
increase, in proportion to the feeling of his having
been unjustly " calumniated :" - " the great, ( says he)
may we add, the calumniated, Machiavel?" Be it so.
My present purpose is merely to give almost the
briefest possible list of general Histories of Italy ;
leaving the chronicles of its numerous provinces,
cities, towns, villages, and parishes, to be sought after
by the diligent Collector more exclusively attached to
such a pursuit. In our own country, the example of
Sir Richard Colt Hoare, Bart. has taught us what
may be done by individual energy and perseverance. †
*Vol. ii. p. 237. " It is remarkable (says the above authority)
that the country, which has long lost its political independence, may
be considered as the true parent of modern history. The greater
part of their historians have abstained from the applause of their
contemporaries, while they have not the less elaborately composed
their posthumous folios, consecrated solely to truth and posterity. "
† The catalogue of his own collection of Italian Historians and
Topographers was privately printed in 1812 ; and afforded an extraordinary proof of the diligence and taste of the Collector ; especially
when we consider that the researches of that same Collector have
been almost exclusively confined to BRITISH ANTIQUITIES So as
to make him a very bibliographical DRUID. Sir Richard's larger
library, confined almost wholly to British Topography and History,
(and of which TWENTY- FIVE copies only of a private catalogue were
HISTORY OF ITALY. 319
As heretofore, I shall begin with COLLECTIONS ; and,
at the head of all, and of every thing of a similar description, stand the Scriptores Rerum Italicarum, collected by the immortal MURATORI *; a name, which
printed) is just the perfect specimen of what an English country
gentleman, devoted to such pursuits, should strive with all his might
and main to possess. I have passed more than ONE pleasing and
profitable hour in the splendid room which contains the library in
question.
* If ever the taste and perseverance of modern times should give
us, in one compressed and full- sized octavo volume, a good literary
life of MURATORI, † it could not fail to be generally instructive. At
once the friend as well as the protegé of Charles Borromeo -and
equally the friend and correspondent of Magliabecchi, Mabillon,
Papebroch, Maffei, and Quirini-what would not a life of nearly
fourscore, (as was Muratori's) devoted to such society, in the intervals of stupendous labour, put us in the possession of if its details were faithfully and judiciously developed ?! But my object
must be strictly bibliographical. Although Muratori lived to publish
FORTY-SIX FOLIO VOLUMES, thirty-four quartos, and thirteen octavos,
I have here only to notice those which are connected with his History and Antiquities of Italy. The Rerum Italicarum Scriptores were
-
+"The name of MURATORI will be for ever connected with the literature ofhis
country. Above sixty years of his peaceable life were consumed in the exercises
of study and devotion : his numerous writings on the subjects of history, antiquities, religion, morals, and criticism, are impressed with sense and knowledge, with
moderation and candour. He moved in the narrow circle of an Italian priest ;
but a desire of freedom, a ray of philosophic light sometimes breaks through his
own prejudices and those of his readers ...... The more strenuous labours of
his life were devoted to the general and particular history of Italy. His Antiquities, both in the vulgar and the Latin tongue, exhibit a curious picture of the laws
and manners of the middle age ; and a correct text is justified by a copious Appendix of authentic documents. His Annals are a faithful abstract of the twentyeight folio volumes of original historians ; and whatsoever faults may be noticed
in this great collection, our censure is disarmed by the remark, that it was under.
taken and finished by a SINGLE MAN. Muratori will not aspire to the fame ofhistorical genius : his modesty may be content with the solid, though humble praise,
of an impartial critic and indefatigable compiler." GIBBON : Miscellaneous Works,
vol. iii. p. 365-7. Edit. 1814 .
320 HISTORY OF ITALY.
might have been introduced with the happiest possible effect in the recent publication just alluded to.
published in 1723-1751 in twenty-five folio volumes, usually bound
in twenty- eight or twenty-nine : the three first volumes are frequently bound in two parts, each ; the twenty-fourth volume has an
Appendix : the twenty- fifth volume does not always accompany the
set. Let this be well attended to. But with Muratori must be procured, what is called the supplement or continuation of TARTINI,
Florent. 1748-70 : two vols. folio : and the Accessions of MITTARELLI
published in 1771, in one folio volume, at Venice ; and then . . . "to
REST .. in peace ! "
99 -
Aword or two, now, about the pecuniary value of these wonderful
tomes. Until the peace of 1814-15, there was no procuring them,
scarcely even for " money for " love, " in such cases, is entirely
out of the question. Yet, I believe it was in the time of war, when
my friend Mr. Heber achieved, of all fortunate achievements the
most fortunate, that of purchasing a set of Muratori (alone) for—
guess, gentle reader? —no, thou canst NOT guess -for, THREE POUNDS
EIGHTEEN SHILLINGS and SIXPENCE !!! I might ask, who was in the
room besides Mr. Heber (Mr. Leigh was in the chair) when the
hammer fell upon this lot? Of course, NOBODY. There seems to
be no copy of Muratori in the Roxburghe or White Knights Collection ; but in that of Mr. Willet (the Merly Library) a copy in twentyseven volumes, in vellum binding, was sold for 391. 18s.; and, as far
back as the Pinelli sale, a copy on LARGE PAPER was sold for 36l.
Recently, the Scriptores of Muratori have appeared in the catalogues
of our booksellers . Mr. Bohn marks a copy in twenty-nine volumes,
in vellum binding, at 351. and Mr. Thorpe, with the addition of
Tartini, inthirty- one volumes, " uniform and complete" at the same
sum. My friend Mr. Petrie imported his copy, in similar attire, for
pretty nearly the same sum. I havejust before said, that a studious
Collector in the possession of the Scriptores of Muratori, with the
To their immortal honour, several noblemen generously contributed towards
the expenses of this work. Not fewer than sixteen of them gave 4000 crowns
a-piece. Nouv. Dict. Hist. vol. viii . p. 512. What " mighty acts " might not
similar bounty, in this country-the WEALTHIEST in the world-produce, if di- rected into similar channels !
HISTORY OF ITALY. 321
But Muratori was himself an Annalist ; and his united
labours place him in the highest class of Italian Historians. The names of MACHIAVEL and GUICCIARDINI
are, it is true, the most popular of those of the same
supplemental volumes of Tartini and Mittarelli, might "to REST
... in peace ; " but I do not think his slumbers would be quite so
sweet, unless the Antiquitates Italicæ Medii Ævi of the first*—published in 1738-1742, in six folio volumes-also accompanied the
Scriptores and of this, I perceive a very neat copy marked at
71. 178. 6d. in the catalogue of Mr. Bohn. At the sale of the Merly
library, a similar copy was sold for Sl. 18s. 6d.
:
Yetthe night's " rest " would be still more perfect, if the Novus
Thesaurus Veterum Inscriptionum, in præcipuis earundem Collectionibus
hactenus prætermissarum, Milan, 1739, folio, 4 vols. were united to
the preceding-especially as these portly tomes may be obtained for
about 51. 5s. Various were the critiques upon this work, to which
the cautious Muratori wisely vouchsafed not a reply. The Annali
d'Italia, by the same great man, was published in twelve quarto volumes, at Milan, 1744-49 : and are, by no means, scarce or dear. The
work was published at Lucca in 1762-70, in fourteen large quarto
tomes ; of which the thirteenth contains a supplement from 1750 to
1762. The fourteenth is occupied by tables : again, another edition
appeared at Munich, in 1761 , 4to . twelve vols.: with some critical
prolegomena of Catalani ; and a fourth reimpression came out at
Naples in 1773, 4to. 14 vols. None of these works exceed 7s. a volume. A CONTINUATION of these Annals was published by Oggeri
Vincenti, at Rome, in 5 vols. 8vo. , 1790. Brunet (to whom I am
indebted for this latter information) says, that an edition of Muratori's
works was printed at Arezzo, in 1767-80, in thirty- six 4to. volumes ;
and another re-impression of his works appeared at Venice, in 1790-
1810, in forty-eight octavo volumes of which the Annals ofItaly
occupy thirty-three volumes, including the six volumes which bring
the work down to 1805. And thus much for MURATORI.
"Les Savans ont trouvé beaucoup de fautes et de méprises dans ce recueil :
ou en a relevé plusieurs dans les Journaux." Nouv. Dict. Hist. eḍit. 1804. vol.
viii. p. 512. The work was reprinted at Arezzo, but in a much less beautiful
manner, in seventeen vols. 1777, 4to.
Y
322 HISTORY OF ITALY.
class of writers ; but the former has confined his historical researches (strictly so considered) to the City
ofFlorence :* his Prince, and Reflections on the First
Ten Books ofLivy, being the works in which the acuteness of his apprehension and the depth of his judgment are more particularly developed.
*« The great NICOLO MACHIAVELLI, whose name is in no danger
of being buried in oblivion. This celebrity is his due, as a man of
profound thought, and as the most eloquent historian, and most
skilful politician that Italy has produced." SISMONDI : Translated
by T. Roscoe, Esq. 1823, vol. ii. p. 224. " In his History of Florence, dedicated to Pope Clement VII., he instructed the Italians in
the art of uniting the eloquence of history with depth of reflection .
He has attached himself, much less than his predecessors in the same
line, to the narration of military events ; but his work, as a history of
popularpassions and tumults, is a masterpiece ; and Machiavelli has
completed, by this noble example of his theories, his analysis of the
human heart." Ibid. The account of his Principe, in these pages,
is very interesting. Of the History of Florence, the first edition
seems to be either that of Rome, in 1531-2, quarto, by Blado – or
that bythe Juntæ in 1532, 4to.: which latter contains the Florentine
History alone. I take this to be a rare and precious little book ; as
well as the Principe of the same date-and yet, probably rarer than
either, is the Discorsi sopra la prima Deca di Tito Livio-printed the
yearpreceding. The edition of Venice of 1540, published by the Aldine
Family, four parts in two small octavo volumes, (each described by
Renouard) containing all his works, is very scarce to procure complete and yet scarcer (according to Brunet) is the reprint of this
edition, of 1546, containing the same parts. But it should seem
that the genuine edition of 1550, 4to. (Rome) 2 vols. is yet preferable. A fine copy of it, in red morocco, was sold for 5l. 10s. at the
sale of Colonel Stanley's library : but the GRAND edition ofthe whole
of Machiavel's works, is that published at Milan, by the enterprising
and high-spirited Luigi Mussi, with additions, in eleven large quarto
volumes, 1810, &c. of which there are only 200 copies on fine vellum
paper, eight on blue paper (horrible heresy ! ) and twelve on common
paper. Can Mr. D'Israeli " rest in peace " without one of the 200
HISTORY OF ITALY. 323
As an historian, in the usual acceptation ofthat word,
GUICCIARDINI may be considered the first of those of
Italy: but such was the jealousy or the fear of the
higher classes ofhis countrymen, that the text ofhis historycontinued in avery mutilated,and palpably corrupt
state, till upwards of two centuries after his death. *
copies of THIS edition of his beloved Machiavelli, bound in blue morocco ?-orthodoxy itself !
• Niceron, who has unluckily (and I may say, perhaps, unaccountably) passed over the names of Machiavelli and Muratori- in
his incomparable " Mémoires pour servir à l'Histoire des Hommes Illustres," —has given us, as usual, a satisfactory account of the publications of the works of GUICCIARDINI-" the lieutenant-general of
the papal army, who had been so close and so indignant an observer
of the Roman cabinet, " says Mr. D'Israeli. The first edition of
the " Istoria d'Italia di Fr. Guicciardini," was published in a handsome folio volume, by Torrentino, at Florence, in 1561. It was
published after the death of the author, by his nephew, Agnolo
Guicciardini, and dedicated to Cosmo de' Medici, Grand Duke of
Florence. This edition is neither complete nor correct ; but the
curious are anxious to possess it, because (says Niceron, vol. xvii .
p. 106) there are passages in it which have been omitted in other
subsequent editions. Formerly it was rare and high priced . Indeed,
now, it is of uncommon occurrence. It contains only sixteen books
of the history ; and was reprinted the same year, at the same place,
in two 8vo. volumes. The history, in fact, extends only from the
year 1490, to 1526 ; but as Guicciardini had written four more books,
bringing it down to 1532, the nephew promised to publish them:
and although an edition appeared at Venice, in 1563, 4to. it was
still but an imperfect work. In 1564, the four latter books first
appeared, at Venice, by G. de Ferrari, in 4to. followed by summary
notices, and numerous annotations by Papirio Picedi, at Parma, the
same year, in 4to. Then appeared the Venetian edition, by Giolito,
1567, 4to. incorporating the whole. Further than this it is not necessary to push the bibliographical history ofGuicciardini's famous work
-as the whole was considered to be in a most corrupt and obscure
state, till, from the editorial care ofthe Canon PIO BONSI, and from an
324 HISTORY OF ITALY.
The Revolutions ofItaly, by DENINA, will be found
useful in a library of any pretension to this class of
collecting ; as well as the History ofWestern Italy,
by the same writer, which was published in 1809, in
uncastrated MS. preserved in the Magliabecchi library, a newand PERFECT EDITION appeared at Florence, in 1775, 4to. 4 vols : and unless both "6 young" and " old " possess this edition, they have not
the legitimate text of Guicciardini. The late Colonel Stanley, who
dearly loved to have the best works of the best writers in the best
possible condition, had this Florence edition of Guicciardini upon
LARGE PAPER, " bound in blue morocco, (out of sheets) by Walther ; "
and it was purchased by Mr. Protheroe of Bristol, for 221. 1s. at
the sale of the Colonel's library, in 1813. An ordinary copy, well
bound, is worth 4l. 14s. 6d. This edition was reprinted at Milan, in
1803 , in 10 octavo volumes ; a copy of which may be had, in boards,
at about 21. 10s. Our FENTON's English version of Guicciardini, published at London in 1618, folio, did not escape Niceron. I find a copy
of Fenton's translation selling at the sale of the Roxburghe library,
(no. 8204) for 5s. 6d. , and I once let slip a golden opportunity of
securing Master Fenton's " Historie of Guicciardin, " bound in delicious old blue morocco, with gilt on the leaves, for 3s. 6d. *
In regard to the works of ARETIN, ALONDUS, POGGIO, and BEMBO, connected
with the more ancient and partial histories of Italy, I do not conceive it necessary
here to enter upon them. The Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. iv. p. 441 , iii. p. 190-1 ,
vii. p. 22, will supply a tolerably copious account of the earlier editions of the two
former, and Mr. Shepherd's Life ofPoggio will afford abundant details respecting
the latter With regard to further particulars, as to the HISTORY OF FLORENCE,
let the names of Adriani, Nardi , Nerli, Segni, Benedetto Varchi, and above all
Giannone—as their labours appear narrated in the instructive pages of Mr. D'Israeli - be held in grateful remembrance by the student of Italian literature in particular. The fourth volume of Brunet, p. 368-376 , (to say nothing of Sir R. C.
Hoare's Catalogue) will give the reader some notion of the almost infinite number
and variety of LITERARY AND TOPOGRAPHICAL HISTORIES of the various Provinces
and Cities in Italy : a field of collecting, rich, perhaps beyond comparison, for the
"" Young and wealthy Bibliomaniac to indulge in ! The history of the CHURCH
ESTATES alone, of Italy, would form a library of no very diminutive dimensions.
And above all , those PICTURESQUE VOYAGES ! but search the catalogues of
Messrs. Treuttel and Wurtz, and Bosange and Co.
HISTORY OF ITALY. 325
six octavo volumes. * Nor let Bossi's Ancient and
Modern Italy, now in a course of publication, (Milan,
1819, 8vo. 12 vols. ) be dismissed from a library,
where previous and more elaborate performances have
not a place. But probably, after all-and especially
among young and timid Collectors-the possession of
SISMONDI'S History ofthe Italian Republics, published
at Paris, in sixteen octavo volumes, will be sufficient
to satisfy the ordinary passion for the knowledge ofItalian History ; especially when the highly popular
work by the same author, and by GINGUENÉ, relating
the History of Italian Literature, have a contiguous
place on the same shelf. I affix no prices to these
latter works, because they are of common occurrence,
and in a constant state of succession, and may be had
in all forms and varieties of binding, at the principal
French booksellers in London.
I am abundantly sensible that, on a subject of such
variety, and even intensity of interest, as ITALY, the
preceding remarks afford but feeble helps towards an
exact knowledge of the best historians of that country :
a country, to a contemplation of the future glories of
* DENINA'S Rivoluzioni d'Italia was published at Torino in 1769,
4to. 3 vols.; and may be worth 17. 10s. in neat binding. A copy of
it, ON VELLUM, divided into five volumes, was sold at the Valliere
sale for 300 francs ; and again (the same copy) at the Macarthy, for
320 francs. This work, which is in good repute, has been reprinted
with a continuation, at Venice, in 1800, in 5 octavo volumes. The
Abbé Jardin, translated it into French in 1771-5, in 8 duodecimo
volumes. The History of Western Italy was also published at the
same place, (Torino) and may be worth 17. 11s . 6d. in boards. Brunet says that, FANTIN DESODOARDS; (by whom a History of France
appeared in 1808, see p. 295, ante) published a History of Italy, in
1803, 8vo. 9 vols. " which is indicated by him for want of a better. "
326 HISTORY OF ITALY.
which, the Sibyllëan prophetess roused the curiosity,
and excited the noblest feelings, of the founder of the
Roman empire ..
Nunc age, Dardaniam prolem quæ deinde sequatur
Gloria, qui maneant ITALâ de gente nepotes
Illustres animas . • . . &c.
Wehave of late, indeed, witnessed two publications,
which have rendered the shores of Italy extremely
attractive to an English traveller : I mean, the
publication of Mr. EUSTACE and of Mr. FORSYTH. *
They are both too well known, and too generally
One of the most beautiful, and really instructive, works of its
kind, in this country, is that of " A Picturesque Tour of Italy," from
the Drawings ofJAMES HAKEWELL, Architect, and J. M. W. TURNER,
R. A. of a quarto form-comprising sixty-three engravings. Those
who possess proof impressions (on India paper) of this fascinating
work, will have reason to congratulate themselves every time they
open the volume to their admiring friends. The English scarcely visit
any place but they adorn it. CAPTAIN BATTY'S work, of a similar character, is extremely elegant and pleasing ; less costly, and less partaking of the higher beauties of art : but sufficiently stimulant to
send at least three score ofEnglish virtuosi every year scampering
across the Alps !
But shall we ever publish any thing fully equal to the " Voyage
Pittoresque des Iles de Sicile, de Malte, et de Lipari, " of HOUEL ? in
fourgrand folio volumes, with 280 engravings, 1782-7 and of which
a very fine copy, with prime impressions of the plates, may be
worth hard upon 35 guineas ! Or, again, what is to be said of the
yet more wonderful works of LABORDE-in the picturesque style ?
As thus : " Tableaux de la Suisse, ou Voyage pittoresque fait dans les
treize cantons du corps Helvétique ." Paris, 1780-6, in four superb
folios, often expanded into five -when the four hundred and thirty
plates, with which they are embellished, are bound up with the text.
I observe, in the catalogue of Messrs. Treuttel and Wurtz, a UNIQUE
copy of this work, " with the cuts coloured, ” valued at £160-but
HISTORY OF ITALY. 327
admired, to render any eulogium of them here
necessary; but I cannot help remarking, that the
attic brevity of the latter may be of greater service to the majority of readers, than the sentimental
expansion of the former. Italy is worth a hundred
visitations, on a hundred different accounts ; and the
treasures of her PUBLIC LIBRARIES, in particular,
which are almost wholly unknown to the Scholar and
Bibliographer, would afford materials wherewith to
enrich many a comely volume, and to gratify many an
enthusiastic reader.
an ordinary copy, at £40.
66 And then, for the same traveller's
Voyage pittoresque et historique de l'Espagne, in the same number
ofvolumes-published in 48 livraisons, of which 46 are already extant- at 11. 5s. the livraison : but upon vellum paper, with impres .
sions before the letter, at 5l. 16s. each. Laborde's " Mouumens de
la France," is a work worthy of its precursors. It will be complete
in 36 livraisons, or 3 folio volumes : at 21. 5s. the livraison. But,
am I not wandering (though not very widely) from ITALY ?
[ 328 ]
HISTORY OF GERMANY.
THE reader will at oneglance observe, that this account
of the Historians of Germany is not only very little
proportioned to the magnitude and population of that
country, but that it is, on a comparison with the
accounts of preceding countries, brief, if not superficial. Two obvious reasons have led to the adoption
of this plan the one, that, in the estimation of the
English, the regions of Bavaria, Austria, Hungary and
Bohemia, are, comparatively with those of France,
Spain , Portugal, and Italy, but sparingly visited ; * and
therefore, a detailed account of their best historians
would be less likely to be perused : the other reason
is, that the " number, weight, and measure," of these
historians themselves, utterly defy enumeration. But,
on the other hand, it ought to be readily conceded,
that there is no country in the world which is divided
into more important departments, enriched by more
* As a proof of this, I will mention that, in the lists of publications of Voyages, Travels, and Histories, furnished me by two of the
greatest publishers in Europe-Messrs. Longman and Co. and Mr.
John Murray-scarcely one in thirty (on a comparative estimate) relates to GERMANY. Indeed, with the exceptions of the Travels in
Hungary, by Dr. Clarke and Dr. Bright, Mr. Jacob's View of Agriculture, Statistics, &c. and Society of Germany, (all admirable works) and
an Autumn near the Rhine, or Sketches of Courts, Society, and Scenery,
in Germany, (of less magnitude, but very amusing) I am at present
unacquainted with any which relate to the country in question :
nor, strictly speaking, do the works of Mr. Jacob and the author of
the Autumn, &c. appertain to Germany, in the view in which that
country is considered in the above text.
HISTORY OF GERMANY. 329
interesting cities, towns, monasteries, and castles, and
blessed with a more fertile soil, than that which is washed by the waters of the Danube. * Add to which, the
remembrance of its language, its antiquities, its former
renown, from the time of Cæsar to that of Charles V.†
* The DANUBE, the noblest river in Europe, visits, in its course,
1500 miles of the united territories of Bavaria, Austria, and Hungary. The Rhine, more talked of, because more contiguous, and
more frequently visited, can boast of only one-third of such an extent of course. But its picturesque beauties† are said to atone for its
comparatively limited boundaries. They may do so ; yet a friend
will quickly shew (I trust) that the Danube is not wholly divested of
such attractive charms ; for its banks are often studded with castles,
monasteries, and princely mansions ; and with undulating and woodskirted hills . Let me here be understood, that I purposely make no
mention of the UPPER DIVISIONS of Germany. I leave the Maine,
the Weser, the Elbe, and the Oder, to roll their sinuous courses
through Prussia and Saxony, and to bring the wealth, with which
the thousand vessels that flit along those rivers are charged, to the
respective ports of Frankfort, Hamburgh, and Bremen : thence to
glitter in the palaces of Berlin and Dresden . It is not essential to this
work to carry my researches to the further banks of the Rhine.
+ Every reader of taste will immediately think of Dr. ROBERTSON'S
famous biography ofthis Emperor ; of which all praise is idle, and all
censure vain. It is doubtless a master- piece ofresearch, of reflection,
and ofcomposition ; but the fruits of subsequent critics and authors,
in pretty nearly the same departments have, I humbly submit, taught
us that the value of the first volume of this celebrated work (so constantly selected for commendation) is not quite of that high and
+ Among the works which give us a lively, and as I learn, a just notion ofthe
Beauties of the RHINE, is that published by Mr. Ackerman, called " The Rhine ;
an Historical and Characteristic Tour of, from Mentz to Coblentz, embellished with
twenty-four highly coloured engravings," 4to 41. 4s. boards. The plates are aqua
tint, coloured after nature, and most deliciously inviting to a residence or ramble
among such combined beauties of art and nature. I have heard GREAT THINGS
of Mr. Turner's drawings ofthis lovely scenery !
330 HISTORY OF GERMANY.
-its alliances with the ancient Republics of Italy-its
genial atmosphere and unobscured skies :-all these
considerations render the soil of GERMANY fertile of
reflection and amusement to the observing traveller.
But my present duty is confined within narrow
limits ; and I hasten only to submit to " the Young,"
rather than " the Old," collector-inasmuch as the
opportunities of examination of references are seized
upon and pursued with greater zeal and activity from
twenty-five to sixty, than from sixty downwards-I
hasten only to submit a comparatively brief list of
Collections ofGerman Historians- premising that the
united labours of Struvius, Buder, and Meuselius (in
the Bibliotheca Historica, 1783, 8vo. ) do not include
an account of histories or travels relating to the German territories. * In regard to Germany in general,
commanding character which, from the force and even prejudices of
education, we have been in the habit of considering it. The truth is,
that Robertson was one of the very first English historical archæologists, if I may so speak, who had access to the inedited treasures of
a few of the libraries in Italy ; and the public were both surprised
and delighted at the complexion of such generally unknown treasures. I could mention living authors, without any wish, or even
thought, ofdrawing comparisons-who have, since the time of Robertson, made us acquainted with yet happier illustrations of ancient history. It is the plan and style of Robertson's Charles V. by
which we are chiefly instructed and charmed. Gibbon has, with his
usual felicity, criticised the latter ; but an elaborate and powerfully
drawn comparison between Robertson and his predecessors and contemporaries, executed by no mean hand, will be found in the Monthly
Review, vol. 20, 1796.
* The work, when complete, according to Brunet's supposition,
will occupy 30 volumes ; but, as twenty years have elapsed since
the last volume, it will, in all probability, continue in its present state.
As far as it goes, it is beyond every degree of comparison superior to
Du Fresnoy's Methode pour étudier l'Histoire, 1772, 12mo. 25 vol.
HISTORY OF GERMANY. 331
secure the following authors : SCHARDIUS, De Rebus
Germanicis, Basil, 1574, folio, 3 vols.: recently become a rare book. MEIBOMIUS, Rerum Germanicarum Libri Tres. Helmest, 1688, folio, 3 vols.
FREHERI Rerum Germanicarum Scriptores, Argent.
1717, folio, three vols. B. G. STRUVII Corpus Histor.
Germ. Ienæ, folio, two vols. : prefixed, is a Bibliotheca
Scriptorum Rerum Germanicarum, which renders
these volumes the more acceptable. Pistorii Rer.
German. Script. aliquot insignes, Ratisb. 1726-31 ,
folio, 3 vols. an admirable work ; and, in the estimation of the learned and tasteful antiquary, more
admirable yet is SCHOETTGENIUS's Diplomataria et
Scriptores Hist. Germ. Medii Evi. Altenb. 1753,
folio, three volumes.* Nor, on any account, must the
Scriptores Rerum Germanicarum of MENCKENIUS
Lips. 1728, folio, three vols. be forgotten.
The preceding are the sturdier and larger works
appertaining to Germany. They are as the oaken
forest, in which the Student may saunter and disport
himself as it pleaseth him. If he like to come forth
* I do not affix a price to every work above specified ; but I apprehend that I am tolerably correct in valuing them at about 15s. per volume. In some instances, according to condition, they will bring
greater prices : thus, in his very copious and instructive catalogue of
1823, Mr. Bohn marks " a fine copy in vellum " of Pistorius at
31. 13. 6d. : and a half bound uncut copy of MENCKENIUS at 21. 2s.
but neat in vellum at 31. 3s. But let me not omit the mention of
the Vet. Script. Rer. Germanicar. of REUBERUS, published in one
folio vol. at Hanover, in 1619 ; and of which a copy was sold for
21. 12s. 6d. at the Roxburghe sale. It contains the lives of Charle.
magne and Orlando, by the Pseudo- Turpin, with various metrical
Chronicles.
332 HISTORY OF GERMANY.
into open lawns, or sunny parterres, he may recline
upon the eleven quarto volumes of BARRE's Histoire
Générale d'Allemagne, Paris, 1748 or DE LAVEAUX's translation of the unfinished history of
Schmidt in the German language : or, if he be master
of that same language, he may recreate himself with
HAEBERLIN'S Modern History of Germany, published
at Halle, in 1774-91 , octavo, in twenty-one vols. and
continued to the year 1804, in seven additional volumes by the BARON DE SENKENBERG : while the unostentatious French work of FRÉRON (Histoire de
l'Empire d'Allemagne depuis Charlemagnejusqu'à nos
jours) in eight duodecimo volumes, 1771 , &c. shall
not be found an unwelcome fire-side companion.
I am now to speak of the Government, rather than
of the particular country so designated, of AUSTRIA ;
and in this I include the kingdoms of BAVARIA, HUNGARY, and BOHEMIA. I will begin with the collections of
PEZ and BELL ; men of indefatigable research and unwearied patience. Pez published his Scriptores Rerum
Austriacarum, at Leipsic, in 1721 , folio , three vols.: an
excellent work, of which every historical student will
have need. BELL is the author of the following :
Prodromus Antiquæ et Nova Hungariæ, 1723, folio :
Notitia Hungariæ Nova, Vienn. 1735, folio, 4 vols. :
Scriptores Rerum Hungaricarum, Vindob. 1746, folio,
3 vols. , all admirable works ; but, with the exception
of the second, better calculated for a public than a
private library.* The same may be said of the An-
* Yet more indefatigable than Bell, was PRAY. His Annals relating to the History and Antiquities of HUNGARY occupy seven folio
volumes of which the five volumes of Dissertations on the ancient
HISTORY OF GERMANY. 333
nales Austria Veteris et Novae of CALLES, published
in four thin folios at Vienna, in 1750-but the HOUSE
OF AUSTRIA has in particular received due homage
and respect from the labours of I. L. Kraft and Mr.
Archdeacon Coxe. *
The capital of Austria possessed a distinguished
antiquary in KOLLARIUS, whose Analecta Monumentorum Omnis Evi Vindobonensia, Vindob. 1760, folio,
2 vols. ,† I do especially recommend to the attention
of the archæologist. It may be possessed, peradventure, for a couple of sovereigns. But Vienna has
recently LOST the MAN, who, under imperial patronAnnals of Hungary, published at Vienna in 1764-1770, and the
History of the Kings of Hungary, Buda, 1801 , 8vo. in three vols. are
the principal. Pray's works are by no means of common occurrence,
either here or upon the continent.
* This intelligent and industrious Historian published his House of
Austria in 1807, 4to. 3 vols .: to which may be added the Kings of
Spain ofthe House of Bourbon, 1813, 4to. 3 vols . His other Works
do not comewithin this particular department ; but they are numerous
and instructive . The author is now " in the sere and yellow leaf”
ofyears, but not of intellect.
+ Kollarius was the Editor of Lambecius's Commentaries concerning the MSS. in the Imperial Library at Vienna ; but has added little
to the labours of his predecessors. This latter work appeared in
1766-in eight folio volumes. The Analecta is, doubtless a preferable performance. But what might not VIENNA accomplish, in the
way of HISTORICAL ILLUSTRATION, if some of its wealthier nobility,
with the Emperor at their head, would come forward with a proper
patriotic impulse on the occasion ?
That man was BARTSCH. From the number of pages, together
with a PORTRAIT, devoted to the notice of Bartsch in the third
volume of my Tour, the reader will naturally sympathise with me in
the intelligence that, before the publication in question reached
Vienna, the amiable object of my little Memoir was NO MORE. He
died suddenly, of an apopletic fit. He was, in fact, a short, thick-
334 HISTORY OF GERMANY.
age, and with an highly cultivated taste for, and
knowledge in, the fine arts-added to a very sober
judgment and active zeal in matters of antiquarian
research-might have done wonders for the establishment of her fame, as the repository of some of the
most interesting specimens of antiquity.
As to BAVARIA, (to which, for the sake of the Black
Forest, I will attach SUABIA in the subjoined note*)
set man, and liable to such a calamitous visitation. I owe him, or
rather his memory, much more than I have hitherto expressed. He
was a constant, kind, and active correspondent : and assigned no
limits to his wishes and actions to befriend you. I have yet a considerable number of his letters, written in the neatest manner, and
with an accuracy and attention to business that could not be exceeded. I will not dissemble that one of the GREATEST pleasures I
had anticipated in the publication of the Tour, was, his perusal, and
as I trusted, approbation, of the manner in which his merits and
kindnesses were recorded. But " Diis aliter visum est... ! "
Nor was the death of Mr. Bartsch the only loss of that kind which
I was doomed to experience. Poor Mr. Bernhard, one of the intelligent public librarians at Munich, was also taken hence ere the work
in question reached him. But the death of Bartsch was more than a
private calamity. His country, in his death, has lost a most diligent, correct, and praise-worthy archæologist, with a taste and knowledge of ART , such as, almost, to render rivalry hopeless . Yet the
gentle, the kind-hearted, the thoroughly bibliographical BERNHARD !
" What," indeed, are the hopes of man ?"
66
It is the work of GERBERT, under the title of Historia Nigra
Sylva, (Typis Blascensis) , 1783-8, in 3 quarto volumes, to which I
allude-and which, much rather than Mariana's History of Spain,
(see p. 309) should be always bound in black morocco. What deeds
ofmystery and of amazement-what objects of terror, of grandeur,
or of preternatural character what enchanted palaces and what
haunted castles-what animals, bipedical as well as quadrupedical--
(Sub pedibus mugire solum, et juga ... moveri
Silvarum, visæque canes ululare per umbras. )
HISTORY OF GERMANY. 335
what shall we say when we find a row of twenty-two
goodly quarto volumes, entitled BAVARIAN MONUMENTS, put forth at Munich between the years 1763
and 1813 ? Now, whether to possess these, is one
thing : but that a sight of them should beget an appetite to possess something relating to that highlyinteresting country, is another, and a most undeniable
thing : and therefore let the historical student avail
himself of the judicious notices in OFFELIUS' Rerum
Boicarum Scriptores, Aug. Vind. 1763, folio, 2 vols. :
and if he be seriously and piously inclined, above all
things let him secure a fine tall copy, with brilliant
impressions of the plates, of the Bavaria Sancta of
RADERUS, published at Munich in 1615, in 3 thin
folio volumes ; to which he may add the Bavaria Pia,
published at, the same place in 1628, folio, in one
volume. I consider the Annales Boica Gentis of
ALDZREITTER and BRUNNER, Francof. 1710, folio, as a
little too remote and old fashioned in their speculations to be of any positive use to the reader.
Thus have I travelled bibliographically, through
characterise and haunt " this boundless contiguity of shade. " !!!
But Mr. Washington Irving, (if report speak true) will shortly give
us more than a sketchy " account of these things.
"6
In the mean time, the Thesaurus Rerum Suevicarum of WAGELIMES, Lidaug. 1756, 4 vols. folio, will supply the antiquary with
much to set his heart at rest respecting Suabian Antiquities.
* Ofthisbeautiful and interesting work, a particular account, together with two fac-similes of some of its embellishments, is given
in vol. iii. p. 221-3, of the Bibliographical Tour. Such a copy of it
as that at Althorp, bound in blue morocco by Lewis, will rarely be
seen. The first two volumes of it, in very fine condition, were sold
at a late sale in Pall Mall, for 2l. 12s. 6d. The cuts are by Ralph
Sadeler.
396 HISTORY OF GERMANY.
these three great countries-to which I must be
allowed to add the notice of a few works not strictly
within their limits ; for who, that has sailed or sauntered along the castled crags of the RHINE, and rested
himself in the picturesque old city of Mentz, would
not be anxious to turn over the gossiping leaves of
SERRARIUS'S Res Moguntinæ, Libri V. published at
Franckfort in 1722, in 3 folio volumes ? Then again,
the Scriptores Rerum Brunswicensium, of which the
famous LEIBNITZ was the editor, published by him at
Hanover, in 1707, folio, 3 vols. *-and which should
seem to have stimulated Gibbon to his well known
essay on the Antiquities ofthe House ofBrunswickwho, I say, that has received a highly polished
education, would not strive to discipline himself in
such tastes and studies as would cause his name to
be ranked with some ofthe great ARCHEOLOGISTS and
HISTORIANS named in the more immediately preceding pages of this work ? Who, above all, that is
blessed with large patrimonial possessions-of the
deeds of whose ancestors the page of history is often
full and instructive — who, of this gallant class of
readers and collectors, would not prefer the devotion
* This is becoming a rare book ; and may be worth 31. 13s. 6d.
" The genius and studies of LEIBNITZ (says Gibbon) have ranked
his name with the first philosophic names of his age and country ;
but his reputation, perhaps, would be more pure and permanent, if
he had not ambitiously grasped the whole circle of human science."
" The Annals of Brunswick, of the empire, of the ancient and
modern world, were present to the mind of the historian ; and he
could turn from the solution of a problem, to the dusty parchments
and barbarous style ofthe records of the middle age. " (Antiq. of the
House of Brunswick :) Post. Works, vol. iii . p. 361 : but see particularly p. 568, of the same volume.
...
HISTORY OF GERMANY. 337
ofwealth to the collection ofmaterials for local and personal history, to the hazard, turmoil, expense, waste,
and thanklessness, of gaining half the ELECTIONS in the
kingdom !-
One self-approving hour whole years outweighs,
Of rabble-greetings, and of loud huzzas !
Sed quo-tendis ? The ground trembles beneath my
feet .... and I recede. *
* On a revision of the immediately preceding pages, I find something to correct, and something to add. Of the corrections, Fresnoy's work, (p. 330, last line of note) is said to be in 25, instead of
15 volumes : and at page 335 (note line 5 ) the barbarous word of
WAGELIMES occurs for Wagelinus. For the additions, the Corpus
Historicum of STRUVIUS, ( p. 331. ) is set forth in very tempting colours in Mr. Bohn's Catalogue, nº. 8279, and two copies of it appear
at 21. 2s. each. I possess the best edition of it in 1753, in two vols.
4to. and am prompt to number it among the most useful and satisfactory works of literary bibliography. After a copious and useful
index, at the end of the second volume, there is a Notitia Suevia
Antiqua of which my copy ends, imperfectly, at page 120. At page
331 , ante, line 8 of note, no notice is taken of an enlarged edition of
REUBERUS'S work, in 1726, folio ; of which, " almost all the copies
except those that were sold at the last Fair, ( 1726) were consumed
by a fire, which lately broke out in the city of Frankfort. " New
Memoirs ofLiterature, vol. iv. p . 151. In the notice of PEZ, ( page
333, ) I have omitted to urge the reader to secure a good and reasonably marked copy of his " Thesaurus Anecdotorum Novissimus, seu
Veterum Monumentorum, ex Germanicis Bibliothecis Collectio. " Aug.
Vind. 1721 , folio, 6 vols . of which a neat copy is marked at the sum
of 41. 4s. in the catalogue of Mr. Laing of Edinburgh. A fine copy
of it is at Althorp, and another very fine one in his Majesty's Library.
Z
[ 398 ]
NORTHERN HISTORIES. *
IT may be doubted whether, at any one period of
public curiosity, a greater intensity of interest has
been manifested, than at the present moment, to become acquainted with the physical and moral properties of the NORTHERN WORLD : with its vegetable,
its animal, and mineral productions. An Englishman may, I think, dwell with more than common
complacency on the events which have recently taken
place in this quarter of the globe. He may indulge
a well founded triumph on the success of the efforts
of his countryman ; a success, not commensurate, it
is true, with the sanguine and too extravagant expec-
* Under this title are comprised brief accounts of DENMARK, NORWAY, SWEDEN, and RUSSIA. It is as impossible for the bibliographer,
as for the naval adventurer, to circumnavigate the globe. The
above countries are incorporated in these pages, to the exclusion of
the more southern :-first, because they are of a more peculiar cast
of character, and more intimately connected with the history and
antiquities of our own country ; and, secondly, because, of recent
years, voyages of discovery to the Northern Sea have become objects of NATIONAL PATRONAGE. In regard to ICELAND, I trust that
I am equally satisfying my own conscience, and the good taste ofthe
public, if I give an unqualified recommendation of the recent works
upon this country, by Sir George Mackenzie, Bart. ( 1810, 4to . ) and
Dr. Hooker, ( 1813 , 8vo. ) : gentlemen, competent, in every respect, to
the successful execution of the tasks which they undertook. These
works are obtainable for about 21. 12s. 6d. ; and I presume them to
be on the shelves of all Collectors of Voyages. As to GREENLAND,
(making mention of Torfæus hereafter) may I not rest satisfied with
the exclusive recommendation of the translation (by the pious and`
learned Gambold) from the high Dutch of old Crantz, in 1767, 2 vols.
8vo. with cuts-worth about 188 ?
NORTHERN HISTORIES. 839
tations of some-but fully equal to the sober and well
founded wishes of the greater part. Nature has, and
perhaps ever will have-as long as the world shall
last-her impassable and insurmountable barriers :
and if, in any one portion of the globe more than
another, it is in
stemming towards the POLE,
that the navigator has to contend with those impediments, which at once appall his fancy and impede
his progress. He may double again and again the
stormy Cape; but the prowof his vessel is broken into
splinters before the " thick ribbed" iceberg. On this,
more than onany other subject, or point of navigation,
we are forbidden to yield to the enthusiasm of the Roman poet :-" POSSUNT quia posse VIDENTUR."
England, therefore, ranks among her heroes " of
bold daring, and high emprise," the names of PARRY
and FRANKLIN ;"* men, who have perhaps, equalled
Those who have been in the habit of reading Mr. Campbell's
very beautiful poem of " The Pleasures of Hope, " must, in the course
of their perusal of the voyages of the above celebrated travellers,
have been equally struck with the truth of the imagery, and of the
feelings, of the poet. Take the following lines-and apply them to
Captain Parry — as you suppose him to be ploughing the northern
ocean :
And again :
Cold on his midnight watch the breezes blow
From wastes that slumber in ETERNAL SNOW.
And waft , across the wave's tumultuous roar,
The wolf's long howl from Oonolaska's shore.t
+ It so happens that these lines are as melodious in structure as they are exquisite in imagery. The first couplet cannot be exceeded : no, not in the Eloisa
ofPope. In the last verse of the second couplet, you really hear the howling of
the wolf-and rush belowto your cabin fire- side.
340 NORTHERN HISTORIES.
in their line of research, what their fellow-travellers
Park and Burckhardt in widely different directions -
But whatever might have been the hardships of both travellers (and
those of Captain Franklin were assuredly the more severe) their
fondest hopes and wishes, respecting the mode of the reception of
their labours, AT HOME, were realised to the fullest extent. The metropolis of England was scarcely less agitated on the news of the
victories of the Nile and Salamanca, (putting those of Trafalgar and
Waterloo out of the pale of all comparison) than it was on the eve of
the publications of the travellers in question. The house of Mr.
Murray, the publisher, was in a state of siege. A constant ingress and
egress of bibliopolistic Mercurii below and of gentlemen, learned
in philosophy, the fine arts, and circumnavigation, above marked
the anxiety which prevailed, and INSURED the prosperous sale which
was to follow. The day of sale came : but that day ( as is usual on
like occasions) was preceded by a dinner-the grand panacea for
all sorrows, and the provoker of all gallantry of spirit, in England.
Postquam prima quies epulis .
-
the sale began. Nowthe work of Captain Parry was a three-guinea
and a half4to. volume ; and ere the clock had struck seven, 1500 copies
were disposed of! Again ; that of Captain Franklin was a fourguinea book ; yet not fewer than 900 copies were bonâ fide purchased
ere the broke company up ; and within " a little month" of that festive evening, 600 more copies were sold. It is now almost a rare book.
What triple honour was here displayed ? the authors, the publisher,
and the public, coming in for a large share of credit, profit, and instruction, on the occasion.
-
Such things occur in No other country in the world ; † and they are
as much TESTS -yea, in all respects, tests of a higher and more com-
+ I beseech Mr. D' Israeli to chronicle this, and similar things, in a future edition of his Curiosities ofLiterature. They will become exceedingly interesting to
posterity. Time mellows these anecdotes as it does a raw picture. They may
appear glaring at first-but.... how eagerly we read the account of the sale of
Pope's translation of the Iliad, and (to mention no other instance) of Gibbon's own
account of the number of copies struck off, or subscribed for, of his Decline and
Fall? In regard to the first edition of Paradise Lost, it is well known that three
different title-pages were obliged to be struck off, in order to make it GO DOWN with
the public ! It has indeed " gone down" in the most triumphant manner.
NORTHERN HISTORIES. 841
-have accomplished in theirs : thus bringing the floes
and icebergs of the Polar sea, as vividly before the
reader's imagination, as were, heretofore, the sand
and deserts of Africa. But, interesting as may be this
subject, to a large portion of very curious readers, I
am forbidden, from the nature of my work, to do any
thing more than present them with an outline of those
historians, from whom the general and particular histories of Denmark, Norway, Sweden, and Russia, may
be obtained ; and in the pages of whose works there
will be doubtless found a due mixture of fable and of
truth.
Among the writers of General History, OLAUS
MAGNUS stands at the head. He succeeded his brother
John as Archbishop of Upsal, and is supposed to have
manding cast of character of national wealth and prosperity, as are
the nine hundred and ninety-nine vessels, constantly displaying their
streamers on the bosom of the Thames, and as constantly and deeply
laden with " the wealth of either Ind." But, to return to the works
of Captains Parry and Franklin. There are octavo editions of both,
each in 2 vols. —either published, or in the course of publication.
Let me hope they will not be denuded of prints. Mr. Murray wields
a mighty sceptre, and can accomplish mighty things. But I must
not conclude this half festive and half literary note, without the
strong recommendation of Mr. ScORESBY's Account of the Arctic
Regions 1819, 8vo . 2 vols. —the fruit of seventeen voyages to the
Polar Seas (nil mortalibus arduum ! ) and especially of Mr. BarROW's Chronological History of Voyages into the Polar Regions, in
8vo. price 12s.: a work, perfect of its kind. *
-
-
Tothe above list-(how impossible is it to avoid mixing up Voyages and
Travels with History ? ) must be added the previous Voyage of Discovery for the
purpose ofexploring Baffin's Bay, &c. by CAPTAIN Ross, in quarto price 37. 13s. 6d.
with thirty-two coloured plates. This publication gave rise to a controversy
which, I believe, has been long and wisely forgotten : but either party will feel
more or less strengthened in his positions , on the result of Captain Parry'sfirst
342 NORTHERN HISTORIES.
acted an important part in the Council of Trent : being
a hearty hater of the Protestants. Of his life, and
indeed of his labours, little is known. His work De
Gentibus Septentrionalibus* first published at Rome
*Acopy of this work, as was to be expected, appears in the Bibl.
Harl. vol. i. no. 7160-but it does not appear (as was not to be expected) in the rich sprinkling of Northern literature and history to
be found in the collection of the late Dr. Heath. Niceron has certainly paidthe author off in few but pretty sharp words : namely, that
" hecrammed into his book all the marvellous things he could hear,
or see, without caring one jot about their truth ." Mémoires, &c. vol.
xxxv. p. 321. Yet Messrs. Rivington and Cochrane, in their recent
very copious and excellent catalogue, fear not to mark a copy of this
work at 31. 3s.: see no.15177. The italic adjuncts to the copy do indeed tell us that it is in " old wooden binding." Mr. Bohn measures his way with extreme caution, and even philosophy — in his
estimation of the price of this book. Although his italics denote the
copyto contain " a profusion ofwood cuts, " yet he qualifies his panegyric by the price of 17. 1s. He has another copy, " slightly stained with
a mendedtitle" for 18s.: and the Basil edition of 1567, with " edges
a little worn, stamped binding " ( such are the niceties of bibliopegistic distinctions) at 11. 5s. To another copy of the Basil edition,
he adds the Muscovy of POSSEVINUS, 1587, folio : 2 vol. in 1 ,
" fine
copies, in white monastic binding, stamped on the sides "-for
21. 12s. 6d. : observing that " copies are usually marked at from
41. 48. to 51. 5s. " This is but candid on the part of Mr. Bohn.
-
I must be brief with the remaining general historians ofthe North.
SNORRO is a great name, in spite of Ritson's sneer.†
His " History
ofthe Northern Kings " was given to the world by Peringskiold, at
voyage. Mr. Murray is also the publisher of Captain Ross's book. Can it be
therefore a matter of surprise, that the publisher's viila, at Wimbledon, is strewed
with seal skins, and lined with skulls and horns of the elk and rein-deer-together
with the canoes, spears, and darts of the Esquimaux ? Most assuredly Mr. Murray
has richly earned these trophies.
+ Ritson said " 'twas a good name for a snorer, or dreamer ; ” I suspect he never
looked into the author. Read Mallet's eulogy on this " Snorer," as judiciously
extracted by Mr. Bohn, in his catalogue - no. 8209 -where one volume only of
the work in question is marked at 17. 11s. 6d. And here, let me ask why that
NORTHERN HISTORIES. 843
in 1555, folio, yet finds purchasers at a good price,
especially if it be in fine condition. Requesting the
Stockholm, in 1697, in two folio volumes ; and this is now become
a rare work. A copy of it was purchased by Mr. Priestley at the
sale of Dr. Heath's library for 71. Messrs. Rivington and Cochrane
tempt us with " a fine copy, in calf extra, marbled leaves," for
61. 6s. but Messrs. I. and A. Arch hold out the more irresistible
temptation of a good copy, in calf binding, at the mitigated price of
51. 58. See the recent catalogues of these respective (and highly respectable) booksellers. Of the NORWEGIAN Dynasty of Kings, by
the same author, a word or two in a subsequent page. On the
richly furnished shelves of Messrs. Payne and Foss, you look and
sigh in vain . . . for a-SNORRO !
Of other general works, procure the Wandalia of KRANTZIUS,
Francof. 1580 : the Sarmatia Europeæ Descriptio of GAGguinus,
Spira, 1581 : (written in a sweet, pure style of latinity, according
to Starowolscius) * the Chronica Slavorum of Steinheim, Francof. ad
Moen. 1581 ; the Orbis Gothicus of PRETORIUS, published at Olive
Kloster, 1688 : † -all in folio with some minor works, each and
all to be had at comparatively moderate prices : but these works
afford food rather for the Antiquary and Critic, than for the common
reader.
-
Yet I am almost peremptory in the injunction that both " the
Old" and " the Young" reader, place upon their shelves the Mémoires
sur la Langue Celtique of BULLET, in 3 folio volumes, 1754, and
worth about 61. 16s. 6d, as a masterpiece of philological erudition,
and as the basis of very much that is valuable and entertaining in
Northern Literature. Tothese, they may add a not less instructive
work of its kind ; the Thesaurus Antiquitatum Teutonicarum, Ecclesivery able and accurate bibliographer, Brunet Fils, describes this work but as in
one volume, and attaches the diminutive price of 15fr. to it ? He ought to
accompany the next polar expedition, to atone for such a kraken of an error. See
his incomparable Manuel, vol. iii. p. 351 .
Igain all this intelligence from the Bibl. Harleiana, vol. i. p. 392. The work
of Gaguin has a number of curious plates ; a copy of it was sold at Dr. Heath's
sale for 10s. only
+" Typis Monasterii Olivensis: " a copy was sold at Dr, Heath's sale for
21.31.
344 NORTHERN HISTORIES. [DENMARK,
ordinary reader to rest satisfied with the account of
these Northern histories which appears in the 11th,
12th, and 13th volumes of the Modern Universal
History, in folio - I must exhort the curious and critical reader to leave " no stone unturned " in his
endeavours to possess a copy of the copious, impartial,
and learned labours of STRITTERUS, as specified in the
subjoined note. *
DENMARK.
Begin with old SAXO GRAMMATICUS. Get a fine
copy of his first edition of the History ofDenmark,
printed in the Latin tongue, in 1514, folio ; but at any
rate you must not think of paying your respects at the
court of Copenhagen, unless you can assure the
Danish monarch that you possess a sound and perfect
asticarum, et Litterariarum of SCHILTER, folio, 1728, three volumes :
and worth hard upon 57. 5s.: while, tothe full as instructive as either, is
the Chronologia de rebus Suecia, Dania, Norvegie of MESsenius ,
with the notes of Peringskiold in 2 folio vols. 1700- of which a copy
was purchased by Mr. Priestley at Dr. Heath's sale for 31. 3s. Messrs.
Rivington and Cochrane mark it at 10s. 6d. less.
" Memoria Populorum, olim ad Danubium, Pontum Euxinum,
Paludem Mæotidem, Caucasum, &c. et inde magis ad SEPTEMTRIONES
INCOLENTIUM, e Scriptoribus Hist. Byz. eruta et digestæ, 1771-9, 4to.
four volumes. A masterly analysis of this work will be found in
Meusel's Bibl. Hist. vol . v. p. 111-122 : and Mr. Evans (who first
directed my attention to it) had a copy of it , in his catalogue of
1802, new and very neat " marked at 51. 15s. 6d. It has become
rare in this country.
66
+ This volume has escaped Brunet. It is a beautiful book, and an
old acquaintance of mine, as a fac-simile of one of its capital
initials in the Typog. Antiq. vol. i . p. xxxvii, will readily prove. In
fine condition, it may be worth 11. 1s. Messrs. Longman and Co.
value it at 10s. 6d. only : Cat. 1822, nº. 231 .
DENMARK. ] NORTHERN HISTORIES. 845
*
copy of the best edition of this work, with the notes of
Stephens, put forth in 1644, folio . It will make but
a slender inroad on your purse. Next, look out
sharply for the Danish Annals and Danish Monuments published by OLAUS WORMIUS, in 1643 † ; and
covet, more vehemently than either, the truly valuable productions of TORFÆUS. You have a familiar
introduction to them in the subjoined note. The
---
A good copy is worth about 11. 11s. 6d. At the sale of Dr.
Heath's library, it was bought for the London Institution for 11. 6s.
Mr. Bohn marks it at 17. 10s. in vellum with an extract from Du
Fresnoy as a whetter for a purchaser. Messrs. Rivington and Cochrane mark it " neat " at 11. 16s. Those who will read an account of
Saxo Grammaticus in Mr. Chalmers's Biographical Dictionary, may
easily satisfy themselves of the value of this historian. Why has
Niceron neglected him ? And why has the Biographical Dictionary
of Caen given so bald an account of him? The writers of the latter
work (edit. 1804) are surprised that Saxo should have written such
good Latin in the x11th century ! They were well read critics,
doubtless. But respecting TORFEUS, they are outrageously superficial.
† Agood copy of either, (being folio volumes) is worth 17. 1s. The
Danica Literatura Antiquissima, &c. with cuts, published in 1636, at
Amst. 4to. is worth nearly double the money. It contains a Dissertation on the ancient Danish Poetry. Messrs. Payne and Foss have,
at this moment, an excellent copy of it at the well-judged price of 11. 16s.
When Monsieur Brunet Fils favours us with a fourth edition of
his Manuel, he will doubtless remodel his article ofTORFEUS - inasmuch as all the prices there attached to the works of this renowned
antiquary and historian, are rated by him greatly below the mark.
For the sake ofjuxta- position I will mention them as they respect
both Norway and Denmark. In 1702, 4to. appeared his Series
Dynastiarum et Regum Dania : worth about 10s. 6d. but selling at
Dr. Heath's sale, in extra binding by Walther, for 11. 3s.
In 1707
appeared the Trifolium Historicum, seu Dissertatio Historica de tribus
Daniæ Regibus Gormo Grandavo, &c. 4to. an uncommon book; but
346 NORTHERN HISTORIES. [ DENMARK.
name of BARTHOLIN is deservedly celebrated in the
annals of Danish Literature, Medicine, and Jurisprudence. My business is only with Thomas (the son of
the famous physician * ) who followed the latter pursuit ; and who, in his curious work " De Causis contemptæ a Danis adhuc Gentilibus Mortis ; Hafniæ,
1689, 4to. hath most pleasingly and learnedly treated
of that curious subject. Again, if Heraldry be among
the favourite pursuits of the historical reader, let him
look closely into the Breviarium Equestre of BIRCHERODIUS, who expatiates with rapture on the origin,
progress, and splendour of the Order ofthe Elephant.
not so rare as the Historia Vinlandiæ Antiquæ, 1705, 12mo. of which
a copy at Caillard's sale (says Brunet) was sold for thirty-six francs.
The grand work of Torfæus is his Historia Rerum Norvegicarum,
published in 1711, in 4 folio volumes, and usually bound in two. A
copy of this scarce work was sold for 81. at Dr. Heath's sale, and is
marked at 71. 17s. 6d. in the catalogue of Messrs, Rivington and
Cochrane. With this work should be possessed the Orcades, 1715,
folio, of the same writer ; and worth about 11. 5s. In 1777, 4to.
appeared the Nota Posteriores of Torfæus on his Series Regum
Danica ; worth about 9s. 6d. ALL these publications came forth at
Copenhagen. But I had well nigh forgotten his Veteris Groenlandia
Descriptio, published with cuts in 1706, small octavo, ofwhich I once
possessed a large and lovely copy, bound in green morocco (as was
most fitting) with gilt on the leaves . . . " FUIMUS ! "
The works of this Physician are elaborately detailed by Watt
in his Bibliotheca Britannica ; and are, with one exception, almost
exclusively professional : shewing the extraordinary activity as well
as knowledge of their author. That " one exception " is the only
thing expatiated upon by Brunet. Thomas Bartholin, who may be
considered as the JOHN HUNTER of the North, died in 1680. Consult Chalmers ; as the Dict. Biographique of Caen is lamentably
jejune. A well written and impartial life of Bartholin would, even
now, be an acceptable gift both to the public and to the profession
in particular.
DENMARK. ]
NORTHERN HISTORIES. 347
His work was published, with plates, at Copenhagen,
in 1704, folio, and an uncommon book it is. Bartholin is picked up for a few shillings . Denmark, on the
whole, is rich in historical lore. Whatever was the
scantiness, or were the defects, of preceding periods,
the eighteenth century witnessed some publications
which would have done credit to the most civilised
and powerful nations on the globe. It is true, that
Torfæus led the way ; but the three quarto volumes
of the Gesta et Vestigia Danorum extra Daniam, put
forth at Leipsic in 1540, roused MALLET to the execution of the history of his country, and of the
Northern Antiquities : while these were exceeded
equally in splendour, utility, and extent, by the meritorious labours of LANGEBECK ;* whose " Collection
* The above, in due order : but a word or two of previous publications. Who has not heard the sound of the " Tuba Danica of
Randulffus, " 1644, folio ? — nor read the Leges Antiquæ Aulicæ Norvegorum & Danorum of Resenius, 1673, 4to . an admirable work- in
the Danish and Latin languages ? with the Historia Compendiosa of
the Kings of Denmark, to the time of Christian IV. , published in the
Latin language, at Leyden in 1695, 4to. As to the above-the
Gesta et Vestigia Danorum extra Daniam, may be worth about
21. 12s. 6d. It is now of rare occurrence. MALLET is the great
modern historian of Denmark. His Introduction to the History of
that country was published in the French language at Copenhagen
in 1755, 4to. His History, in the same language, was published
three years afterwards in three quarto volumes : a rare work, with
the third volume-and worth 3l. 13s. 6d. His Northern Antiquities,
a most curious work, was translated into English and published in
*
This work is pronounced by Ritson ( I quote from memory) to be " stuffed
with lies from one end to the other. " There are, assuredly, fictions enough in it,
as there are in Homer : but cannot the truth be severed from the falsehood ? And,
do not eventhese falsehoods, in some degree , illustrate the truth ? The ground of
Ritson's abuse was, simply, because Bishop Percy took a part in the publication.
348 [NORWAY.
NORTHERN HISTORIES.
ofWriters of Danish Affairs in the Middle Ages" appeared in seven folio volumes at Copenhagen in 1772-
1792. It is said that the present venerable and learned
Dr. Thorkelin, principal librarian of the Royal Library at Copenhagen, seldom pronounces the name of
Langebeck, without passing his hand across his eyes,
or placing it on his heart. This is as it should be.
NORWAY.
Norway will scarcely detain us two minutes. Of
late years, the shores of this country have been rarely
visited ; and that stupendous chain of eternally snowcapt mountains, which separates it from Sweden, and
of which the lower parts are alternately darkened
by forests of fir, * and relieved by gladsome pastures
1770, in 2 octavo volumes, under the editorial care of Bishop Percy;
and has been more than once reprinted. LANGEBECK's Scriptores
Rerum Danicarum Medii Ævi, published at Copenhagen in 1772-92,
is now become a work of uncommon occurrence . The copy of it, in
Dr. Heath's library, was sold for 6l. 8s. 6d. The editor was doubtless the Bouquet of Denmark. Dr. THORKELIN has published a
Danish and Anglo- Saxon poem by Beowulf, (with Latin verses
and indexes) of the feats of the Kings of Denmark in the third
and fourth centuries, from a MS. in the Cotton Library. It was published in 1815, 4to. and is marked in boards by Mr. Bohn at 17. 5s.
My friend Mr. Douce is yet the correspondent of this amiable and
learned Septuagenarian ; between whom and Earl Spencer many book
presents and bibliographical civilities have passed. From the destruction of his library, in the bombardment of Copenhagen during the
siege, Dr. Thorkelin has but too just grounds of remembrance of that
tremendous occurrence.
* Is the reader-or rather, are all my readers-aware that the
proudest feature of a first rate man of war, is the produce of Norway?
NORWAY. ] NORTHERN HISTORIES. 349
this marvellous portion of the globe seems (as
if fashion should rule the waves as well as the land)
to have no attractive charms for the enterprising
travellers of the south. On throwing an eye over the
extraordinary list of Voyages and Travels put forth by
the Two most celebrated booksellers in Europe, I find
no notice of Norway. Very recently, indeed, a work
has appeared under the following title : Travels through
Sweden, Norway, and Finmark, to the North Cape, in
the Summer of 1820. By A. DE CAPELL BROOKE,
M. M. 1823. This is a handsomely printed, and an
instructive volume ; but perhaps of equal interest, as
well as of more scientific attainment, is the performance of BARON VON BUCH, a Prussian-whose Travels
in Norway and Lapland appeared in a 4to. volume,
with Notes, Illustrations, and Maps, by Mr. Jameson,
in 1813 ; and may be worth 21. 2s. in comely binding.
Of the ancient historians of Norway, we must be
contented chiefly with TORFEUS and SNORRO. The
celebrated work of the former has been already noticed ; * and of the latter-(the son of the Author
upon the Northern Kings) it will be only essential to say, that, in the possession of his Historia
Regum Norvegia ; Hafnia, 1777, folio, 5 vols., you
have in all respects the most valuable work extant in
regard to Norway. The history of its revolutions,
I allude to the mast : for strength, straitness, and altitude, we must
always have recourse to the NORWAY FIR.
* See page 345.
+ " Snorroi, Sturlæ- Filii, Historia Regum Norvegicorum, Islandicè,
Danicè, et Latinè, à Schoning. Haunia, 1778, 1813, &c. Folio. Messrs.
Arch mark a copy, " four vols. in three, " calf, at 71. 17s. 6d. : ` but
Messrs. Rivington and Cochrane, adding another volume of the date
950 NORTHERN HISTORIES. [SWEDEN.
up to its union with Sweden in 1814, has been satisfactorily accomplished by Catteau Calleville, at Paris,
in 1818, 2 octavo volumes. But defective as may be
the link of Norwegian Historians, the country under
discussion boasts, in the work of PONTOPPIDAN, of one
of the noblest volumes extant connected with Natural
History. This magnificent book was published at
London in 1755, folio. *
SWEDEN.
This country is sufficiently fruitful in literary lore.
If it have not, in the developement of its history, all
those hardy and original traits which characterise the
Danish annals, it contains, nevertheless, a body of instruction and amusement, of which those who have
not read Puffendorf, Vertot, and Voltaire, can have no
adequate conception . Of late years, indeed, the hisof 1818, mark a copy, sewed, at 127. 12s. ; " and very neat in calf,"
at 157. 15s. Here is a tremendous difference of valuation, indeed !
The fifth volume, it is true, contains the history of OLD HACO ; but
are the memoirs of that ancient gentleman worth such an additional
sum ? I predict however that, before the year of our Lord 1830, not
a SNORRO will be found in the archives of our booksellers.
* Mr. Bohn marks this book at 21. 2s.: Messrs . Rivington and
Cochrane at 31. 3s. , and Messrs. Payne and Foss, "2vols. in 1 , neat, ”
at 41. 4s. adding another copy, on fine paper, with the margin of the
second vol. " slightly wormed " at 5l. 5s. I own I should be for this
latter, in spite of the insinuating worm, against all the field ! Dr.
Heath's copy produced 4l. 19s. Brunet does not notice a large
paper copy but such a one (and I believe it is UNIQUE) exists in the
magnificent library at Althorp. It is bound in two volumes, in calf
binding. The Glossarium Norvagicum, Germ. et Lat. 1749, 12mo.
was by a different author, of the same name.
SWEDEN.] NORTHERN HISTORIES. 351
tory of this country has become more particularly
interesting ; and it will be the wisdom of its present
reigning Monarch to consolidate and perpetuate, as
far as human means may, the strength of the Empire
by the encouragement given to PATRIOTIC LEARNING.
As an earnest of future glory, I hail the appearance of
the first volume of the National Writers of Sweden,
by Fant, published under the auspices of the King. *
Among the earlier writers on Swedish History, we
may notice the performances of MESSENIUS, LOCCENIUS, ELRIC OLAUS, ERLANDUS, SCHEFFER, and VERELIUS ; writers, whose works rather belong to the
Scriptores Rerum Sueciarum Medii Ævi, edidit E. M. FANT,
Holmiæ et Upsaliæ, 1818, folio, vol. i. Ofthis volume, I never saw
acopy ; nor is it at present to be found on the shelves of the Althorp
Library. Among the earlier collections of Swedish writers was that
of GOLDASTUS, published in 1727, folio : of which a copy reached
only the moderate sum of 9s. at the sale of Dr. Heath's library.
+ Let us consider these old fashioned gentlemen in the order in
which their publications appeared : but first, suppose " the Young
Man" exercise his ingenuity, and gratify his love of novelty, by turning over the " Regnorum Sueciæ, Gothiæ, Magnique Ducatus Finlandiæ &c. Descriptio Nova, 1656, adorned with cuts ; and then examine the more stately and satisfactory work entitled SUECIA ANTIQUA
ET HODIERNA, published at Stockholm, in three folio volumes. He
may afterwards purchase, or not, the works of the above authors as
follow. Scandia Illustrata, MESSENII ; with notes, by Peringskiold.
Holmiæ, 1700, folio : Chronicon Episcoporum, EJUSDEM ; 1611 , 8vo.
LOCCENII Hist. Rerum Sueciar. et Antiquit. Sueo- Goth. Holm.
1654, 8vo. A copy is in the library of the London Institution .
Suecia Regni Leges Provinciales, &c. EJUSD. Holm. 1672, folio : a
curious and uncommon book : see Bibl. Harleian. vol. i . n°. 7207.
Historia Suecana, &c. usq. ad Car. II. Libr. IX. &c. Francof. et Lips.
1676, folio. By the same Author ; and equally rare and valuable.
ELRICI OLAI Historia Suecorum Gothorumque. Holm. 1654, 12mo.
This book was edited by Loccenius. A copy of it was purchased by
352 NORTHERN HISTORIES. [SWEDEN.
cabinets of the curious, than to the libraries of general Collectors. The note, just referred to, will accordingly be read only by such a class of Virtuosi or
Antiquaries . I hasten, therefore, to the Biographies
of CHRISTINA, GUSTAVUS VASA, and CHARLES XII ;
because, in the first place, these biographies contain
Mr. Heber at the sale of Dr. Heath's library for 6s. 6d. ISRAEL ERLANDI Vita S. Erici Sueciæ Regis, 1675 , 8vo. A copy is in the possession of the same gentleman from the same library.
name.
The name of SCHEFFER stands deservedly high among the writers
of Northern History ; and there are several, I believe, of the same
The History of Lapland is probably more generally known ;
but the Harleian Catalogue furnishes me with the following of John
Scheffer, relating to Sweden. De Antiquis Verisque Regni Sueciae
Insignibus. Lib. sing. Holm. 1678, folio : Upsalia cujus Occasione
plurima in Religione, Sacris, Festis, illustrantur. Upsal. 1666, Svo.
De Situ & Vocabulo Upsaliæ, &c. Holmiæ, 1678, 8vo. Neither of
this writer, nor of the following yet more curious one, do I find any
works in the well- stocked library of the late Dr. Heath. It is of
VERELIUS of whom I am about to speak ; and whose Manductio
Compendiosa ad Runographiam Scandicam Antiquam recte intelligendam, Upsal, 1675, small folio, is considered by myfriend Mr. Douce
as exhibitingthe performance of the " Coryphæus of Northern lore : "
indeed, as he pronounced these words, he thrice flourished his Runic
staff, or wand, round his head ! And yet that same deeply-versed
antiquary could not put into my hands (as he did the " Manductio" )
the " Index Linguæ Scytho- Scandica, sive Gothicæ, ex vet. mon. collect.
1691 , folio- which Rudbeck republished in his Atlantica ; nor was I
furnished, by him, with the same author's " Hervarar Saga, seu Mulieris bellicosa, Hervora dictæ, Historia, Ling- Suec. cum Interp. Lat.
et Notis ; Upsal, 1672, folio. But these " SAGA * " plunge the
bibliographer into an unfathomable and interminable ocean of research. If, however, the heart of the enterprising " Young Man "
-
* Messrs. I. and A. Arch once had a snug corner of their valuable stock of
books devoted to these " Saga but the NORTHERN MANIA put them quickly to
Alight: to the equal joy of their past and present possessors.
SWEDEN. ]
NORTHERN HISTORIES. 353
some of the most curious particulars of Swedish history ; and because, in the second place, we have
hardly any regular history of that country till we
catch hold of the little elegantly printed (Elzevirean)
production of the Life of Christina, published in
1667, 12mo. * An Englishman, however, may solace
himself with the sensibly written History of Sweden
which appears in the twelfth volume of the Modern
Universal History, in folio, and in the twenty-ninth
and thirtieth volumes in octavo.
Next comes PUFFENDORF, a host in himself; his
" Swedish Affairs," and " Transactions of Gustavus
Adolphus," being works (especially the latter) withfail him , in these confined but curious researches, I beg and entreat
that when a good copy of the Monumenta Sueo- Gothica (with no
stinted sprinkling of curious cuts) of PERINGSKIOLD, Stockh. 1710,
folio, turns up-he will give as much as Mr. Priestley did, at Dr.
Heath's sale, to become its purchaser-namely, 21. 10s.
* Before the appearance of the rare little Elzevir volume above
noticed, there was published an Italian History of Christina, at
Modena, in 1656, 4to.: now become a rare book ; see Bibl. Heath, no.
2510. Four years afterwards appeared an English work under the
following title, " The History of Christina Queen of Swedeland, with
the Reason for her Abdication and Motives of her Conversion to the
Church of Rome, " 1660 , 8vo. Bibl. Harl. vol. i. nº. 7220. But
the most splendid and perfect work, relating to this celebrated Queen,
was published in the French language, " Mémoires de Christine,
Reine de Suède, (recueillis par Archenholz) Amst. 1751 , 4to. 4 vols.
with cuts, including portraits ; and of which a copy was bought by
Earl Gower at Dr. Heath's sale for 2l. 12s. Christina has recently
had more honours paid to her memory. Lacombe published a short
history of her in 1762, 12mo. ; and Catteau Calleville in 1815, 8vo.
2 vols.
† First, of his " Commentariorum de Rebus Suecicis Libr. xxiv. ab
expedit. Gustavi Adolphi Reg. in Germaniam ad Abdicationem Christinae, first published at Utrecht, in 1686, folio ; and afterwards at
A A
354 NORTHERN HISTORIES [ SWEDEN.
.
out which no historical collection can be considered
as complete. We approach VERTOT ; whose Histoire
des Revolutions de Suède, was first published in 1734,
4to. Its reimpressions are very numerous. About the
same period came out VOLTAIRE's popular Histoire de
Charles XII; of which the editions are almost innumerable ; and which indeed may be considered one
of the most instructive and admirably written works of
modern times . *
Of recent execution, we have indeed nothing absolutely full and instructive relating to Sweden : at
least, I am unacquainted with any such production.
But I cannot close these observations, however imperfect, without making some mention, and enforcing
the recommendation, of the celebrated work called
Franckfort on the Main, 1705, folio. A work of great and justly
founded reputation. No historian or commentator on Swedish affairs
excels Puffendorf. A good copy of the latter edition may be worth
17. 10s. The " Res gesta Caroli Gustavi Sueciae Regis," was printed
at Nuremberg, in 1696, folio, two vols. and again at the same
place in 1729 ; of which latter, a copy produced 31. 10s. at the sale
of Dr. Heath's library. It has many plates . A French version appeared at Nuremberg in two vols. the year after the first Latin version : Bibl. Harl. vol. i. n°. 7211.
But the GREAT GUSTAVUS has more recent historians. Harte published his history in 1759, 4to. which has been reprinted in 8vo. —a
work strongly recommended by Lord Chesterfield ; and Mauvillon
published his history from the MSS. of Archenholz, at Amst. 1764,
⚫ 12mo. 4 vols. or 4to. 1 vol.
* The most copious, and intrinsically valuable, history of Charl
XII. is that by NORDBERG, published in the French language at the
Hague, in 1748, 4to. 4 vols. : and worth about 17. 18s . or 21. 2s. To
this, and to similar works, let me add " Mémoires pour servir à la
connoissance des affaires de la Suède (par Canzler) in 1776," Dresd.
two parts, in quarto.
SWEDEN]
NORTHERN HISTORIES. 355
OLAI RUDBECKII ATLANTICA, published in four folio
volumes, at Upsal, in 1675-1698, * and of which per-
* The " Atlantica, sive Manheim vera Japheti posteriorum sedes ac
patria " of RUDBECK is doubtless among the GREATEST GUNS ofa
well chosen collection. Brunet, by the assistance of an amusing and
instructive work called " " Voyage de deux Français au Nord de
l'Europe," 1788, (qu ? ) has given a very particular and faithful
account of this extraordinary production. The main features of
a perfect and desirable copy are these. There are three different
titles to the first volume: one has the date of 1675 ; another, that of
1679, purporting to be a second edition —but in fact precisely like the
volume with a previous date, having only seven additional leaves at
the end. There is a third title page without any date-and all these
title-pages were found in the Valliere copy, which produced 1351
francs-a sum exceeding that ofany other copy sold in France. This
copy had other peculiarities, presently to be noticed, and chiefly the
index to the third volume, for which the keen Collector must be on
the constant look out. Debure never sawany copy with this Index,
but that of Gaignat. It will be found, I believe, in the copies of his
Majesty, Earl Spencer, Mr. Grenville, and Mr. G. Hibbert, and I
suspect that a similar copy graces the Chatsworth Library The
Atlas, which was first published, should contain forty- three plates ;
or rather forty-one leaves, including two Chronological tables, which
follow the forty- third plate. The fifth plate is never found ; but
there is a duplicate of the twenty- fifth .
And now, a word about the fourth volume. It is in fact almost
UNFINDABLE ; as only three or four copies are supposed to have survived the fire which consumed, not only the author's MS. (with the
foregoing exception) but the WHOLE OF THE IMPRESSION after the third
sheet of the second alphabet had been struck off. These perished
with a great number of copies of the third volume ; so that the first
two volumes of Rudbeck are often found (as in the Harleian Collection) without the third. All the more eminent libraries, sold within
these dozen years, did not contain it. My printer furnishes me with
the following notice from his interleaved De Bure :
" De Bure is certainly mistaken in asserting that there are no
printed copies of the 4th vol. of Rudbeck's Atlantica. Mr. Dryander has often seen the copy which is in the University Library at
356 NORTHERN HISTORIES. [ SWEDEN.
fect copies are cherished with a sort of enthusiastic
fondness, only exceeded by the possession of a perfect
set of the peregrinations of DE BRY. Happy is that
man, but happier yet that well-versed Bibliomaniac,
who, on pointing to his perfect Rudbeck, says, that
" his blood and treasure have not flowed in vain in
the acquisition of such an object." Great conquests
can only be obtained by great expenditures. And so
he hastens to open his black-letter tomes, of which, in
all probability, he is unable to read one word of the
original text, however he may grapple with the Latin
version. I cannot in my heart help avowing that, the
printing and embellishments of this work are most
provokingly repulsive. Yet I must not be supposed
to raise the feeblest sound against its intrinsic worth.
Upsala, containing, as far as Mr. Dryander can remember, about 130
pages. In the library of the Academy of Sciences at Stockholm is
another copy, as may be seen from Rounadler's Catalogue (of his
library given to the Academy) page 4, no. 48-52, where are the
1, 2, 3, volumes, and ofthe 4th, as much as has been printed-together with the plates in a 5th vol. Mr. Dryander has also been told
that one copy is in the possession of Professor Aurivilliers at Upsala,
and that one was in the library of the late Dr. Hawswolff, rector of
St. Clara in Stockholm, which was bought at the sale of his books,
either for some public library or some private person in Germany.
This accounts for four copies, which Mr. Dryander has been told to
be the only existing, and also that they do not all contain the same
number of sheets . In Upsala it is believed that the copy in the
public library there is the completest ; but as Mr. Dryander has not
seen any of the others, he has no proof of it. " Mr. Towneley's fine
copy, bound in five volumes, in red morocco, produced eighty
guineas ; and I cannot suppose such a copy to be now fallen in price.
Mr. Grenville's copy was obtained for a considerably less sum, from
the sale of Prince Palm's library, at Ratisbon, in 1819.
There was a duplicate of the first volume, having no date
[ 357 ]
RUSSIA.
The last and not the least of the Empires of the
North, whose history may be worth the sedulous attention of the Student, is RUSSIA : an Hercules in its
infancy. Of its strength and power in maturity, no
political foresight can venture to form any satisfactory prediction. As an empire, influencing the destinies of the other parts of Europe, its history scarcely
extends beyond the last century ; although of the
Affairs of Muscovy we have a work of nearly three
hundred years standing. I allude to that of SIGISMUND Baron of HERBERSTEIN ; which was succeeded,
about half a century, by a Body ofthe Historians of
the same country. *
* Take the following account of these works. " Sigismundi Liberi Baronis in Herberstein rerum Muscoviticarum Commentarii, Basil.
1556, folio. I find, however, a copy of this work of the date of
1551 , in the catalogue of Dr. Heath's library, nº. 2537, where it is
said to contain " cuts and a curious portrait of the first Russian King
who was converted to Christianity. " The copy was in antique binding, and was purchased by Mr.Evans for 21. 17s. The " Muscoviticarum Rerum Scriptores unum in corpus congesti, &c . curis Marnii & Aubrii," was published at Franckfort, in 1600, folio ; and Isaac Vossius's
copy of this work was bought by the London Institution at Dr.
Heath's sale for 19s. 6d. To these let me here add a couple of
lines by noticing the work of LASITZKI de Russorum Muscovitarum &
Tartarorum Religione et Ritibus, Spiræ, 1582, 4to. : a rare book, and
if in sound condition, well worth a golden guinea. †
+In a sub-note , I may be allowed to whisper in the car of the very curious ColJector, that one or two SCARCE BOOKS belong to the class of those which treat of
the Affairs of Muscovy. As this : " Ulfeldii Legatio Moscovitica," 4to . Franc. 1608.
358 NORTHERN HISTORIES [RUSSIA.
.
I am anxious, in this bibliographical sketch of
works bearing on Russia, that " the Young Man"
should, in the first place, provide himself with the
Atlas Russicus, published by the Imperial Academy
at Petersburg in 1743, which he may obtain for about
27. 2s.; and that he should afterwards study well the
works of D'ANVILLE and the MARQUIS GABRIEL DE
CASTELNAU, * upon the ancient and modern histories
of this vast Empire. Let him then throw more than
a cursory glance over the Description de toutes les
nations de l'Empire de Russie, published in 1776, in
three quarto volumes ; and especially let him lose no
opportunity ofsecuring a good and moderately-priced
copy of a work-which perhaps may supersede all previous similar works-entitled Histoire de la Russie Ancienne et Moderne, par N. GABR. LE CLERC, published
at Paris in 1783, in 6 vols. 4to. , with an Atlas, in folio.†
* Whatever D'ANVILLE wrote, is worth purchasing and worth
reading. His work in question is styled : " L'Empire de Russie, son
origine et ses acroissemens ." Paris, 1772, 12mo. The modern work
bythe Marquis, bears this title : " Essai sur l'histoire ancienne et
moderne de la nouvelle Russie : Statistique des provinces qui la composent Odessa, &c. Voyage en Crimée. Paris, 1820, 8vo. 3 vols .
with plates, 17. 1s . in boards.
† The volumes above specified may be worth about 12s. each : but
I suspect a well bound copy of the latter work is not to be obtained
There is a striking similarity between the account given by this Author of the
Tartars and that drawn by Pallas in our own days ; which proves that the manners
of the Tartars had undergone very little variation in more than a century. Diarium Itineris Moscoviæ magnif. Dom. Ignac. Christ. de Guarient, &c. , anno 1678 ,
descriptum aJ. G. Korbio, a small thin folio. Vienna, 1700. This very rare book was suppressed at the instigation of Peter the First, on account of the anecdotes it
contains of the Russian Court. In his History of the Rebellion ofthe Strelitzes ,
the Author informs us that the Czar beheaded eleven of the rebels in ten days
with his own hand! I know not, just now, where to point out any other copy of
either of these works than those in the well selected Library of his late Majesty.
RUSSIA. ] NORTHERN HISTORIES. 859
He may then set to work in chronological order ; and
putting the pretty little Strawberry Hill edition of
LORD WHITWORTH'S Account of Russia, in 1710,
(printed in 1758, 12mo.) into his pocket, or post chaise,
as an out-of-door companion, he will sit solidly and
steadily down to GENERAL MANSTEIN's Memoirs of
Russia from 1727 to 1744 with Maps and Plans, published in 1773, * 4to. which will be found to contain
a great deal of valuable and correct information.
We now reach the order of time in which the best
edition ofBELL's Travels from Petersburgh to diuerse
parts of Asia, appeared ; namely, in 1763, 2 vols. 4to,
printed by the respectable family of the Foulises,† and
about twenty years afterwards came out the Travels
of Mr. ARCHDEACON COXE, in Poland and Russia, in
3 vols 4to, 1784, with maps and cuts. But the splendour and celebrity of all travels in Russia, performed
by Englishmen, has been exceeded by that of the late
and deeply lamented Dr. EDWARD CLARKE-through
Russia, Tartary, and Turkey : first published in 1810-
12, in four quarto volumes ; and succeeded, till within a
short time ofthe author's death, by publications ofother
Travels in the Holy Land, Hungary, and Bohemia. ‡
under 41. 14s. 6d. To such works add the following : Tableau historique, géographique, militaire et naval, de la Russie, par D. DE RAYMOND, Paris, 1812, 8vo. 2 vols. Dictionnaire Géographique et Historique de l'Empire des Russies, par VSEVOLOJSKYS, Moscou, 1813,
8vo. 2 vols.
* A copy ofthis work, bound in russia, was bought by Mr. Payne
at the sale of Dr. Heath's library for 11. 11s. 6d. It is a long time
since I have met with a good copy of it.
+ Dr. Heath's copy of this work was bought by Sir Richard Borough for 21. 12s. 6d. It is the best edition.
Of works of such recent and general notoriety, it were perhaps
360 NORTHERN HISTORIES [RUSSIA.
.
It is surely not too much to aver, that few Travellers
have obtained so large and so general a reputation as
unnecessary to enter into any very elaborate detail ; yet it is not less
honourable to the British public, than to the author's memory, that,
within the comparatively short period of fourteen years, so many editions, in a quarto and octavo form , should have appeared of these
truly interesting travels. This FACT is alone a test of their value.
The reader may be gratified with the following analysis :
VOLUME I. RUSSIA, TARTARY, TURKEY. First Edition : 1810,
4to. Second Edition, 1811 , 4to Third Edition, 1813, 4to . Fourth
Edition, 1816, 8vo.
VOLUME II. GREECE, EGYPT, and the HOLY LAND. Section the
First. First Edition, 1812, 4to. Second Edition, 1813 , 4to. Third
Edition, 1817, 8vo.
VOLUME III . THE SAME COUNTRIES . Section the Second. First
Edition, 1813, 4to. Second Edition, 1817 , 8vo.
VOLUME IV. THE SAME COUNTRIES. Section the Third : to
which is added a Supplement, respecting the Author's Journey from
Constantinople to Vienna, containing his Account of the Gold Mines
of TRANSYLVANIA, in HUNGARY. First Edition, 1816, 4to. Second
Edition, 1818, 8vo .
VOLUME V. DENMARK, SWEDEN, LAPLAND, FINLAND, NORWAY,
and RUSSIA. Section the First. First Edition, 1819 , 4to.
VOLUME VI. THE SAME COUNTRIES. Section the Second. First
Edition, 1823, 4to. A review of this Second Section appeared in
the October Number, 1823, of the Edinburgh Review.
All the preceding volumes have been, I believe, elaborately and ably reviewed in
both the Edinburgh and Quarterly critical Journals.
Such are the works of the late lamented Dr. Edward Clarke.
Another volume, too closely connected with the preceding, is about
to be added : I mean, that of HIS LIFE, with posthumous disquisitions, for which a large and liberal subscription has already been set
on foot. The Travels of Dr. Clarke are published in a very unostentatious manner, in respect to paper, printing, and embellishments.
Each of these, considering the prices of the volumes, might havebeen
on an improved scale : nor am I quite satisfied with the LARGE PAPER,
inasmuch as it should have presented us with a more decided difference from the small. In the catalogue of Messrs . Harding, Mavor,
RUSSIA. ] NORTHERN HISTORIES. 361
Dr. Clarke. His style is easy and perspicuous. His
facts are striking, interesting, and instructive : and if
the matter contained in such a formidable series of
quartos might have received a salutary compression,
we must not lament that too much, rather than too
little, has been said upon subjects, which had something inore than the mere charm of novelty to ensure
them a popular reception. Scepticism was up in
arms about the contents ofthe first volume, which represented the Russ to be almost a compound of fraud
and filth ; and had the author ventured to Petersburg,
while his text was fresh in the memories of its inhabitants, he might have been rewarded by a
ducking in the waters of the Neva. Yet when temporary prejudices, and temporary views and interests
shall have subsided, the name of CLARKE will be held
in more than ordinary estimation by a grateful posand Lepard, I observe a copy of the quarto impressions (1810-15)
on small paper, " bound in crimson morocco, extra " (it should have
been darkgreen or dark blue morocco) marked at twenty- five guineas.
The octavo volumes are published at about 15s. each ; and eight volumes, in this form, including Russia, Tartary, Greece, Egypt, and
the Holy Land, are marked, in calf binding, at 81. 8s. in the last
catalogue of Messrs . I. and A. Arch.
But the name of Clarke will be for ever connected with ancient
CLASSICAL LITERATURE. His labours upon the tomb of Alexander,
and onthe fragment of a colossal statue of Ceres (the latter presented
byhim to his own University, Cambridge) are learned and ingenious;
yet, even higher honour is due to their author, by his having procured a very important MS. of the GREEK RHETORICIANS, now in
the British Museum ; and the MOST PRECIOUS MS. extant of PLATO : -
a MS. over which Porson hung with rapture, and Mr. Gaisford yet
indulges in visions of classical inspiration ! It is preserved in the
Bodleian Library. Upon the whole, if HUMBOLT be the first, CLARKE
is the second Traveller of his age.
362 [RUSSIA.
NORTHERN HISTORIES.
terity. If some facts and statements, in those meritorious volumes to which his imperishable name is
affixed, appear to be distorted, or given upon loose testimony- and doubtless much, in the earlier volumes,
requires great qualification and correction- there is
on, the other hand, an abundance of matter, which,
while it has been highly conducive to the best interests of science, has displayed the keen and penetrating observation, the hardy enterprise, and the invincible perseverance of the Author. That Dr. Clarke,
will LIVE, in the purest sense of the word, cannot be
doubted for an instant.
But among the works which treat of the History of
Russia, we must not omit those that relate to the
Lives or Memoirs of Peter the Great and Catharine
II.; characters, equally extraordinary of their kind,
and under whose sceptres the Russian Empire maybe
said to have attained a more formidable ascendancy
throughout Europe. * Both French and English Memo-
* Besides the celebrated work of VOLTAIRE, upon the formerwhich has been published in all forms and sizes, and of which the
popularity need not here be dwelt upon-the French have published
various works. Journal de Pierre le Grand, &c. Lond. 1773, 8vo.
2 vols. Mémoires, &c . by SUNANNOI, Amst. 1740, 12mo. 5 vols.
Anecdotes Originales, Strasb. 1787, 8vo. But the most esteemed
work, (which is in German) is that of De Halem, published at
Munster in 1803-5, 8vo. 3 vols. Of Catharine, the Histoire, &c. by
CASTERA, in 1800, 3 vols.: and the Mémoires secrets of MASSON,
Paris, 1800-3, 8vo. 4 vols. are among the principal : while a French
version of Mr. Tooke's well known history of the same extraordinary
character appeared at Paris in 1804, Svo. in six vols. Mr. Tooke's
history of Russia to the Succession of Catherine II. , was published in
two octavo volumes. His reign of Catherine, in three octavo volumes.
These are in a constant state of republication—and are de-
RUSSIA. ]
NORTHERN HISTORIES. 363
rialists have entered upon this fertile field ; and among
ourselves, few, I believe, have been rewarded by the
reputation which has followed the labours of the late
Mr. WILLIAM TоOKE. Yet the modern traveller, who,
of all others, seems to have exhausted the natural and
civil history of Russia, is PALLAS ; a German , and
worthy in all respects to be classed among the most
accurate describers of this country. The French have
been most active in versions of his text, and the pages
of Brunet supply a rich harvest of the labours of
that traveller's pen.
It is yet possible that " the Old Man," whose eyes
might be speedily wearied by looking into the greater
part ofthe preceding works, would be desirous of turning over, in the calm leisure of country retirement, a
few of the more splendid and striking publications,
which display the manners, customs, and dress, of the
Russians. Ifthis be the case, let him hasten to secure
the Histoire de Russie en figures, Paris, 1799, 4to. 3
vols. of which the celebrated DAVID is the author ; and
if the small and similar work of BRETON, in eight
octodecimo volumes, published in 1813, be deemed
insufficient, there can be no doubt of the satisfaction
to be derived from the larger volumes of HEMPEL and
HOUBIGANT. Of other similar works, now in proserving ofall the reputation which they have acquired . The authr
was a long resident, and a close observer of what he saw, at Petersburgh.
* Vol. iii . p. 6. I doubt whether a 101. note would not put the
collector in possession of the principal works of Pallas. His travels
into the Southern part of the Russian Empire were translated into
our tongue ; Lond. 1802-12 : 2 vols. 4to.
+ The work of the former author came out in a grand quarto vo-
364 NORTHERN HISTORIES [RUSSIA.
.
gress, the enumeration would unnecessarily occupy
too large a portion of these pages.
lume, in 1805, at Leipsic ; and is called Tableaux Pittoresques des
Mœurs, des Usages, &c. des Russes. But Hempel published another
work, called Description de tous les Peuples qui sont sous la domination
d'Alexandre I. Paris, 4to. But a yet more splendid work, of a
description similar to the first, was published in London in three
folio volumes ; and at Paris (" Les Peuples de la Russie, ") 1812, in
two folio volumes. Houbigant's work came out in 1817, folio, under
the title of " Maurs et Costumes des Russes. " Yet this list comprises
scarcely a third part of such publications : but enough, and perhaps
more than enough, has been said for the accommodation of the generality of purses !
[ 365 ]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS.
It is reported of an Indian, while incautiously
gliding in his canoe, towards the rapids which are
within a short distance of the falls of NIAGARA, that,
finding himself within the irresistible vortex of those
falls, he ceased making any efforts of resistance :
but, placing his paddle by the side of him, within
his little bark, and lying on his back, he quietly
awaited the fate which it was impossible to escape :-
and was precipitated into eternity . . . down the central horse- shoe fall. * The author of this work is not
* The " horse- shoe fall " is the greater of the two falls of the river
Niagara, and is on the British or Canadian side of it. It is advantageously seen from two points of view : the one, from Goat Island,
a small piece of cultivated land, which separates the two falls—and
the other, from the Table Rock, projecting about fifty feet on the
Canadian shore-and immediately commanding a view of both falls,
and of the Rapids ; but more particularly of the great horse-shoe, or
semicircular fall - which is about 600 yards across, and about one
hundred and fifty feet deep . The arch, made by the latter fall, is
about fifty feet from the perpendicular base ; and under this arch , the
hardy traveller frequently ventures-stunned, as if all the guns, fired
at the battle of Trafalgar, were discharged at the same moment. The
fall, on the American side, to the left of Goat island, is comparatively
perpendicular, gaining somewhat in height what it loses in width :
being only 300 yards across, but one hundred and sixty-four feet
high. Here is therefore a body of water in short, a huge river—
of half a mile in width, precipitating itself into a channel, or stream,
which is discharged in the Lake Ontario. But the greater, or
horse-shoe fall, is the more tremendous object ; in the description
which travellers seem to exhaust all their powers of comparison and
expression.
-
366 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS.
very unlike the Indian in question .. in regard to being
propelled by an irresistible bibliographical impulse.
HISTORY, VOYAGES, and TRAVELS, are so closely connected, that it is impossible to avoid the two latter in
the enumeration of the chief treasures of the former ..
and accordingly I find myselfinevitably, but safely and
I know of no one description, however, which exceeds, for liveli.
ness, spirit, and propriety of colouring, that which was furnished me
by a female friend, last summer, immediately after visiting the spot.
I should previously observe, that the Rapids, in their obviously descending, and more tremendous, force (and into which the poor
Indian's canoe, above-mentioned, was precipitated) are about fifty
feet above the edge of the falls ; so that, the whole body of descending water may be said to be about 210 feet high. Its immense width
takes away even from this height. But, for the description just
alluded : " I wish I could convey to you, (says my friend) a slight
idea of this magnificent scene ; which no description that I have
read, nor view that I have seen, comes up to—even slightly. Never
can I forget the deep, solemn, tide of the fall, clear as chrystal, and
green as the chrysolite- broken with white feathery foam, sweeping through its channel of rocks, with a sullen dignity of sound and
motion far beyond any thing I could ever have conceived . A sight of
the Rapids themselves was worth all the fatigues of our journey.
They come dashing along from above, in frightful confusion, to the
brink of the precipice-where they are absorbed in a deep, slow,
solemn tide (just mentioned) which disguises its rapidity by the dignity of its sound and motion. Then again, this most wonderful fall
of transparent water is feathered with broken foam, which flies off,
like jets of snow-white water, discharged from the conch of a Triton
- sparkling in the sun, with a brilliance beyond description and
magically harmonising with the prismatic colours from the rising
spray below. Here I saw, what I had never seen before, and could
never have dreamt to see : the rainbow above, reflected in the water
below, and united in a perfect circle. We stood entranced !" And
so I think will the reader sit entranced-in realising such a scene in
his imagination.
-
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 367
pleasantly, I trust, borne down those rapids that precipitate themselves into the mighty ocean which encircles the globe, and which sustained the vessels of CoLUMBUS, VASCO DE GAMA, COOK and PEROUse.
And here, ere I am launched into such an interminable ocean, let me say a word or two of comfort and encouragement to both " young" and " old." The theme
to be touched is full of interest. Thebooks which relate
to VOYAGES and TRAVELS are among the most precious
and instructive in our Libraries. I speak, of course, of
well authenticated Travels ; and not of such stuff as
the fictions of Psalmanazar, and the fabrications of
Damberger. Within the precincts of his library, the
Collector of Voyages and Travels makes himself acquainted with all countries, climates, and characters.
The sea always carries him to his destined port in
safety ; and the land is always secure from banditti.
He sits " in his easy chair, " and associates with warriors, legislators, philosophers, or savages ; he now
scales the perilous height, and now traverses the
parched plain-with equal impunity. To him, the
wild beast of the forest, and the reptile of the desert,
is equally innocuous. Nor do physical causes present
either harm or impediment. The snows of the Alps
and the Andes, and the fires of Vesuvius and Ætna,
neither freeze his blood nor scorch his skin. He
knows not hunger or thirst : although hundreds of his
fellow-creatures are perishing from both causes. Ifit
be the season of winter, he draws close his crimson
curtain, stirs his wood-coal fire, trims his lamp, sinks
upon his couch-and throws himself into sunny regions, where the lime, and tamarind, and pomegranate, yield their refreshing juices . Or, should summer
368 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS.
dart its heat upon his head, he seeks the northern
arbour of his garden ; and cool, beneath the mixed
foliage of the holly, and ivy, and clematis-over the
whole of which the woodbine throws its sweet- scented
tendrils-he spreads his folio or his quarto upon the
rustic table ; now gazes upon the highly wrought
plates, and now buckles himself to the uninterrupted
perusal of the instructive text. In such a recess, he is
cooled by the fancied breezes of Kamtschatka or Spitsbergen ; and thus, turning over the pages of Cook or
Parry, the hours steal away, and the sun is sinking
low in the horizon . But, whether winter or summer,
the volumes of HAKLUYT and of PURCHAS will never
fail to afford an inexhaustible fund of amusement.
I am, however, running a little riot, (" I own the
glorious subject fires my breast !" ) and am anticipating
names which should come in the chronological order
of detail. But, let the observation be strictly attended
to, that my object is FAR indeed from giving any thing
like a complete or analysed Catalogue of Books of
Travels. On the contrary, I shall only speak of COLLECTIONS OF VOYAGES, and of the principal Voyages
and Travels which relate to the three great quarters of
the globe, ASIA, AFRICA, and AMERICA. In the two
former, the recent labours of Mr. Murray* have rendered me an incalculable service.
* Historical Account of Discoveries and Travels in AFRICA, from
the earliest ages to the present time. By HUGH MURRAY, F. R. S. E.
1818, 8vo. 2 vols. Second edition . Historical Account afDiscoveries
and Travels in ASIA, from the earliest ages to the present time. By THE
SAME, 1820, 8vo. 3 vols. I strongly recommend these five octavo
volumes to a place in EVERY library, professedly devoted to Voyages
and Travels, or not. They are reasonable in price, accompanied by
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 369
Let me, therefore, begin with the notice of the
shorter Voyages of the Portuguese, * the FATHERS of
Adventure and Discovery. The Italians quickly imitated their examples, and almost rivalled their glory.
The names of COLUMBUS and VESPUTIUS† are among
useful maps, and the text is a fund of amusement and nstruction.
Nogentleman should have his few score volumes in the country, with.
out such delightful companions. BEKMAN put forth a pretty and
instructive work, on a similar plan, in the German language, in one
octavo volume, 1806 ; and the Bibliothèque Universelle des Voyages,
of BOUCHER DE LA RICHARDERIE, in six octavo volumes, Paris, 1808,
cannot fail to be consulted, both as an amusing and instructive work.
Peignot, in his Rep. Bibliog. Universel, 1812, 8vo . p. 478, has given a
concise and correct analysis of the contents of these volumes.
* Among these shorter voyages, there is an early publication, entitled, " Gesta proximè per Portugalenses in India, &c. " Romæ, 1506,
4to. printed by Besicken. It has only six leaves. A copy of it is in
the very curious library of Mr. Grenville, and its possessor knows of
no other copy, except that in the library of the Royal Society. The
facts which it relates, took place only a few months before the publication of the volume. Mr. Grenville's copy, brilliantly bound, by
Charles Lewis, in red morocco, is as fresh and fair as the earliest
blown summer rose. Another work, relating to the same Portuguese
travellers, was published at Milan, in the Italian language, in 1507,
4to. under the title of " Paesi novamente ritrovati ; " which again
was translated by Madrignanus, under the title of " Itinerarium Portugallensium in Indiam et inde in Occidentem. " (Milan) 1508, 4to.
Both editions are in Mr. Grenville's library.
† The earliest performance connected with the travels of ALBERICUS OF AMERICUS VESPUTIUS, appeared in a small 4to. volume,
published in the Latin language, without date, ( but somewhere about
1501 ) , in a series of letters to Lorenzo de' Medici, the son of Pietro
Francisco, " Quæ editio (says Meuselius, with a note of admiration)
perrara," Bibl. Hist. vol. iii . p. 265. It is so indeed-and was
speedily translated and published in the Italian language. This first
Latin edition contains six leaves only, on signature a ; having the
device of Iehan Lambert (the word " Felix" between two monkies)
B b
370 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. [ COLLECTIONS.
the most splendid of those of modern renown. Voyages continued to be made, and publications of them
to appear, till RAMUSIO, about the middle of the sixteenth century, put forth his memorable Navigation
et Viaggi, in tre volume divise ; a work, of which the
best edition, in 1563, &c. * will be found to be among
;
in the frontispiece or title page. In the first page of the text, we
find that " the voyage was prosperously commenced, on the 14th of
May, 1501 , along the Fortunate Islands, now called the Canaries
then they coasted along the African and Æthiopian shores as far as
the promontory of Ptolemy, now called Cape Verd, " &c. There was
an early French version, of the date of 1516 , 4to . called "Le Nouveau
Monde d' Americ de Vespuce : " of which Mathurin du Redouet was
the translator, and for a copy of which I find my friend Mr. Heber
giving the unaccountable sum of £10, at the sale of the Merly
Library. Both editions are in Mr. Grenville's library ; but the first
Latin is so rare, that it may be doubted whether a second copy be in
England. There is one in the Royal Library in France.
* In the instructive pages of Niceron (Mémoires pour servir à
l'Histoire des Hommes Illustres, ) vol. xxxv . p. 97—139, will be found
a good account of the contents of the Collection of Voyages put
forth by the celebrated JOHN BAPTIST RAMUSIO : a man, who, to
the dexterity of a diplomatist, added the hardihood of an adventurer,
and the taste of a scholar and was especially skilled in the French
and Spanish languages. He served the Republic of Venice fortythree years ; and retired to Padua, in the privacy of old age, to
profit himself of his past experience, and to collect his notices of
past travels. His collection , enough (as Niceron says, very properly) to immortalise his name, formed the amusement of his old
age. He died in 1557, in his 72d year. The first volume of his
Collections appeared in 1553, the last in 1588. According to Brunet, we should purchase the first volume of the edition of 1563 or
1588 the second volume of that of 1583 ; and the third of that of
1565. To this third volume, should be added a portion of the edition of 1606-p. 386-430, containing the Viaggio de M. Cesare de
Frederici nell' India- orientale : Fine and perfect copies of Ramusio are of rare occurrence. The work is handsomely printed in the
COLLECTIONS.] VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 871
the most valuable acquisitions to a library of any
pretension to a Collection of Voyages and Travels.
But the celebrity ofall previous, if not of all succeeding
similar collections, was eclipsed by that ofTHEODORE
DE BRY, and his Sons*-well known under the title
of the Greater and Lesser Voyages : and of which
the first volume appeared at Franckfort on the Main,
in 1590, and the last in 1634.
But what a bibliographical chord am I striking, in
the mention of the Travels of De Bry ! What a
Peregrination" does the possession of a copy of his
labours imply ! What toil, difficulty, perplexity, anx66
GIUNTI Office ; and a fine copy of it , at the sale of Colonel Stanley's
library, was purchased by Lord Morpeth for £24. An inferior copy,
at the Merly sale, was obtained for £8. It is not usually found in
the catalogues of our booksellers ; and I search in vain those so
frequently mentioned in the course of these pages.
copy ofthe first volume of the edition of 1563, and of the third of
that of 1606, (but not containing the voyage of Cæsar Frederic)
marked at the reasonable sum of 11. 5s.
Mr. Bohn has a
* It is a pity that more is not known of THEODORE DE BRY, and
his Sons. They appear to have been men of considerable, if not of
first rate, talents ; while their diligence, enterprise, and love of art,
entitle them to the gratitude of posterity. Theodore, a native of
Franckfort on the Main, was born in 1528, and died in 1598. The
excellence of his burin lay chiefly in his smaller figures ; although
the frontispiece to the Grands Voyages, which represents them comparatively large, (but not of the largest size) is an admirable performance of its kind. I suspect Theodore de Bry to have usually improved his subjects, as his figures are tall and graceful, and executed
with remarkable facility, if not force. His Adam and Eve, in the
Voyage to Virginia, is however full of contortion and conceit. A
book of travels, of the same extent, executed now, in the style of
De Bry's smaller figures, would, indeed, be a delicious performance :
but aquatint and lithography have extended their baneful influence
Over ALMOST every similar production.
372 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. [ COLLECTIONS.
iety, and vexation, attend the collector-be he "young"
or “ old” —who sets his heart upon a PERFECT DE
BRY ! * How many have started forward on this pur.
* SUCH a perfect copy" -and indeed MORE than a perfect onewas, for two successive days, " sub oculis manibusque," in the fine
library of the Right Honourable Thomas Grenville-above alluded
to. How is the reader to be made acquainted with this copy ? I can
only impart to him its leading features, which renders a consultation of De Bure, Brunet, and Camus, almost unnecessary. But a word
or two by way of introductory remark. The Collection of De Bry
consists of Travels in the East and West Indies, put forth in twentyfive folio parts, between the year 1590 and 1634, inclusively. This
Collection is divided into the GREAT and Small Voyages ; and each
of these Voyages has appeared in two editions, in the Latin and
German languages. The first voyage to Virginia, has been published
in the English language ; and a perfect copy of this English version
is, as the reader will presently find, the VERY RAREST of all the parts :
and it is extraordinary that Brunet does not notice this part, however
briefly-although he says that he has seen the first part of a French
edition, which was probably never continued. The Great Voyages
(or those parts which were published in a larger folio size) relate to
the West Indies : the Small Voyages (put forth in asmaller form) to
the East. And now, for " a true and particular" account of the unrivalled copy of Mr. Grenville . First, by way of précis or summary-almost in the words of its deserving possessor :
This copy of De Bry was originally formed by Debure, at Paris,
in eight volumes, which that bibliographer considered a perfect
copy. Since Mr. Grenville purchased it, he has spared no expense
* It was, infact , the copy which had belonged to Mr. Willett, and which Messrs
J. and A. Arch purchased at the sale of the Merly Library, in 1813 , for 1264. It
contained ten leaves of Elenchus, supposed to have been a fac- simile of those published by Merian, in 1634-- but which turned out to be the original ; and the purchasers being fortunate enough to obtain many other pieces, wanting in this copy,
sold it, in such improved state, to Mr. Grenville, for 2401. This copy, therefore, so
improved, formed only the basis of Mr. Grenville's.
Let me here note, of MERIAN'S reprint of the first nine parts of the Latin edition
of the Grands Voyages, that the most beautiful copy, perhaps, ever brought into
the market, was that lately procured by Mr. Triphook, in original boards of wood,
with stamped leather. I know not who is its present fortunate owners.
COLLECTIONS.] VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 873
suit, with gay spirits and well replenished purses, but
have turned from it in despair, and abandoned it
in procuring, from a variety of other copies, whatever the Mémoire
ofCamus, or his own observation, could supply, to render it more
perfect ; insomuch that the XX volumes, of which it is now composed, have cost several hundred pounds. It has the first part to Virginia, in English, the only perfect copy that Mr. Grenville has ever
seen, and which is so rare, that it is not among the many volumes
of De Bry in the Royal Library at Paris, nor was it known to De
Bure, to Camus, or to any of the French bibliographers. This copy
of Debry has the first and the second edition, with all the varieties,
quoted by De Bure or Camus, of the Grands et Petits Voyages in
Latin : both editions of the Elenchus : the rare frontispiece of part
VI. of Gr. Voy.: the two small maps, never seen by Camus, in
Part VIII. Gr. Voy.: the Appendix to Congo : the Arctic map, in
Part III. Pet. Voy. : an additional map of Egypt and Africa, in Part
IV. Pet. Voy.: the three Variations of Dedications, in Part VII.
Pet. Voy. the two different Frontispieces of Part IX. Pet. Voy. :
together with the plates of St. Helena and Mozambique, noticed by
Camus, but unknown to De Bure ; and the very rare true plate 7, of
Part. II. Pet. Voy.
It has the German edition of the Gr. et Pet. Voy. the copy of
which had belonged to the Prince of Palm, and was purchased at a
sale at Ratisbon in 1819, and is now of extreme rarity, even in Germany. No other copy of it is known in France, but that in the
Royal Library at Paris ; nor is there a second copy in England, that
Mr. Grenville has ever heard of. This copy has four books ofthe
Gr. Voy. of the first German edition , while the Paris library has
them only of the second or third edition . On the other hand, the
Paris library has the German Appendix to Congo, and the Abridgement of the Gr. Voy., not in Mr. Grenville's copy ; who has added
to his 20 volumes, De Bry's Casas, which should, as Camus remarks,
have entered into his Collection.
Secondly, for the contents, or dates of the respective parts :
VOL. GRANDS VOYAGES. Lat. Edit. prima.
I. Briefe and true Report ofVirginia. Discovered by SIR RICHARD
GREINUILE, Knight, in the yeare 1585, &c. &c. made in
374 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. [COLLECTIONS.
in utter hopelessness of achievement ! Nor can this
prize, like that of beauty, be held out as a reward for
VOL.
It is
He had
The enEnglish by Thomas Hariot, seruant to Sir Walter Raleigh.
Francof. ad Moen. Typ. S. Wechel, Sumt. T. De Bry, 1590,
folio. This copy was procured from Franckfort by Lord
Oxford, about the year 1740, at the expense of £100.
the only perfect copy Mr. Grenville ever heard of.
before possessed two imperfect fragments of it.
gravings are sharp and brilliant. The prints (xxiii ) are
numbered but there is one of Adam and Eve (followed by
an Address to the gentle reader* ) not numbered, which precedes the others. At the end, is the imprint, thus : -At
Franckfort, Inprinted by John Wechel, at Theodore de Bry,
owne coast and chardges,"
:
II. Pars i. 1590 : ii . 1591 : iii . 1593, with Elenchus, 1634. Ed.
Prin. Lat.
III. Duplicate of pt. ii . 1591 .
IV. Pars iv. 1594 : v. 1595 : vi . 1596.
V. Pars vii. 1599 : viii . 1599 : ix. 1602 .
VI. Pars x. 1609 : xi . 1619 : xii . 1624.
VII. Pars xiii. 1634.
GRANDS VOYAGES. Lat. Edit. Sec.
VIII Pars i. Elenchus reprint, 1634 : ii . 1591 : iii . 1592 : iv.
1594 v. 1595 .
* De Bry thus notices his helps , in this Address :-" By the helpe of Maister
RICHARD HAKLUYT, of Oxford, Minister of God's Word, who first incouraged me
to publish the work, I creaued out of the verye original of Maister IHON WHITE,
anEnglisch paynter, who was sent into the countrye by the queene's Maiestye, onlye
to draw the description of the place, lyuelye to describe the shapes of the inhabitants, their apparell, manners of liuinge, and fashions, att the speciall charges of
the worthy knyghte, Sir Walter Ralegh, who bestowed noe small sume of monnye
in the serche and discouerye of that countrye, from the yeers 1584, to the end of
the years 1588.
I craeued both of them in London, and brought them hither to Franckfurt, wher I
and my sonnes hauen taken ernest paynes in grauinge the pictures therof on Copper, seeing yt is of noe small importance." After talking of the " contrefaict" of
" this his book," he warns the reader to give no credit to it —adding, " For
dyuers secret marks lye hiddin in my pictures, which wil breede confusion unless
they bee well observed.
COLLECTIONS. ] VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 375
"the brave." Good fortune, good luck, accidentcall it what you will-are the concomitants of such
VOL.
IX. Pars vi. 1596 : vii. 1599 : viii. 1599 : ix . 1602.
X. Narratio per Episcopum Casaum. Francof. 1598.
PETITS VOYAGES. Lat. Edit. prin.
XI. Pars i . 1598 (Congo) : ii. 1599 : iii . 1601 .
XII. Pars iv. 1601 : v. 1601 : vi . 1604 : vii. 1606.
XIII. Pars viii . 1607 : ix. 1612 : x. 1613 : xi . 1619 : xii. 1628.
PETITS VOY. Edit. Sec. Lat.
XIV. Pars i. 1598 : ii . 1599 : iii . 1601 : iv. 1601 : v. 1601 .
XV. Pars vi. 1604 : vii. 1606 : viii . 1607 : ix . 1612. x. 1613.
GRANDS VOYAGES.
XVI. Virginia, Duplicate, 1590.
Germanicè.
Same frontispiece as the English. It is so rare, that Camus, p. 17,
says he never saw it : neither is it in the De Bry in the Royal Library at Paris. Although Mr. Grenville has another copy quite
perfect, he preserves this, which is imperfect, wanting several ofthe
plates.
XVII. Part i . 1590 : ii. 1591 : iii . 1593 : iv. 1594 :† v. 1595 :
vi. 1619 vii. 1617 : viii . 1624.
XVIII. Part ix. 1600 : x . 1618 : xi. 1619 xii. 1623 xiii. 1627 :
xiv. 1630.
PETITS VOYAGES. Germ.
XIX. Part i. Congo, 1597 : ii. 1598 : iii . 1599 : iv. 1600 :
v. 1601 vi. 1603.
XX. Part vii. 1605 viii . 1606 ix . 1612 : x. 1613 : xi. 16181
xii. 1628 : xiii . 1628.
Abridgement of Petits Voy. Germ.
XXI. Orientalische Indien. Fitzer, Frankfurt, 1628.
Camus's Mémoire upon De Bry and Thevenot, is bound to form a
twenty- first volume.
Such is the account of a copy, which has no compeer, and which
is hardly ever likely to find one. In each of the volumes of this
+ Nothing more rare than the first edition of these four parts.
876 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. [COLLECTIONS.
an acquisition. And what will the sceptical reader
say, when I inform him, that neither the pages of De
copy, bound uniformly in blue morocco, by C. Lewis, there is a notice, by Mr. Grenville, of the prominent features of its rarity. What
then shall be the value assigned to it, I will not pretend to divine.
But if the reader will take the trouble to consult Brunet, vol i . p. 291,
he will find notices of the value of some of the copies sold abroad ;
and if he will take the further trouble to consult the Bibliographical
Decameron, vol. iii . p. 81 , he will find mention made of the sale of
Colonel Stanley's copy, purchased by the Duke of Devonshire for
546. That copy, brilliant and extraordinary as it was, was chiefly
remarkable for "the profusion of duplicate plates and parts, " and
for the general splendour of the impressions : but it had, and has,
no pretensions to be placed alongside of Mr. Grenville's copy. Ah,
it makes one's heart rejoice to think ofthe " good old times," the
GOLDEN days of the Bibliomania—when Colonel Stanley's copy was
sold ! -days, I fear, which are gone never to return. Ramusio,
De Bry, Hakluyt, and Purchas-Caxton, De Worde, Pynson, and
William Faques-were THEN contemplated and caressed, as their
beauties and merits entitled them to be !
Yet, soberly and dispassionately speaking, I do not look upon the
volumes of De Bry, from beginning to end, as a work of either perfect beauty or interest. The paper is indifferent ; the printing is indifferent ; and the inequality of the art is obvious : and when, as in
the case of the five prints of the Picts, subjoined to the Virginia, we
are told that De Bry engraved them from some " cuts out of an old
Chronicle," sent to him by John White, the English painter, a very
reasonable scepticism may be exercised in regard to the fidelity of
that, and of other portions of the graphic embellishments. But, under
all circumstances, the " Peregrinations " put forth by De Bry,
form a wonderful and a highly covetable performance. I could
have noticed several other copies, more or less perfect : as the fine
one (incomplete) in the library at Blickling, in Norfolk, from the
Bibl. Ouilleniana ; and that, supposed to be perfect, which was recently sold at Fonthill Abbey for 200 guineas — bound in blue
morocco. This was, I believe, the copy of Mons. Paris de Meyzieux,
and was sold in this country to Mr. Beckford, in 1790, for the same
COLLECTIONS.] VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 377
Bure nor Camus initiate him into ALL the mysteries of
a perfect copy of De Bry ? No : it is only in the
book- fairyland of Cleveland Square that such a treasure can be found.
All hail to thee RICHARD HAKLUYT! for thou wert
a genius of no ordinary complexion. What, though the
warmth of a prebendal stall in the Abbey of Westminster might have comforted thy limbs, and thy
clerical duties in the rural shades of Wetheringset have
occupied much of thy time, yet, behold this meritorious Divine stealing, " many a time and oft," to the
then picturesque vicinity of Wapping ; -holding discousre with sea-faring men : listening, with willing
and greedy ears, to tales of adventure and high exploit feeling the passion for visiting distant parts
increasing daily within him ; and, influenced by the
secret advice and urgent entreaty of that wise Minister Walsingham, * gratifying this passion, in the colsum. The reader may consult the Bibliomania, p. 547. At Althorp
there is a beautiful copy, in 13 vols. in blue morocco binding, with
the true Elenchus, and the Appendix to the Voyage to Congo.
* " But that which is chiefly to be noticed in him [ Hakluyt] is
this, that his geny urging him to the study of history, especially to
the marine part thereof (which was encouraged and furthered by Sir
Francis Walsingham) made him keep constant intelligence with the
most noted seamen at Wapping, near London. From whom, and
many small pamphlets and letters, that were published and went
from hand to hand in his time, concerning the voyages and travels of
several persons, he compiled his Navigations, &c." Wood : Athen.
Oxon. vol ii. col. 186, Edit. Bliss. I refer to this work for a few
scarce pieces of Hakluyt, mentioned by Dr. Bliss, which were unknown to Wood. Hakluyt had " the fourth stall in the church of
Westminster, in the place of one Dr. Richard Webster : and with
this he held Wetheringsett cum Blockford, in the diocese of Nor
wich. -Ibid.
378 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. [COLLECTIONS.
lection of scarce and curious tracts, and in obtaining
accurate notices relating to the growth and produce
" ofeither Ind." The reader will already (in this very
strange and perhaps rhapsodical apostrophe) anticipate a strong allusion to, and recommendation of, the
famous "Navigations, Voyages, Traffiques and Discoveries ofthe ENGLISH NATION," put forth by the said
antiquarian divine, in the years 1598 and 1600, in three
folio volumes ; " awork which, as Oldys* properly remarks, redounds as much to the glory of the English
nation, as any book that ever was published in it ." But,
great and generally uniform as may be my respect and
veneration for all original editions-like this, in the
black letter—I cannot, conscientiously, recommend
the edition just mentioned, in preference to that put
forth, some dozen years ago, by Mr. Evans, con-
* See his British Librarian ; p . 137-158 : where fifty pages are
devoted to a minute and admirable analysis of the above volumes of
HAKLUYT. They were preceded, however, by an impression of the
first volume only of the second edition, put forth in 1589, folio :
which has the advantage of an Index, but differs materially from the
second and best ; and is neither rare nor high priced. It is however, if
my memory be not treacherous, a handsomely printed book. The
three folios display one of the fullest pages ever seen in the black
letter and copies are usually cropt. I never saw it uncut. :
should be taken that the map (usually missing) be found in the first
volume, as in Mr. Grenville's copy ; and that the Voyage to Cadiz be
there also. I find a copy of this best black letter edition, " with the
addition of the smaller voyages, 4 vols. bound in 3, bound in calf, "
marked at 107. 10s. in the last catalogue of Messrs. I. and A. Arch.
Care
† The complaint, urged by Oldys, respecting the lack of spirit in
not republishing Hakluyt " in a fair impression, with proper illustrations, and especially an Index" -can no longer be brought forward.
Mr. Evans has republished it, in five comely quarto volumes, and
COLLECTIONS. VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 379
taining, not only the Reprint of these black letter
pages, but some Additions of a decisive and important
character.
his reimpression has the following advantages. It comprises an
accurate reprint of the best folio edition, with the addition of those
voyages which were published in the first edition, and omitted in the
second. Mr. Evans (who is generally understood to havebeen the editor)
has added a Supplement, which forms the latter half of the fourth
and the whole of the fifth volume. All the voyages and travels
printed by Hakluyt, or at his suggestion, subsequent to the publication of his Collection , are here included, and a curious Tract, from a
manuscript in the Marquis of Stafford's possession, entitled " The
Omission of Cales Voyage, stated and discussed by the Earl of
Essex."
Of this reimpression there were only 250 copies printed on small
paper, and 75 on large. I believe that both forms are now become
scarce, especially the large : although I observe a copy ofthe latter
marked at 127. 12s. , in boards, in a recent catalogue of Messrs. I. and
A. Arch. This should be seized upon by those who have keen appetites for books at once rare and intrinsically valuable.
We cannot conclude this account of Hakluyt's Collection more
agreeably, or more advantageously to the reader, than by inserting
the spirited character drawn of him by Zouch, in his life of Sir Philip
Sidney. " Every reader conversant in the annals of our naval transactions, will cheerfully acknowledge the merit of Richard Hakluyt,
who devoted his studies to the investigation of those periods of English history, which regard the improvement of navigation and commerce. He had the advantages of an academical education. He
was elected student of Christ Church in Oxford, in 1570, and was
therefore contemporary with Sidney at the University. To him we
are principally indebted for a clear and comprehensive description of
those noble discoveries of the English nation made by sea or overland to the most distant quarter of the earth . His incomparable
industry was remunerated with every possible encouragement by Sir
Francis Walsingham and Sir Philip Sidney. To the latter, as to a
most generous promoter of all ingenious and useful knowledge, he
inscribed his first collection of voyages and discoveries, printed in
880 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. [ COBYATE.
Although my old friend, the Odcombian, TOM
CORYATE, was not a Collector of Travels, but a gay
and gallant traveller himself, yet I cannot step across
the threshold of the sixteenth, and enter upon the seventeenth century, without a brief but pointed recommendation of his " Crudities, hastily gobbled up,'
1589. Thus animated and encouraged, he was enabled to leave to
posterity the fruits of his unwearied labours-an invaluable treasure
of nautical information preserved iu volumes, which even at this day,
affix to his name a brilliancy of reputation, which a series of ages
can never efface or obscure."
* The entire title is " Crudities hastily gobbled up, in five months
Travels in France, Savoy, Italy, Rhetia, some parts of High Germany,
and the Netherlands. Lond. 1611 , 4to. It was published with seve⚫
ral very curious cuts, and the author's portrait in the frontispiece :
the whole reprinted in 1776, 8vo. 3 vols. -with all the engravings,
but some necessarily in a folded state. The reprint is neither rare
nor dear : worth perhaps 17. 10s. The first edition, when in fine
condition, (especially if it be like that ofthe copy of my friend, Mr.
Cruden, of Gravesend) has been known to sell for ten or twelve
guineas. Colonel Stanley's copy, which is described as being " extraordinarily fine, in russia binding, " was sold for 10l. 10s. Mr.
Bindley's copy produced the same sum ; but, of late years, it is much
" fine copy, with the lowered in price ; and Mr. Thorpe marks a
plates, very neat, " at 4l. 48. The most extraordinary and most precious copy perhaps, in all respects existing, is that in the library of
Mr. Grenville. It is a presentation copy, with an original letter by
the author, to Prince Henry, in whose family he was domesticated.
It may be safely said that this book exists not on large paper. Coryate was a native of Odcombe, in Somersetshire, and was, indeed,
(according to Wood) born at the parsonage house there. Hence he
is called the Odcombian. Browne Willis told Cole (the greatest collector of gossip and scandal of his day) that Coryate's shoes were
hanging up in the church at Odcombe till the year 1702. See Dr.
Bliss's ; Athen. Oxon. vol. ii . col. 208-214. A just estimate of the
merits of Coryate will be found in the Quarterly Review, vol. ii.
p. 92.
COLLECTIONS. ] VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 881
as no unsavoury sandwich for the more substantial
attack upon the Pilgrimes and Pilgrimage of PURCHAS, published in five folio volumes, 1625-6 ; and
which exhibit a monument of care, diligence, and research, that, of its kind, can hardly be surpassed. *
Purchas, " who (says Wood) is by some styled our EnglishPtolemy," yet maintains his reputation and his price in the market.
The highest price perhaps ever given for a copy, was that (50l. 8s. )
which was given for Colonel Stanley's : but then it had " the rare
frontispiece, and five portraits of the persons to whom each volume
is dedicated, inserted ; t" and was, in other respects,
(c an extraordinary fine copy." Yet a finer is to be found (without the extra
embellishments) in the library of Mr Grenville ; for he has it UNCUT ; having upwards of twelve years ago purchased the four
volumes, in this state, of Mr. Miller the late bookseller ; and given
forty guineas for them. The fifth volume (the commonest) was
afterwards luckily found in a similar condition. It is now in blue
morocco binding. I have seen several other beautiful copies of a
book, however, not remarkable for its typographical elegance. The
Royal Library here, boasts of Colbert's copy ; and in the Peypysian
library, at Cambridge, there is a very fine, large, and clean copy, in
old calf binding, with a brilliant impression of the much- coveted
frontispiece : which (more fortunate than the head of Fuller, in his
Worthies) has luckily escaped the scissars of Master Samuel Pepys,
the celebrated collector. In the trade, the price of Purchas varies
considerably. Messrs. Arch mark a copy in calf at 217.: a price,
which, if the frontispiece be fair and sound, must be considered exceedingly moderate. The richly filled pages of the catalogue of
Messrs. Payne and Foss exhibit two copies : one, "" very neatly
bound in russia, " for 35l.: another, " very fine copy, with the frontispiece", for 40l. There is a title-page, as well as a frontispiece.
Granger has a brief but pleasing memento of Purchas. He says
that " his work is not only valuable for the various instruction and
†Asimilar copy is at Althorp, in russia biuding.
+ Pepys was a Collector of portraits, which he had the hapless knack of almost
crucifying inhis method of trimming and sticking them on. I have seen one of
bis folio volumes of Collections ofPortraits : ..." vox faucibus hæsit !"
382 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS.
Above all things, let the lover of graphic virtu, and
the desperate hunter after perfect copies, look sharply
after the possession of a clean, bright, and brilliant copy
of the engraved frontispiece ; at the bottom of which
appears the frill-guarded neck and shoulders of Purchas himself; representing him in his forty- eighth year.
If this frontispiece be wanting, ten guineas will hardly
supply its place with a beautiful impression of it .
This was an age full of glory and gallant adventure
for Old England ; and the names of DRAKE and
RALEIGH alone, to say nothing of that of SMITH, * (one
amusement contained in it, but is also very estimable on a national, and
he may add, a religious account." Biogr. Hist. of England, vol. i .
p. 365, edit. 1804. He alludes to Harman's Illustrations of the
Scriptures from works of a similar description.
Mr. Chalmers (Biogr. Dict. vol. xxv. p. 384) has refuted the
notion of Granger, that Purchas died in prison, from distressed circumstances, on account of the publication of his " Pilgrims. " The
former is untrue, as he died in his own house in 1628, in his fiftyfirst year. "It is not improbable (says Mr. Chalmers) that he might
be a sufferer by the expense of printing his books ; but his debts are
to be referred to a more honourable cause, the kindness of his disposition." See the note, ibid : and Cens. Lit. vol. iv.; and Wood's
Fasti Oxon. vol. i . col. 363. Edit. Bliss.
* Before I touch upon CAPT. JOHN SMITH'S travelling achievements, let me ask the ingenious and intrepid Defender of King
James I. (my approved good friend Mr. D'Israeli) howthe ScotoEnglish Monarch COULD find it in his heart, or in his head, to order
the execution of such a man as RALEIGH ? And further, how either
his head or his heart could excuse him for NOT ordering the execution of two such unprincipled, wicked, and guilty creatures, as the
EARL and COUNTESS OF SOMERSET ? as much the instigators, and
accessories before the fact, of the murder of Sir Thomas Overbury, †
+ Mr. D'Israeli, who is learned in biographical history, must have read
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 383
of the hardiest and bravest adventurers that ever
faced physical or civil obstacles) will be long dear to
every British heart. It was in their school, that
Anson, Cook, Perouse, and Vancouver, studied ; men ,
who with greater or lesser degrees of success, circumnavigated the globe. But this is anticipation.
Let me revert to Collections ofVoyages and Travels ;
as .. but there is no need of any comparison. Lord Clarendon
has somewhere well observed, that King James could never resist
the influence " of fine clothes and a handsome person : " and Carre,
Earl of Somerset, happened to be that handsome person. I revert to
Smith-What an age was that of the opening of the seventeenth century !* I can conceive Drake, Raleigh, Smith, Hakluyt, Coryate, and
Truthbrought to Light byTime, 1615 , 4to . with a print of poor Sir Thomas Overbury: among the rarest of British portraits. If not , he must have read the reprint
of the tract in 1651 , 4to. without the print : but with additional matter.
* It was the SPIRIT of such an age which induced a truly respectable printer, of
the name of JOHN WOLF, to publish an English version of a very curious and instructive volume of a Dutch Traveller ofthe name of Huighen Van LINSCHOTEN,
who entitled it a " Discourse of Voyages into the East and West Indies." Wolf
printed it in a close and handsome black letter type , in double columns, in 1598,
folio, and dedicated it to Julius Cæsar, Doctor of Laws. It contains A to Q q, in
sixes : Qqwith seven. Wolf thus observes in the dedication : " about a twelvemonth agoe, a learned Gentleman brought unto mee the uoyages and navigation of
John Huyghen Van Linschoten into the Indies, written in the Dutch tongue, which
he wished might be translated into our language, because he thought it would be
not only delightful, but also very commodious for our English nation. " The name
of the translator is not mentioned. Thereis a copper- plate frontispiece, engraved
by" William Rogers, a citizen of London ; " and twelve copper- plate Maps : of
which Herbert's copy wanted two, and Bindley's four. Mr. Grenville's copy is
quite complete, in green morocco binding by C. Lewis. Colonel Stanley's copy had
"the addition of the plates belonging to the original Dutch edition, " and was purchased by Lord Ossulston for 221. Herbert's copy, made complete, is at Althorp.
A Latin edition, translated by Linschoten himself, was published at the Hague
in 1599, folio : with similar maps to those of the English edition , but larger and
coarser. It has, however, a number of additional plates, equally coarse, of the
costumes of men and women of the different countries visited . The coast of
Guinea has a separate title- page of the same date. There is also an Index, or
384 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS.
and here, in chronological order, I necessarily point
to THEVENOT's Relations de divers Voyages curieux
Purchas, belonging to a sort of Travellers' Club ( at present so fashionable with many who have only felt the saline particles of the British
Channel ) and laying their heads and charts together respecting the
several countries visited , or about to be visited . Indeed , SMITH was
the very Dragon of his breed : " nil actum credens si quid superesset
agendum." His Travels and Adventures in Europe, Asia, Africa, und
America," between the years 1593 and 1629, were published in a
small folio volume of sixty pages in 1630, and will be found reprinted in the second volume of Churchill's Collections. The first
edition contains some pretty separate plates, in small, representing
some of Smith's adventures. He vanquishes several great Champions
at tournaments ; and being detained prisoner by the Bashaw of Nalbrits longer than he wished, and having been scolded and ill treated
used by him, he contrives to find an opportunity of beating out his
brains (represented by a plate) with a " threshing bat, for they had no
flails." He then hid his body under the straw, dressed himself in the
Bashaw's clothes, (a ticklish experiment ! ) and scampered across the
desert " at all adventure. " Mr. Grenville's copy of this slender
little folio (bound in green morocco, by Charles Lewis) was not
acquired under the sum of 51. 5s.
Direction to the bookbinder, at the end. To Mr. Grenville's copy of this Latin
edition is affixed --of the date of 1677--a Nuptial Dithyrambic in the native tongue
ofthe country, with a Latin version; the latter beginning thus :
Euge! Brema, Nuptiales
Ede lætâ voce plausus,
Nuptias Köperianas
Gratulando dum salutes
Barbitoque versibusque ;
Plaude, Brema tota, plaude ! plaude tantis Nuptiis.
Only one word more. According to Meuselius ( Bibl. Hist. vol. ii. p. 342) the
Earliest Dutch edition of Linschoten was at Amsterdam in 1596 : reprinted at
Frankfort in 1601 --and corrected at Amst. in 1614 : 1623 : 1634 , and 1664 : all
with plates. AFrench version first appeared at Amst. in 1610 , 1619 , and 1638,
each with cuts.
* This " threshing bat " looks very like the club of Hercules, and therefore was
well calculated to " settle the matter ". with the Bashaw.
COLLECTIONS. ] VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 385
put forth in 1663-96, in 2 folio volumes : * a work,
I now come to the more famous work of Smith, being his GENERAL HISTORY OF VIRGINIA- that country having been visited by him
betweenthe years 1584-1623 , and the work published in a folio volume in 1624. Mr. Grenville's copy of this book will throw a collector of Travels into a succession of ecstasies ! It is on LARGE PAPER ;
and a similar copy, is in the fine collection of Mr. G. Hibbert. It
has both the portraits, genuine and counterfeit ; the one, of Frances
Duchess of Richmond, by Will. Pass : the other, of an exceedingly illlooking Prince called Matoaka, by Holland. There is also a third,
and a brilliant little portrait, by Simon Pass, of the Author, “ Captayne Iohn Smith." This is at top, at the left-hand corner of the
last map. But a fine impression of the Frontispiece is worth more
than a moment's gaze. Above, are portraits of Elizabeth, James,
and Charles when Prince of Wales. The engraver was John Barrà.
Note; it is remarked by Mr. Grenville, that the sheet O is suppressed
-and that the defective paging, from page 96 to 105, not supplied
in ALL the copies of this book. A shoal of complimentary verses
(the fashion of the age) is prefixed. Amongthem, is a set from our
old friend Samuel Purchas, who occupied so much of our attention in
the preceding note. The reader will thank me for furnishing him
with one stanza only, and will probably agree with the author himself, that he had a " rustie out-worne Muse. " Such crabbed lines
are too tooth - breaking for utterance ;
Loe here SMITH's forge, where Forgery's roague- branded,
True Pegasus is shood, fetters are forged
For Silke-sotts, milk- sops, base sloth, farre hence landed,
(Soile changd soule- soild still ) England's dregs , discharged,
To plant (supplant ! ) Virginia, home- disgorged :
Where Vertues praise frames good men Stories armour
Gainst Time , Achilles like, with best Arts charged ;
Pallas, all-arm'd, all learn'd , can teach Sword- Grammer,
Can Pens of Pikes ; Armes t' Arts ; to Scholar, Souldier ; hammer.
&c. &c.
Mr. Grenville's copy is bound in a style worthy of its beauty by C.
Lewis, in olive- colour morocco. Messrs. Payne and Foss mark the
usual copy, with the genuine prints of the Duchess of Richmond and
Captain Smith, at 61. 6s.
I have a strong doubt whether a perfect copy of the Voyages
CC
386 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. [ COLLECTIONS.
somewhat motley in its contents, but curious and instructive withal ; and, I will be free to add, of excollected by MELCHISEDEC THEVENOT, with all its parts and varieties,
be not of as rare occurrence as a perfect copy of De Bry : doubtless,
however, it is of infinitely less value and importance. Yet Colonel
Stanley's copy, although not on large paper, and apparently far less
perfect than the one I am about to describe, was not purchased
under the sum of 14l. 14s. Brunet is delightfully communicative,
apparently from the copious materials of Camus : yet that active bibliographer appears never to have seen a copy on LARGE PAPER. Such
a copy adorns the library of Mr. Grenville : and that copy is a
Museum Duplicate. Prefixed to it, is the following memorandum by
its very intelligent and accurate possessor.
" This is a large paper
copy of the edition of 1663 , 1664, 1666, and 1672 : with additions
from that of 1696. It contains all that is described by Camus, except
a 17th page of the Spanish fragment ; six leaves of Appendix to the
Hist. of Mogul ; and ten leaves, from page 48 of Asganii Sassonii ;
which three articles were equally wanting in Huet's copy, though
they are found at the end of that of the Corps Legislatif, at Paris.
This copy however has, in tom. i . p . 50, of the Voyage de Bouteko,
a Map, with variations, not noticed by Camus. Connected with the
Voyage à Pekin, part iii . are a few duplicate plates, to shew the
superiority of the originals to the counterfeits or re- engravings. At
the end of this third part, is " Explication de la Carte de Telmer,"
never seen by Camus but once, and not in any other copy of Thevenot." Camus, p. 283.
Brunet notices the usual termination of the " Asganii Sassonii" with
page 48 ; and, indeed, observes upon the usual absence of the
three latter treatises contained in Mr. Grenville's copy. As to the
EMBELLISHMENTS of Thevenot, the chief merit of them consists in the
Maps, which are numerous and curious. The figures are generally
coarse and ill executed ; but a decided exception must be made in
favour of a very pretty small plate, vignette-wise, which occurs in
vol. i. p. 17, of the Voyage de Terri : representing the Grand Mogul,
Selim Sha (with a hawk on his fist) the Sultan Coroome, and a
female Slave his wife. They are each in profile, and very like, in
figure, dress, and form, what we see in the usual highly decorated
MSS. of Persia and Hindoostan. The counterfeits, or reprints, in-
COLLECTIONS. ] VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 387
tremely great difficulty of acquisition-with all its
parts in an unmutilated state.
The beginning of the eighteenth century witnessed
a most valuable performance in the " Account of the
Voyages made by the Portuguese and Spaniards," &c.
published by I. L. Gottfried, in the Dutch tongue, at
Leyden, in 1707, in eight folio volumes : * and within
half a century from this period, the English had again
to boast of some valuable Collections of Voyages, to
which the names of CHURCHILL and HARRIS are prefixed as Editors. The former published his six handsome folio volumes in 1732 ; the latter, in two similar
volumes, in 1744. In the year ensuing, appeared a
Collection of Voyages and Travels compiled from the
library of the Earl of Oxford : a library, which, as it
united MSS. with printed books, may be said to rival,
if not eclipse, that of the great Colbert in France.
troduced in Mr. Grenville's copy, are doubtless very much inferior
to the originals ; some few of which (as the veiled lady on horseback, led by a slave) have sufficient spirit and effect. This copy is
bound in red morocco by C. Lewis, in the most appropriate style.
It has the four parts in two volumes. I might have noticed that
Thevenot's Collection consists of different curious Voyages which
have not been published, or which have been translated ( in the
French tongue) from Hakluyt, Purchas, and other English, Dutch,
Portuguese, German, and Spanish travellers . †
* Brunet (vol. ii . p. 110) makes the date 1727 as well as 1707.
He adds, that the author's real name was JOHN PHILIP Adelinus ;
and that the work was reprinted in the same (Dutch) language in
thirty octavo volumes. Of the price of either edition, I can say
nothing. The celebrated bookseller Vander Aa, of Leyden, was the
publisher of the folio impression.
+Mr. Payne tells me that he has a strong recollection of a fine, large paper,
perfect copy, bound in old morocco, possessed by his father ; but knows not its
388 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. [COLLECTIONS.
The note below* will make the reader acquainted with
the pecuniary value of all these Works.
There were yet minor publications, of a similar character ; such as the Collections of ASTLEY, 1745, 4to.
four volumes ; and Dampier 1729, in four octavo volumes. The labours of our immediate neighbours, the
French, must not be forgotten. Their " Lettres Edifiantes et Curieuses, écrites des Missions étrangères,
Paris, 1780,12mo. 26 volumes, should find a place in the
99
* First of CHURCHILL. Messrs. Payne and Foss mark a neat copy,
on LARGE PAPER, at the moderate sum of 81. 8s. ; but then it is the
first edition of 1732. I observe that a large paper copy of the best
edition of 1744, with the Harleian Collection of Voyages of 1745,
-in all, eight volumes "very fine copies, uniformly bound
(out of sheets) in russia, by Walther, " was sold for the ponderous
sum of 361. at the sale of Colonel Stanley's library. My friend Mr.
G. Hibbert may boast of a fine similar copy, in white calf, with rich
gilt tooling on the back. It should be remembered that either edition of Churchill contains several pieces from original MSS. and
others then first published in the English language. Watt, in his
Bibl. Brit. mentions an edition as early as 1704, and as late as 1752.
As to HARRIS's Collection, let any one inspect the curious contents
only of the first volume, as exhibited by Mr. Harris in his valuable
Catalogue of the Library ofthe Royal Institution , p . 260, and he will
not hesitate a moment respecting the importance of this work. I
find a neat copy of the best edition of it, 1744-48, with maps and
plates, marked at 5l. 5s. in the recent catalogue of Messrs. I. and A.
Arch. The Collection from the HARLEIAN LIBRARY may be worth
half the sum.
+ Astley's Collections appear to have attracted little notice ; and
yet I observe that a copy of them, bound in russia, was sold for 8l. 8s.
at the sale of the Merly Library in 1813. Whoever chooses to consult the pages of Mr. Chalmers's Biographical Dictionary, will reapresent " locus in quo." I heartily wish Mr. Payne would leave us , as a legacy,
all his Book Reminiscences--the Bibliomaniac would rejoice to possess them.
There are Reminiscences extant which might be thought less deserving of record.
COLLECTIONS. ] VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 389
gilded upper shelves of a well-furnished library of any
description. I knew an " old" friend who solaced himself, during eight and twenty long wintery nights, by
the perusal of these " edifying and curious Epistles."
If any keen book Angler chooses to bait his hook with
a five pound note of the Bank of England, he may, at
a public auction, catch the whole of this savoury fry of
sparkling little fish. The gilt tooling of Padaloup or
De Rome may represent their scales, like those of the
carp, "« bedropped with gold. " Very recently there
has appeared a French work of more intrinsic value ;
namely, the " Bibliothèque Portative des Voyages, "
Paris, 1810, in 41 octodecimo volumes, with an Atlas,
in 8vo. This collection contains the travels of Norden,
Cook, Macartney, Barrow, and Tavernier.
Reverting to our own country, it remains only to
notice the Collections of Voyages and Travels by Mr.
PINKERTON and Mr. ROBERT KERR. Of the former,
commenced in 1808 and concluded in 1814, in seventeen quarto volumes, with maps, &c. a well bound
copy may be obtained for 261. 5s. It must not be
denied that it is the most valuable Collection of Voyages extant. * Mr. Kerr's Collection, published in
1811-17, comprises eighteen octavo volumes.
dily see what an interesting voyage round the world was made
by Captain William Dampier. This Collection contains many of
his achievements, with those of Wafer, Funnel, Cowley, Sharp,
Wood, and Roberts. A copy of it was purchased by Lord Essex, at
the sale of Dr. Heath's library, for 31. 17s. At the sale of the Merly
Library, it produced little more than half this sum.
* The xviith volume contains a copious Catalogue of Books on
Voyages and Travels, and an excellent Index. With these Voyages,
should be uniformly bound the GEOGRAPHY of Mr. Pinkerton with
390 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. [ COLLECTIONS.
And thus, in the preceding twenty-five pages, will
the reader find a Collection of Voyages, &c. which,
while they exhibit an imperishable monument ofthe talents and enterprise of human beings, in every civilised
quarter of the globe, will furnish him with a key to the
knowledge ofalmost every country however remote, or
any productions, however rare and extraordinary.
Happy the man — be he "YOUNG " or " OLD " -who
possesses these treasures ; but happier far shall he be,
who applies them to right uses and purposes ; and who,
looking
66 --through Nature, up to Nature's GOD,"
learns to cherish the gentler emotions of charity and
benevolence towards " all sorts and conditions of
men," and to be grateful for the comparative blessings ,
which, under a civilised state, it is his happiness to
enjoy.
fifty-two maps, published in 1817, 4to. in two vols. I find this latter
work marked in boards, at 51. 5s. in the catalogues of Messrs. Payne
and Foss and Messrs. Lackington, Harding, and Co. The Collection
of Mr. Kerr may be obtained for about 7s. 6d. a volume, inboards :
see the last mentioned Catalogue, no. 3758.
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 391
CIRCUMNAVIGATIONS.
It should seem that the next natural step, in this
department of bibliography, was, to present the reader
with a few of the more popular works which describe
the CIRCUMNAVIGATIONS of the Globe ; that is to say,
the discoveries of those Navigators who have visited ,
the different quarters of the world. And here, the
reader's recollection will almost immediately furnish
him with the illustrious names of Drake, Dampier,
Anson, Cook, and Vancouver-among his own countrymen Carreri among the Italians ; and Pérouse,
D'Entrecasteaux, and Marchand among the French.
A sum, hardly exceeding fifty sovereigns, will place
good copies of all these circumnavigations on the shelf
of the unfastidious Collector.
The earliest book relating to the exploits of Sir
FRANCIS DRAKE, appeared in 1587 ; and the latest, in
1653.* The text of these impressions will be found
reprinted in the Collections of Voyages by Osburn and
Callander. Honest WILL DAMPIER is entitled to every
praise if not for the extent and importance, at least
* The first book, was that which described his Services performed
against Cales ; 1587, 4to.: the second, " a summary and true Discourse of his West India Voyage ; " 1589, 4to. Latin editions had
appeared the preceding year. His " life and death, " was published
at Oxford in 1596, 8vo. A work called " Sir Francis Drake revived," appeared in 1626, 4to.: and again, in 1653, 4to. or " Atrue
relation of his foure voyages to the West Indies. " I find a fine copy of
this latter work, with a portait of Drake, selling for 41. 4s, at the
sale of the Stanley Library. The earlier pieces are not rare ; and
may be worth about 17. 1s. each .
392 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS [CIRCUM- .
or the accuracy and interest, of his discoveries : and
it is gratifying to have to record that a more spirited
and impartial estimate of the value ofhis travels is no
where to be found, than in the recent edition of the
Biographie Universelle Ancienne et Moderne. * The
fruits of his navigations lie within a narrow and reasonable compass, and some four or five octavo volumes
furnish us with all that has survived of his labours.
Had his auto-biography been extant, I can conceive
nothing more original and amusing than it would
have been. His integrity, hardihood, and simplicity
were equally couspicuous throughout all his transactions.
The name of ANSON is entitled to more general respect. This enterprising Navigator, who afterwards
* " However this may be, all his defects ought to be overlooked
by posterity from the fruits to be gathered by the perusal of his first
voyages. They contain descriptions, made by a man, gifted with
the most accurate coup- d'œil, the most delicate tact, and with an
exquisite judgment. An air of truth, a precision, and yet rapidity of
style, which charms the reader, reign throughout the whole of these
descriptions ... His treatise upon winds, tides, and currents, is
among the best works of the kind : facts only are stated, but they are
arranged and methodised with surprising ability. " Edit. 1813,
vol. x. p. 479. His " Account ofa New Voyage round the World " was
published in 1697, 8vo. 3 vols. with maps and cuts : again in 1699,
and 1703 8vo. 3 vols . His " Voyage to New Holland " appeared in
1701 , &c. the whole being not only reprinted in separate forms, but
reprinted collectively, in Callander's Voyages. The embellishments in
Dampier's Voyages must not be criticised : the text redeems a multitude of graphic sins . At the sale of the Merly Library, a copy of
Dampier's Voyages, 1729, 8vo. 4 vols. was sold for 21. 1s. I suspect that the earlier editions of Dampier are getting scarce ; as I find
no copies of them in the catalogues of our principal booksellers.
Pinkerton (Collection , vol. xi. ) has reprinted his New Holland and
account of the Phillippine Islands.
NAVIGATIONS. ] VOYAGES AND TRAVELS 393
rose to the highest honours of his profession, made a
sort offighting and capturing voyage round the world.
He was the veriest bull- dog of all circumnavigators :
loving nothing better than tough contests by sea and
by land. A Spanish galleon or an hostile town was
equally an object of attack ; and he returned from his
three years and nine months absence from his native
country, laden with more spoils and wealth than it
had fallen to the lot of any individual to bring home.
Considering what he saw and what he accomplished,
it is to be regretted that we are not in possession of a
more perfect record of his achievements. It is to be
regretted that Dr. Johnson has not written a Life of
Anson as a companion to that of Drake, (which is
among his minor and more simply written pieces of
biography) and which should be read by every man
curious in the annals of marine adventure. Let me
inform both the young and the old, that very little
more than a sovereign will place Anson's quarto volume upon their shelves. It was first published in
1748 ; and considering the noble navigator to have
been " alive and hearty " at the period of its publication-himself not dying till 1762-it is surprising how
he could have permitted so unworthy a production to
have seen the light. *
* « Unworthy” in every respect is the volume which records the
achievements of the intrepid Anson. † It was published in 4to. in
+ Lord Anson was one of the plainest and bluntest of mankind. He had studied
little, and cared less for, the rules of polished society : and though he was First
Lord of the Admiralty, and Admiral in Chief of the Fleet, it was said of him—that
" he had been round the world but never in it . " The French have properly recorded this anecdote-(“ il avait fait le tour du monde, et il n'y était jamais
entré.") A curious anecdote, not altogether unbibliographical, belongs to Anson's
394 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. [CIRCUMBYRON followed Anson. Indeed he was a companion (though a young one) ofhis voyage : and although
the public scarcely recollect any thing of his advenin 1748, but there are titles with the date of 1749. The French
Biographical Dictionary (vol. ii . p. 240) assigns incorrectly the date
of 1746. The author of the text was either a Mr. Robins or a Mr.
Walter ; let Mr. Chalmers's untwisting ofthis knot satisfy the curious.
Biogr. Dict. vol. ii . p. 228. The PLATES are in truth barbarously
bad. Look (inter alias) at the view of the " Streight Le Maire, " &c.
p. 74: the ships look like black spiders. But more appallingly terrific is the burning of the town of Payta, on the coast of Santa Fee :
p. 201,-" awhole town on fire at once, especially a place that burnt
with such facility and violence, being a very singular spectacle, Mr.
Brett [who I presume to be the artist that accompanied Lord Anson]
had the curiosity to delineate its appearance, together with that of
the ships in the harbour, which may be seen in the annexed plate . "
It may indeed : but if the reader were not thus instructed by the text,
he might misconceive the burning of this town for any thing
but what it was really intended to be. It is the consummation of
barbarous art : the work ofa seven months apprentice. All the copies
of this book, which I have seen, look like large paper : but I believe
there is only one size . Upon the whole, I cannot conscientiously
advise the giving of more than a sovereign for Anson's circumnavigatory labours ; and note-they are reprinted in the Collections of
Callander and others . To read the text without the plates must be
a comfort.
-
Voyage round the World. Mordaunt Cracherode, the father of the Rev. C. M.
Cracherode, of celebrated BOOK- FAME, went out to make his fortune, as a Commander of the Marines, in Anson's ship. He returned, in consequence of his
share of prize money, a wealthy man. Hence the property of his son-and hence
the Bibliotheca Cracherodiana, in the British Museum. A droll story is told of
the Colonel, of which the repetition is pardonable. It was said that he returned
from this Ansonian circumnavigation in the identical buck- skins which he wore
on leaving England : --- they having been the object of his exclusive attachment
during the whole voyage ! Far, however, be it from me to give credence to
the report, that there is some one particular volume, in the Cracherode Collection, which is BOUND in a piece of these identical buck- skins !
NAVIGATIONS. ] VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 395
tures, it should be remembered that HE was the man
who more particularly stimulated Cook to his unrivalled discoveries. At the name of this latter, great
circumnavigator, there is not a British heart but what
alternately glows with transport and melts with pity.
The spirit, disinterestedness, penetration, physical and
intellectual energies, of Captain JAMES COOK, fitted
him in an especial manner for the various and extraordinary discoveries which he so successfully accomplished ; and to which, alas ! he fell a victim and a
sacrifice. Never were such labours closed by such a
tragical catastrophe : and if the eulogies of the good
and wise, of all countries, be grateful to departed spirits, surely there is no spirit which can be soothed with
purer attestations of worth, and higher acknowledgments of excellence, than that of this unparallelled
and most unfortunate commander. The publications
(in the order in which they appeared) that record his
discoveries, are stated in the subjoined note.† To the
* They form the first part of the Collection of Voyages by Dr.
Hawkesworth, 1773 , 4to. 3 vols.: and will richly reward a sedulous
perusal.
+ Let me be allowed, in the first place, to make mention of the
eulogies bestowed on Cook by the "wise andthe good. " Biographies
are easily referred to : but the testimonies of competent judges may
not be so much within the immediate consultation of the reader.
The judgment of PEROUSE is referred to by the editors of his Voyage
autour du Monde. "" Equitable et modeste autant qu'éclairé , on
verra avec quel respect il parlait de L'IMMORTEL COOK. " And Marchand, in a similar voyage printed in 1798, (ofwhich, by and by) calls
our maritime hero " Navigateur le plus experimenté, le plus infatigable, qu'ayent vu les deux Océans." Vol. i . p. lxxiij . And now for
the publications of the discoveries of this great circumnavigator.
It is usual to begin with his first voyage, as published by Dr.
396 [ CIRCUM- VOYAGES AND TRAVELS.
volumes of Cook, add those of Captain GEORGE VanCOUVER; containing a Voyage of Discovery to the
Hawkesworth, in conjunction with the voyages of Byron, Wallis,
and Carteret ; in 1773, 4to. 3 vols . Captain Cook, himself, published his Second Voyage towards the South Pole and round the
World, in 1777, 4to. 2 vols. and in 1785, ( after his death) appeared
his third voyage-to the Pacific Ocean, comprehending its conclusion
by Captain King. The assassination of Captain Cook took place in
the Sandwich Islands in February 1779. The literary part, or the
arrangement and composition of the text, was the performance of
Dr. Douglas, the late celebrated Bishop of Salisbury : and the plates
were under the especial management of the late Sir Joseph Banks.
Prefixed to the third voyage, of which the text is remarkable for its
plain and perspicuous style, the Bishop has given an introduction
containing the substance of the two preceding voyages. The PLATES
are necessarily a very material object to be attended to in the purchase of a good copy of these three voyages. On looking through
them , one discovers the names of engravers justly eminent in their
day ; such as Pouncy, Lerpiniere, Hall, Caldwall, Sherwin, Byrne,
Woollet, Basire and Bartolozzi. The drawings of the first voyages
were by William Hodges ; an artist of acknowledged eminence in his
department, and those of the third were from the accurate pencil of
Webber, on the spot, and under the eye of the great Circumnavigator. To say that these plates are always, and in every respect,
worthy of the reputation ofthe engravers, would be to advance a
very inaccurate position. Both in the first and second voyages,
there are great and palpable inequalities. A few copies of the
second voyage have proof impressions of the plates struck off on
a large folio or atlas size, which are now become very rare. The
plates of the third voyage, executed under the superintendance of
Sir Joseph Banks, have much greater pretensions to general commendation ; but many specimens of birds and fruits, in the second
voyage, can hardly be excelled ; and the burin of Record, in implements of husbandry, &c. and weapons of attack and defence, leaves
nothing to be desired.
But it is after the graphic embellishments of the third voyage, that
the purchaser must more particularly look. This publication was
conducted by Messrs . G. Nicol and Cadell ; and such was the care
NAVIGATIONS.] VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 397
North Pacific Ocean and round the World : " performed between the years 1790 and 1795 , and puband attention paid to the delivery of copies, in the exact order in
which they were subscribed for, that the hundredth or the first thousandth subscriber, had precisely his hundredth or first thousandth
copy. The sale of the work was equal to the celebrity of the
Circumnavigator ; whose horrible death had excited an intense and
general interest. Not fewer than 4000 copies of these three 4to.
volumes, with a magnificent Atlas folio of plates, were sold during
the first year of the publication. A few of the first impressions of
the plates are yet to be found among the stores of Mr. Nicol. The
work was twice or thrice reprinted ; but a book- connoisseur of
correct tact must seek for the first impressions of the plates of the
edition of 1785, with the second or third edition of the letter press ;
inasmuch as these latter editions were better printed . It may be
now, therefore, high time to talk about the prices of these several
works. I find a copy of the third Voyage, " with the Atlas plates
from thefirst edition, and the usually added plate of Cook's death,
engraved by Bartolozzi, " marked at 10l. 10s. in the catalogue of
Messrs. Payne and Foss : and of the second Voyage of 1777, there is
a neat copy, with good impressions of the plates, marked at 5l. 15s. 6d.
another copy of the second voyage, in boards, is marked at 61. 6s.
Messrs. I. and A. Arch mark the complete set in eight volumes,
including Dr. Hawkesworth's Collection, at 24l.: another copy,
halfbound, at 177. 17s. and the first edition ofthe South Pole voyage,
in boards, " with the plates printed upon folio paper, before the
numbers were inserted " at 127. 12s. Messrs. Longman and Co.
have most judiciously reprinted the whole of Cook's Voyages, with
plates, in 7 volumes 8vo. at the reasonable price of 31. 13s. 6d.
With the Voyages of Cook, is usually collected that of George
Forster round the World, in Cook's ship, which relates to physical
and ethical observations, Geography, and Natural History ; Lond.
1777, 4to. 2 vols. Consult the Bibl. Heath, nº. 2814, and nº. 2815
for a picked copy of Cook's third voyage. To these, add Kippis's
Life and Death of Captain Cook,, 1788, 4to .
Brunet, (vol. i. page
455) will supply a few other particulars, with French versions of
Hawkesworth and Cook. Upon the whole, choice copies of all
these quarto tomes are proud features in the library of ANY Collector.
398 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS [CIRCUM- .
lished in 1798, 4to. 3 vols. with a folio volume or
charts and maps. A good copy of these four volumes
maybe worth 5l. 15s. 6d.
I
pass slightly over the circumnavigations of ORDONES DE CEVALLOS, and GEMELLI CARRERI, * to make
room for the mention of the more important maritime
discoveries of the FRENCH SCHOOL ; and therein, more
especially of the lamented Pérouse, and the laudable
but unsuccessful labours, in pursuit of him, by Labillardiere and D'Entrecasteaux. The work of PÉROUSE,
*The voyage of Pedro Ordoñes de Cevallos was published at Madrid in 1614, 4to .: but the circumnavigatory voyage ofANTONIO PIGAFETTA, published in Milan nearly a century before (namely, in 1517,
4to.) should not be omitted. Mr. Pinkerton, in his list of voyages and
travels, vol. xvii. p . 252, makes this first edition of Pigafetta, erroneously, of the date of 1556. At the sale of Colonel Stanley's library, an
edition of1536, 4to. purporting to be the first, was purchased by Mr.
Heber for 171.17s. It was reprinted by Amoretti at Milan, in 1800, 4to.
and again in 1805 and in the French language in 1811 , 8vo. It
should be remembered that this voyage is also the celebrated voyage of
Ferdinando Magellan, from whom the streights, so called, derive their
name and it should be also remembered that Antonio Pigafetta
must be distinguished from his descendant Filippo, whose " Relatione del reame di Congo e delle circonvicine contrade, " was published
at Rome in 1591 , 4to. and translated into the Latin language as a
portion of the Petits Voyages of De Bry. It was also translated
into English and published by John Wolfe in 1597, 4to. , with the
plates copied from De Bry's : and I find Mr. Heber giving 31. 4s. for
a copy of this latter work at the sale of Mr. Towneley's library. A
copy at the sale of the White Knight's library brought about half
the sum.
CARRERI'S circumnavigation was published at Naples, in 1699, in
7 vols. 8vo. with cuts : and translated into French by Le Noble, and
published in 1719, in 6 vols. 12mo. But consult the excellent account of Gemelli Carreri to be found in the Biographie Universelle, &c.
vol. xvii. p. 49.
NAVIGATIONS.] VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 399
with a portrait of that intrepid commander prefixed,
appeared at Paris in 1797, in four quarto volumes. *
That ofthe Citizen Labillardiere, in 2 quarto volumes,
1800 ; and the more important one of D'ENTRECASTEAUX in 1808, 4to. 2 vols. These volumes are all
handsomely printed, and the last work is enriched
with many plates of coasts, headlands, and soundings,
&c. They are alike destitute of picturesque embellishments. I might perhaps have made mention of the
circumnavigatory labours ofKRUSENSTERN, printed in
the German language, in 1810, in 3 quarto volumes,
with an Atlas folio ; but as I have omitted the names
of Turnbull, Dixon, and Portlock, (minor circumnavigators) ofmy own country, there is the less necessity
to expatiate on the discoveries of other foreigners . It
* I will be brief in the notice of the works of the above Navigators, because they are well known, and are of every day's purchase.
Voyage de la Pérouse autour du Monde, Paris, 1797, 4to. 4 vols.
The miniature prefixed is from a painting of Tardieu, and looks like a
strong resemblance. Relation du Voyage à la Recherche de la Pérouse, 1791-2 : Par le Cen. Labillardiere. Paris, An. VIII. ( 1800)
4to. 2 vols. Voyage de D'Entrecasteaux, envoyé à la recherche de la
Pérouse. A Paris, 1808, 4to. 2 vols. No mention of Labillardiere
is made in the preface ; but on the death of D'Entrecasteaux (p . xi. )
Auribeau was appointed to succeed him. A year or two before,
however, appeared " Voyage autour du Monde pendant les années, "
1790-1-2, par ETIENNE MARCHAND. Par C. P. Claret Fleurieu .
Prais, An. vi. The introduction is exceedingly interesting ; and in
the summary of Circumnavigators, honourable mention is made ( as
noticed in a preceding note) of the labours of Cook. Let me only
further observe, that beautiful copies of all these French publications,
bound in russia, are found at Althorp .
† I refer the reader to Pinkerton's list for the present omissions,
which are few indeed in number ; and defective in no respect in the
importance of the books omitted.
400 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS [ASIA. .
may, be as well to state, that an English Version of
Krusenstern, by Richard Belgrave Hopner, Esq. was
published in 1813, in 2 volumes, quarto. The Collection of Voyages in the South Sea, from its first discovery by Europeans, until the commencement of the
Reign of George the Third, by the late ADMIRAL
BURNEY, should, however, be added to this list, "The
author accompanied Captain Cook in his two last
Voyages. His book displays a rare union of nautical
and literary research, and the liberal spirit which it
breathes, is honourable to his profession and his
country. *
* Quarterly Review, vol. xvii. p. 1 .
[ 401 ]
ASIA.
Having given a pretty full account of COLLECTIONS
ofVOYAGES, and of CIRCUMNAVIGATIONS of the Globe,
I proceed to lay before my readers, both " young"
and " old, " a sketch of a few of the more important
voyages and travels which relate to the most ancient,
and, with the exception of America, the largest quarter of the World : to those regions, once the scene of
an earthly paradise,
" where God or angel guest,
With Man, as with his friend familiar, used
To sit indulgent, and with him partake
Rural repast.
""
Ofcourse I allude to ASIA. Dismissing, in the briefest
possible manner, what hath been written upon this
country by Herodotus, Arrian, Ptolemy, and others
of the ancient school, including the Minor Greek
Geographers, I commence with the notices of Tu-
*The notices of Asia by Herodotus, and more especially the memorable voyage of Nearchus, ( rendered familiar to British readers by
the version and edition of Arrian by the late Dr. Vincent, and by the
Doctor's own account ofthe voyage and Periplus of the Erythræan Sea)
need scarcely be dwelt upon. Ptolemy's map of Asia is republished
by Mr. Murray (vol. i . page 448) in his Historical Account of Discoveries and Travels in Asia, 1820, octavo, three vols. a work,
before (page 368) especially commended, and to which, as will be
obvious, I shall have such frequent occasion to refer. In regard to
the information incidental to India, to be found in the ancient minor
Greek Geographers, edited in 4 vols. 8vo. by Hudson, in 1698, I
cannot venture upon recommending the reader-unless his purse be
well garnished with pistoles-to purchase these rare and high-priced
D D
402 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. [ASIA
dela, Marco Polo, and Mandeville. Benjamin, the
son of Jonas of Tudela, a Spanish Jew, was among
the earliest of Asiatic Travellers in the middle ages.
His work, which is rather curious than valuable, has
been translated into the English, French, and other
languages. * MARCO POLO, although greatly surpassed
tomes. He will be pleased to read what is said of them in my Introd.
to the Classics, vol . ii . p . 439, and to unite in the wish of Toup, that
the University of Oxford (now so laudably smitten with a passion
for reprinting) would republish, with such additions and corrections
as recent researches have brought to light, these intrinsically valuable volumes. Upon LARGE PAPER — but why am I about to run
riot? Only this much be conceded to me : to mention a remarkably
fine copy of the first two volumes, in original calf binding, in the
Pepysian library at Cambridge. I have seen fine and perfect copies
on large paper in the Luton and Althorp Collections ; among the
" lock up " rarities in Christ Church Library, Oxford : in Cleveland
Square ; in Portland Place ; but is not all this running EXCEEDINGLY
riot ? It is it is : and I desist. Let me however earnestly entreat
and exhort Messrs . Elmsly and Gaisford to take heed to the republication of the MINOR GREEK GEOGRAPHERS, first edited by Joseph
Hudson.
* The FIRST EDITION of Tudela's text was by Montanus, who
translated it from the original Hebrew, and published it in the office
of Plantin, 1575, 8vo.: but a better version appeared by Constantine
Lempereur ab Oppyck, a professor of theology at Leyden ; who
brought it out in an elegant form at the Elzevir press, in 1633,
12mo. : a copy of which was sold for 7s. 6d. at the sale of Dr. Heath's
library, and for 17. 13s , in black morocco, at that of Colonel Stanley's
library. Both editions contain the original Hebrew. An English
version appeared in 1783, 8vo.: and a better French one was published by Barathier at Amst. in 1784 , 2 vols . 12mo. But it is in a
yet better form among the French versions of old travels, in the 12th,
13th, 14th, and 15th centuries, published by Pierre Bergeron in 1735,
4to. 2 vols. Consult Pinkerton, vol. xvii. p. 126; who is here comparatively communicative .
ASIA.]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS.
403
by subsequent travellers in the extent, variety, and
importance ofthe information imparted, is nevertheless
one of the most authentic and valuable of the middle
age writers of travels ; and, luckily for Englishmen,
this country can boast of the most correct, full, and
satisfactory version and edition of his labours extant.
I allude to the masterly publication, in a quarto form ,
which has been recently put forth by Mr. Marsden ; *
and my obligations to which have been already declared in a public manner. The ardent and the
curious Bibliomaniac will doubtless revel in the possession (should he be ever able to possess it ! ) of the
first printed text of Polo's travels in the German language but the sober-minded and dispassionate
* " Mr Marsden, in his recent very learned edition ( 1818, 4to . ) of
these travels, has collected and placed in the clearest light all the
evidences of their authenticity, drawn both from ancient and modern
sources. His labours have smoothed the task, which would otherwise have been difficult, of analyzing the description given by Marco
of the eastern world." Murray ; vol. i . p. 161. The reader should
know that Marco Polo was a Venetian- son of Maffio, and nephew
of Nicolo, Polo-both of whom undertook the first voyage to the
countries in question, and both of whom were eclipsed by the enterprise and energies of Marco. Mr. Marsden's book (21. 12s. 6d. )
should be in every professed collection of Voyages and Travels.
+ The curious reader may see a full and particular account of this
first German impression in the Edes Althorpianæ, vol. ii . p . 176-9,
together with a fac-simile of the portrait capriciously introduced as
that of Marco Polo himself. Mr. Murray has inaccurately dated this
edition 1471. It is so rare, that only one other copy of it is known ;
which is in the Imperial Library at Vienna and Mr. Marsden had
gone a considerable way through his labours, before he was put
in possession of a transcript of the Vienna copy. Lord Spencer's
copy, in every respect sound and desirable, was obtained at Munich,
by Mr. John Payne-when he sprung a mine, at that place, of
404 [ASIA. VOYAGES AND TRAVELS.
Collector will embrace, with a better regulated fondness, the intelligible and uncorrupted version of
Marsden.
SIR JOHN MANDEVILLE is our next most ancient
and popular Eastern traveller. Whatever may be the
estimation in which his Work is held abroad, there are
certainly good proofs of its having been long favourably received at home. Leaving the cabinets of the
curious in quiet possession of the French and Italian
impressions in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, the
unambitious Collector may rest well satisfied with the
handsomely printed edition, in a large octavo form, of
the date of 1725 : which yet however maintains a stiff
price. It is a mistake to suppose that there are
several very mysterious and precious tomes. Polo's travels have been
translated into Italian, ( 1497) French, ( 1566) and Spanish, 1720.
An early English version appeared in 1579 : again in Purchas ; and
latterly in Pinkerton. Messrs. Arch had the courage to give 31. 13s. 6d.
for the Latin version, printed in 1671 , 4to. at the sale of Colonel
Stanley's library ; and 10l . 10s. were given for an early edition, sine
ullá nota, in the same language, at the sale of the White Knights
library.
*The versions of Mandeville, even in ms. , must have been numerous, and widely scattered abroad. A French and an Italian edition appeared in 1480, nineteen years before the appearance of the
legitimate text of the author, in the English language. Brunet correctly notices these early impressions, of which I have seen a copy of
the Italian, in the libraries of Mr. Grenville and Mr. Wilbrahamso rich in publications of this character. There are numerous reimpressions of each in the xvth century. Lord Spencer has the Bologna
edition of 1492, 4to. The Duke of Marlborough's copy of the Bologna edition of 1497 was sold for 31.: and a fine copy of an old
Latin edition, sine ulld notá , was sold, at the sale of his library in
1819, for 9l. 9s. Several other copies were in the same collection.
But very much rarer than either of these-and so rare, as to baffle
ASIA.]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 405
copies on large paper. I have never seen the volume
but of one size. Shall I provoke the smile, or the frown,
of the reader by the mention of the name of MENDEZ
PINTO ? -pronounced, in a well known comedy, to be
at least a " liar of the second magnitude ! " Yet time
has caused the truth to be filtered through the supposed
falsehood of this text ; and, bating some exceptions,
(rather in the shape of exaggeration than studied fiction) Pinto may be acknowledged among the most valuable as well as early of the Explorers ofthe Southern
Coasts of Asia. The précis of his exploits, by Mr.
Murray, is really a piece of witchery to peruse.
all present enquiries to identify a copy-is the first, hitherto known,
ENGLISH VERSION, put forth by Wynkyn de Worde in 1499, 4to : of
which a particular description is given, together with some account
of Mandeville, in the Typog. Antiq. vol. ii . p . 84, &c. Where the
copy, there noticed, now reposes, is beyond the ken of the author of
this work. The English reprints, in the sixteenth century, are
said byWatt and Murray to be of the dates of 1503 and 1568 : in
the seventeenth, 1684 : and in the eighteenth, I know of none but
those of 1722, 1725, and 1727. Of the first of these, which has
wretched wood- cuts, a copy was sold for 11. 9s. at the Towneley
sale ofthe second, † a copy brought 31. 7s. at the Stanley sale, and
31. 158. at Bindley's ; and of the third, Mr. Payne marks a copy,
very neat," at 21. 2s. I do not know the secret history of the edition of 1725 selling so high.
(6
Historical Account, &c . vol. i . p. 234-261 . The earliest edition
of the Peregrinaçam of Mendez Pinto, in the original Portuguese language, is that of 1614, Madrid, folio : and if a very fine copy of the
Valencia reprint in 1645, folio, produced the sum of 31. 13s. at the
sale of the Stanley library, we may suppose the parent text to be
+It is not a little curious that of this very date, a work should appear by an
author of the same name, called " a modest defence of Public Stews"--which I have
heard, more than once, resolutely contended for as the work of our worthy knight
the Traveller !!! See other Mandevilles in Thorpe's Catalogue, p. ii. no. 9146. ~
406 [ASIA.
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS.
I know not, however, if this sketch of the earlier
travellers into Asia be complete, without some mention, however incidental, of the voyage of F. PYRARD, *
who is classed by Pinkerton ( not always the soundest
judge to appeal to) among " the most accurate and
intelligent " of travellers . Pursuing the order of Mr.
Murray, in his three delightful volumes, I proceed at
worth 51.5s. There was a Madrid reprint of 1627.
version appeared in 1653 ; the French, in 1605 ; the
1671 ; and the English, in 1663—rather a rare book
1692, folio : worth about 12s. 6d.
-
The Dutch
German, in
and again in
* "—navigation aux Indes- Orientales, aux Maldives, Molucques, au
Bresil, &c. Paris, 1615 or 1619, 8vo. First edition , according to
Brunet ; but Pinkerton makes it 1613. Neither seems to speak from
authority ; though both unite in considering the edition of 1679, 4to.
as the best. Huet thought that Bergeron was the author of the text,
from theoral instructions of Pyrard : consult Brunet, vol. iii . p. 174.
Be this as it may, whoever reads the notice of this work by Pinkerton,† (Coll. of Voyages, vol. xvii. p . 163 ) will run with all his might
and main to secure the first copy of it that turns up. And yet, whoever reads the very interesting account of the author, in the Biographie
Universelle, 1823, vol. xxxvi . p. 348-50, will observe that Duval,
who was the editor of the edition of 1679, and who boasts of having
done, and who has certainly done, much towards the elucidation of
the text, has unluckily omitted the Vocabulary of the Maldivian language, to be found in the preceding impressions ; so that the purchaser will be a little embarrassed in his choice. A sort of Syllabus
ofthe work, under the title of " Discours du Voyage, " &c. appeared
in 1611 ; but which should seem to be hardly worth walking after.
+"Ofthe ancient travellers in India, PYRARD, who set out in 1600 , and returned
in 1611 , is one of the most accurate and intelligent. His descriptions are concise
and neat, and his accuracy has not been impeached. The account he gives ofthe
Maldives continues the best we have, and that of Bengal, Cochin, Travancore , and
Kalicut, are of great value. His remarks on Ceylon , the isles of Sunda and the
Moluccas, are more rapid, but those on the Brazils , though short, are full of curious matter." But consult the new Biographie Universelle Ancienne et Moderne;
as above referred to.
ASIA. ] VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 407
once to the notice of the labours of the Portuguesethe Discoverers of India : as I shall have occasion to
mention, in another and more compressed form, the
travellers who are introduced by him towards the end
of his first volume.
At the very sound of Portuguese enterprise, the
name of VASCO DE GAMA rushes npon our ear with a
fond and enthusiastic sensation and leaving the
lovers of poetry to read the achievements ofthat great
and dauntless navigator in the mellifluent numbers of
Camoens,* I shall gently lead them to the more sober
details of his exploits, to be found in the Decads of
BARROS, and in the Asia Portuguesa of FARIA DE
SOUSA, and other similar bodies of travels ! Mean-
* Will " the young" or " the old " Collector aspire to the rarest
and most splendid edition of this poet which has ever appeared, and
which is described in tempting detail in the Ædes Althorpiane, vol.
i. p. 143-5 ? At this moment, I know not whether any copy of it has
been sold by auction. When it does, will thirty- six guineas enable
GOTSCALEUS to become its purchaser ?
+ First ofBarros. As Decadas III de Asia dos feitos que os Portugeses fezerão, &c. de Joam de Barros, printed at Lisbon in 1552-63,
3 vols. folio : and reprinted in 1628, and again with those of Couto ,
or the 4th Decad, in 1736, 3 vols.: and again from 1778 to 1788 in
24 duodecimo volumes. The IVth Decad was printed in 1602 : the
Vth in 1612 ; the VIth and VIIth in 1614-16 : the VIIIth, IXth, and
Xth in 1673 : all in folio. The XIth Decad is in MS. and so is the
XIIIth and of the XIIth, only the first five books are printed. So
astonishingly scarce are copies of this work, that Mr. Murray doubts
if the VIIIth, IXth, Xth, and XIth Decads have been printed ; but
there is a printed copy of the VIIIth, and a complete set of the
whole, in the library of His late Majesty. A set is not only pronounced
tobe "presque introuvable " in France, by Brunet-but he knows of
no catalogue which contains a copy of the IXth and Xth Decads.
408 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. [ASIA.
while, the analysis of Mr. Murray, (vol. iii. p. 43-56 )
cannot fail to be a provoker of the appetite for a more
abundant intellectual meal. Among the labours of
the Portuguese Missionaries, those of Guzman are the
more important ; and if the result of English Embassies, having for their object many things in common
with those of the Portuguese, be at all a topic which
weighs with the Collector of Travels, let him form an
acquaintance with the texts of HAWKINS and ROE. *
We have now reached the period, when it behoves
us to render justice to the spirit of discovery and of
The likeliest quarters to meet with another such a copy, are the libraries of Lord Holland, and Messrs. Heber, Frere, and Southey -and
where they are sure to be turned to good account. It may be remarked, that it is a work of extreme difficulty to specify accurately.
The Asia Portugessa of MANUEL FARIA DE SOUSA, published in
3 folio volumes at Lisbon in 1666, with many curious cuts, is also
exceedingly rare . A copy of it was sold at the sale of Dr. Heath's
library for 91. An English translation appeared in 1695, 8vo. 3 vols.
see Bibl. Heath, no . 2563 ; and Bibl. Harl. vol. ii . nos. 11494, 11524.
With this work, should be united the Europa Portuguessa of Emanuel
Faria de Sousa, published in 1671 , folio, 2 vols. of which an extra
bound copy, by Walther, was sold for 71. at the same sale. Yet perhaps, of more importance than either, is the account of the Conquests
ofthe Portuguese in India, which occupies the eight folio tomes of
FERNAN LOPEZ DE CASTANHEDA, and which was printed at Coimbra
in 1552-4. Where shall we expect to find a copy of this curious
work, if not in one of the foregoing libraries ?
* The work of LUIZ GUZMAN is that of a Portuguese Missionary,
and it incorporates an account of China and of Japan as well as of
the East Indies. It was published at Alcala in 1601 , in two folio
volumes, and has become rare and high priced. The travels of Hawkins and Roe are found in the first volumes of the Collections of
Purchas and Churchill. Roe, more fully in the latter and again,
separately, in 1740.
:
ASIA.]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 409
enterprise which actuated the FRENCH SCHOOL ; and
wherein the names of Bernier, Tavernier, Thévenot.
and Chardin, are eminently conspicuous. The nature
ofthis work forbidding an exemplified notice of these
labours in the text, the reader is referred to the subjoined note for the best editions* of the publications
which record them. Following the order of Mr. Mur-
* First of BERNIER ; whose work, in two duodecimo volumes ,
1679, with cuts—again in 1725 , 12mo. 2 vols. - contains one of the
best accounts of Hindoostan that has ever appeared ; including the
first good account of Cashmeer and of several other countries. So
says Pinkerton : but consult Murray, vol. ii . p. 183, &c. TAVERNIER's is a better known, and more common work. It was published
in the French language at Paris in 1679, 1692, and at Utrecht 1712,
12mo. 3 vols. with cuts. A copy of the latter edition was sold for
21. 3s. at the sale of Dr. Heath's library. The first may be the more
valuable, on account of the sharpness of the cuts ; but Brunet forbids the purchase of any edition subsequent to the date of 1712. An
English version of Tavernier appeared in 1678, folio, with plates ; of
which a very neat copy is marked at 21. 2s. in the catalogue of
Messrs. Payne and Foss. JOHN THEVENOT, the traveller, must be
distinguished from Melchisedec Thevenot the Collector of Travels,
(concerning whose work see p. 384, ante) . The fullest edition of I.
Thevenot's labours appeared in 1689, in 5 small octavo volumes,
with cuts, which may be purchased for about a guinea. A high character is given of the writer in the Bibl. Harleiana, vol. ii. p. 696.
CHARDIN is incomparably preferable to either of his precursors, but
he is rather a Persian than a more Eastern traveller. His Voyage en
Perse et autres lieux de l'Orient appears with every possible advantage in 4 quarto volumes published at Amsterdam in 1735 ; and a
fine copy of this precious work yet rears its head in the market. Dr.
Heath's copy was sold for 15l. 15s.; but Colonel Stanley's, in blue
morocco binding, brought nearly double that sum - namely, 281.
This is thought to be the best edition : but M. Langlès, an able editor, has recently ( 1811 ) put forth a new and handsome edition in ten
octavo volumes-with an Atlas folio of eighty-one plates. For
purity of text, this latter is probably the preferable impression ; yet
410 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. [ASIA.
ray, we enter upon the immense territory of HINDOOSTAN ; the chief seat ofthe British Empire in the East.
the thorough-bred bibliomaniac clings to his quarto with pertinacious fondness.
The name of RAYNAL (the Abbé) is doubtless connected with those
writers, of the French School, who have treated of the affairs of
India ; but the Abbé's work relating to India is purely philosophical and political ; the author never having visited that country.
His "Histoire philosophique et politique des établissemens et du commerce des Européens dans les deux Indes, " was first published, according to Barbier, in 1770, in six octavo volumes : it was afterwards
published at Geneva, in five volumes in quarto, and ten in octavo,
in 1780 : the last volume of the quarto having maps : and a quarto
Atlas accompanying the octavo impression. Brunet says the octavo
is the preferable edition : but I find a copy of the quarto impression
purchased by Lord Essex for 31. 13s. 6d. at the sale of Dr. Heath's
library. Brunet gives a curious anecdote enough about the publication of this work. He says " that the Abbé Raynal, before he
printed and published it at Geneva, and by Pellet, first printed three
copies only at Stoupe's, at Paris : of these, one was left with Stoupe ;
the second was preserved by the Abbé ; and the third was left with
Pellet, as for the impression copy. " By these means, he introduced
his own corrections, and those of his friends, upon the margins of a
printed copy, for the more immediate facility of publication.
Grimm says, that Diderot wrote one third part of it, which is not
the least distinguished for the boldness of its sentiments : Mem. part
iii. vol. iv. p. 85. But la Harpe says, that Diderot wrote the half of
it ; and that though Raynal was really a better man than Diderot,
yet that he, Diderot, Rousseau, Voltaire, and Helvetius, were among
the most powerful prime movers of the French revolution : Cours de
Litterature, vol. xv. p. 113 ; xvi . part i . p . 173-4. " Jai lu" (says
Barbier) "cette histoire politique, qu'on attribue avec raison à divers
auteurs. Ces Messieurs déclament plus qu'ils ne racontent ; et ce
livre est moins une histoire, qu'une compilation hardie et irréligieuse
Bibl. d'un Homme de Gout, de tout ce qu'ont dit les voyageurs. " *
vol. iv. p. 182.
* Dr. Johnson flew out into a great passion, and perhaps with reason, when any
one talked of the Abbé Raynal's history. Gibbon has drawn no very enviable
ASIA. ]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 411
Yet before the notice of those writers who have, more
particularly written upon that country, be entered
upon, it may be worth while to observe, not only that
several of the authors before described make more or
less mention of it-but that several, not at all previously noticed, are copious in their accounts ; such as
many whose works appear in the Danish Asiatic
Transactions; while the labours of DAPPER, TIefenTHALER, and VALENTYN* present the most copious
* First of the transactions of DANISH Travellers and Missionaries,
under the title of " Acten der Danischen Mission en Ost- Indien."
They were published at Halle in 1718, in 13 vols. 4to. , and have
been continued to the year 1805, (if not later) comprising sixty- one
volumes. These Acts (says Pinkerton) are cited as authority by
Anquetil-du- Perron. They have been abridged in the Latin and
German languages. But, in the German language, let Dapper's
" Asia, or a Description of the Empire of the Great Mogul, and of a
large part of India, " published at Amsterdam in 1672, in 2 folio
volumes, receive a quiet place at the bottom row of folios in the
library of the Linguist : and if the graphic Connoisseur have a small
void for the oblong folio of Romain de Hooge, which represents→→→
EVERY THING-connected with the East and West Indies, let this
brilliant tome be found in his cabinet . TIEFENTHALER is a " clarum
nomen" in the list of oriental travellers ; but the safest and pleasantest advice respecting his work, will be to recommend" the young
Man " to procure the French version of it, with the researches of
Anquetil du Perron, and the map of Rennell, in 1785, 4to. 3 vols.
A copy of this valuable performance may be obtained for 31. 13s. 6d.
" The account of the Seikhs by Tieffenthaler is the most interesting
we possess, " says Pinkerton.
picture of the Abbé himself. In a letter dated Lausanne, Sept. 30 , 1783 , he thus
writes to Lord Sheffield : " Yesterday afternoon I lay, or at least sat, in state to
receive visits, and at the same moment my room was filled with four different
nations. The loudest of these nations was the single voice of the Abbe Raynal,
who, like your friend, has chosen this place for the asylum of freedom and history. His conversation , which might be very agreeable , is intolerably loud,
peremptory, and insolent ; and you would imagine that he alone were the Monarch
and legislator of the world." Post. Works, vol. v. p. 330.
412 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS [ASIA.
.
and curious details. But coming more collectively
to the notice of Hindoostan, and carrying with us,
as a safe guide in all our journeyings, the incomparable Map of MAJOR RENNELL, first published (with an
octavo volume of explanation, containing an account
of the Ganges and Burrampooter rivers) in 1788, I
am anxious to recommend the Asiatic Researches, together with the works of SIR WILLIAM JONES, * to
those who are more solicitous of minute and curious
66
99
I cannot dissemble my fondness for FRANC VALENTYN, although
I am unable to read a single sentence in his work : -published in the
Dutch language, in 1726, folio, in 8 volumes : but the plates are so
curious and apparently faithful, as well as numerous —and the work
being considered scarce and little known, " as well as " the best
hitherto published, relative to India, I may venture to stimulate the curious to secure, as soon as possible, the fine old vellumbound copy of it, which lies at Messrs. Payne and Foss, at the price
of 71. 7s. I remember, after the capture of Java, by the gallant
Colonel Gillespie, looking over many plates in this work, which
represent the streets of the capital through which the gallant English army marched in their road to victory. My friend, Mr. Brunet,
rightly calls these volumes a very curious collection ; but
being written in a language of limited circulation, their contents
cannot be generally appreciated. " With the work of Valentyn, I
am desirous of recommending two ancient volumes in the French
language, which describe the adventures and discoveries of the
Dutch in the East Indies, of that period-" avec le vrai portrait au
vif des habitans-le tout par plusieurs figures illustré ; par G. W. A.
W. W." Amst. 1538, folio . A second volume, descriptive of Dutch
enterprise, under Admirals J. Cornelius Nec, and Wilbrant de Warwic, appeared in 1609 , folio. Just now, the present abode of a copy
of either of these works escapes me.
66
* The Asiatic Researches, which owe their origin to the patronage
of the celebrated Sir William Jones, and which were first published
at Calcutta, have been reprinted in London in 14 quarto volumes :
1799-1821 . The publication price is 25s. per volume. They are
ASIA.]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 413
details connected with our East India territorieswhile, in lieu of these elaborate performances, the publications of BUCHANAN, MALCOLM, HAMILTON, and
MILL, can scarcely fail to gratify a very large class of
readers. *
full of the most curious and valuable intelligence in every possible
form, and on every possible subject. Need I dwell a moment on
the recommendation of the works of SIR WILLIAM JONES, in 8 quarto
volumes, 1799-1801 -reprinted in 12 octavo volumes ? A scholar,
a critic, philosopher, lawyer, and poet-where shall we find, in the
works of the SAME MAN, greater demonstrations of pure and correct
feeling, and cultivated and classical taste, than in the volumes here
noticed and recommended?! The piety of Sir William Jones was not
inferior to his learning. Athoroughly good, and great- minded man,
- his caution, humility, and diffidence were equal to his learning
and multifarious attainments ; and there is a vigour and raciness in
his translations of Persian Poetry, which give them the enchanting
air of original productions. This great man may be said to have
fallen a victim to the climate where he spent the latter portion ofhis
life. He was prematurely cut off in his high career : but his grateful country numbers him among the most illustrious of her WORTHIES.
* Dr. FRANCIS BUCHANAN'S works, connected with India, do infinite credit to his memory. His Journey through the Countries of
Mysore, Canara, and Malabar, Lond. 1807, 4to. 3 vols. is a most curious and instructive work. Those researches, of an ecclesiastical
character, which distinguish the works of the Rev. Claudius Buchanan, are too well known and appreciated to need being chronicled
in this place. See the 1st. 2nd. and 16th volumes of the Quarterly
Review. The works of SIR JOHN MALCOLM place him among the
principal of statistical writers upon the East. His History of Persia
belongs to a subsequent place ; but his papers in the Asiatic Researches, his Sketch of the Sikhs, and, above all, his Memoir of
Central India, ( 1823, 8vo. 2 vols. ) are productions of decided and
general utility. The latter received an elaborate investigation in the
Quarterly Review ofJanuary, 1824. But of the most obvious utility
and merit, are the labours of Mr. Hamilton. Who, that has relatives
414 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. [ASIA.
Yet portions of this great territory have stimulated
the curiosity, and called forth the spirit of enterprise,
of some ofthe most ardent and scientific of travellers
-and those ofour own country. The Himmaleh or
Himmalaya mountains-that vast and magnificent
chain, which forms the northern boundary of Hindoostan, and is the immediate barrier between the
kingdoms of Nepaul and Thibet-which, rising with
its eternal snows, looks down even upon the proudest
summits ofthe Andes-those stupendous heights have
received the most delightful and satisfactory illustratrations by Messrs. Hardwicke, Webb, Raper, Colebrooke,Moorcroft, and Fraser.* THIBET should seem
in India, ("Alas, I feel I amno actor here ! " ) can rest satisfied without
the possession, not only of his Gazetteer, but of his Geographical Description ofHindoostan, in two quarto volumes, published at London,in
1820 Mr. James Mill, without having visited India, is nevertheless
the author of a most spirited and popular History of British India, in
two quarto- reprinted in 6 octavo volumes : obtainable in either shape,
and at a moderate price.
* Consult the Asiatic Researches, vol. x. xi, and xii. and above all
the very interesting Reviews of Works connected with these magnificent regions, in the xivth and xviith volumes of the Quarterly
Review. Or, if these should not be at hand, let the work of Mr.
Murray's Asia, be consulted ; especially the whole of the first chapter
of the 3d book in volume ii. The perusal is almost transporting.
Does it from hence follow, that the perpetual height of snow, in the
Himmalaya range, is 17,000 feet-and that the Mont Blanc of
this range is 27,000 feet in altitude ? Colonel Kirkpatrick, in his
Nepaul, seems to have first imparted to the public a notion of the
marvellous height of these mountains ; although Turner, in his
Thibet, had more than a casual glimpse of them. The Colonel's
extatic feelings are thus described-" the summit of Chandragiri
which commanded a sublime amphitheatre, successively exhibiting
to the delighted view, the cities and numberless temples of the valley
ASIA. ]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 415
hardly to stand in need of another historian, after the
very admirable work of the late Mr. Samuel Turner ;
whose " Account of an Embassy to the Court of Teshoo Lama," in that country, together with the Views
of Lieutenant Davis, and the Mineralogical and Botanical Observations of Mr. Saunders-all put forth
in one splendid quarto volume, in 1800-cannot fail
of meeting the approbation of every qualified judge. *
This performance is among the most perfect of those
which relate to the northern parts of India.
NEPAUL has been brought before our eyes, as it
were, by the labours of Colonel Kirkpatrick and Dr.
below the stupendous mountain of Sheoopoori ; the still supertowering Jibjibia, clothed to its snow-capped peak with pendulous
forests ; and, finally, the GIGANTIC HIMMALEH, forming the majestic
back-ground of this wonderful and sublime picture. " Murray, vol. ii.
p. 429. Mr. Murray himself is even hurried along by the force of
such impassioned feelings. He mentions " the snowy pinnacles of
the mighty Himmaleh : the almost unfathomable depth of the valley
beneath, contrasted with the stupendous height of the mountains
above, and the grandeur of their awful and cloud- capt boundary,
producing an impression of sublimity amounting to terror." In
Captain Hardwicke's tour, the two loftiest peaks in view, were those
of Gangoutri, supposed to be the source ofthe Ganges, and Jamautii,
that ofthe Jumna, " p. 295.
Such are the regions in which the two mightiest rivers in Asia are
supposed to have their sources ; regions, still to be accurately and
fully explored - notwithtsanding the unparalleled efforts of Mr.
MOORCROFT, who has penetrated farther into the mountainous world
of India, than any other European traveller. An outline of his truly
instructive and interesting narrative may be found in the first number of the Edinburgh Philosophical Journal. But EVERY author,
above mentioned, deserves equal praise ; and, if achievements,
such as they performed, were always the result of TERRITORIAL
CONQUEST, who might not envy the CONQUERED the felicity of their
lot ?
416 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS [ASIA. .
Hamilton ; and the Hon. M. Elphinstone's CAUBUL
is a work which places its author in the first rank of
historians and travellers in the East. Luckily, the
labours of these gentlemen are neither costly nor
rare ; * and most earnestly do I recommend them ,
especially the book of Mr. Elphinstone, to every library
of any pretension to a Collection of Voyages and
Travels .
PERSIA, according to Mr. Murray's arrangement,
next claims the attention of the bibliographer. Leaving the discoveries of earlier travellers to be found
in the collection of Aldus, put forth in 1543-5, under
the title of Viaggi fatti da Vinegia,+ I pass quickly
* COL. FITZPATRICK'S Nepaul, an elegant 4to. volume, published
in 1811, with a map and other engravings, was elaborately, and on
the whole dispassionately, reviewed in the vth volume of the Quarterly Review, p. 305–332. The account ofthe kingdom of Caubul,
ofthe Hon. MOUNTSTUART ELPHINSTONE, was published in 1815, in
a handsome quarto volume-and republished in two octavo volumes.
Elaborate and exceedingly interesting reviews of it appeared in the
Edinburgh and Quarterly Reviews of the same year. A work of such
excellence stands in need of no commendation here.
+ The narratives of Zeno, Barbaro, and Contarini were first published in the Viaggi fatti da Vinetia, alla Tana, in Persia, in India,
&c. collected by Antonio Manutius, and published by Paul Manutius
in the Aldine Office, in 1543, and again in 1545, in one 8vo. volume
of 180 leaves. The second edition , which has only 163 leaves, is the
better printed book, according to Renouard ; vol. i . p. 225, 234.
A copy of the first edition was sold for 17. Is. at the sale of Mr
Bindley's Library ; and for 31. 7s. at that of Colonel Stanley's. AnTONY SHERLEY's Travels were first published in 1613 , 4to. and they
are reprinted in Purchas, and Mr. Murray has given a very interesting
extract (vol. iii . p. 23, ) from the original . Yet, nothing short of a
clean- margined copy of the original impression, must satisfy the
curious. It is obtainable for a sovereign. Sherley was the pro-
ASIA.]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 417
by the performances of Sherley and Herbert, to make
especial and honourable mention of that of CHARDIN ;
and recommending my readers not to let the amusing
work of JONAS HANWAY* escape them, especially if
tegé of the Earl of Essex : " whom he had made the pattern of his
civil life ;" and at whose advice he travelled into Persia. But consult the work last referred to (vol . iii . p. 29-52, ) for the treasures
which are yetin MS. relating to Persia, of which DON GARCIA DE SYLVA
is the author ; who lived in the reign of Philip III. The Travels ofSIR
THOMAS HERBERT were first published, in folio, in 1634 , and afterwards in 1635, 1665 , and 1667. They relate to Africa and Great Asia,
as well as Persia. A copy of the first edition was sold for 11. 10s.
at Dr. Heath's sale . But all these are eclipsed by the labours of
CHARDIN, " who devoted his life , as it were, to the knowledge of
Persia, " says Mr. Murray. I will be free to add, that for intrinsic
merit and fidelity of narrative, Chardin has been exceeded by No subsequent traveller. His travels first appeared in a folio volume of
1686 ; containing only his journey from Paris to Ispahan : then,
came out his account of Persia, in 3 quarto, or ten duodecimo volumes, at Amsterdam , in 1711 : but, as before observed, ( see p. 408)
the Amsterdam edition of 1735, is the most popular one.
Perhaps this is not the most proper place for the mention of
Hanway's Travels ; but as there is very much in them relating to
Persia, the reader may as well know that the work appeared in 1753,
in four quarto volumes, and that in Mr. Murray's Collection (vol. i.
p. 355) some amusing particulars from them are extracted. At
Balfrush, " finding his beard grown to a most inconvenient length,
Hanway, with great difficulty, procured a barber ; but that operator
learning, in the midst of the process, that he was a Christian, uttered
a cry of horror, and ran away ; and Hanway was obliged to push
on with his half- shaven beard !" He was, at the time, very critically.
situated. The work of Hanway contains a great number of maps,
and some very pretty vignettes and plates, of which several were
designed by WALE ; a name dear to the lovers of fine art, from his
happy performances in Sir John Hawkins's edition of Walton's
Angler. A copy of this work was sold for 21. 19s. at the sale of Dr.
Heath's library. It may, however, be obtained at a less price,
E E
418 [ASIA.
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS.
obtainable at a moderate sum, I may venture to conclude the list of publications, relating to this most
interesting country, with the strong recommendation
of the more recent, and more intrinsically valuable,
works of Morier, Malcolm, Ouseley, and Sir Robert
Kerr Porter. The subjoined note affords a brief outline of the editions of the labours of these distinguished travellers. *
* I have only to subjoin the titles and dates of the works ofthe
above four eminent travellers : MORIER, James, Journey through
Persia, Armenia, and Asia Minor, to Constantinople, in the year
1808-9 . Lond . 1812. 4to. Second Journey ; 1810-16. Lond. 1818,
4to. For reviews of these works, consult the volumes of the
Edinburgh and Quarterly. MALCOLM, Sir John : History of Persia,
from the earliest ages to the present times. Lond. 1816, 4to. 2 vols.
See an excellent criticism on this valuable work in the xvth. vol. of
Quarterly Review . The copies on large paper were published at
121. 12s. OUSELEY, Sir William : Travels in Various Countries of
the East, particularly Persia, Lond. 1819 , 4to. I understand that
the two latter travellers possess fine collections of Persian and Sanscrit MSS. The supplemental pages of the Bibliographical Decameron, vol. iii. will prove that some of Sir John Malcolm's treasures,
of this description, are of no ordinary beauty ; but whether Sir William Ouseley's treasures may, or may not, compete with those of
Sir Gore Ouseley, as detailed in the 4th volume of the late Mr. Beloe's
Anecdotes ofLiterature and Scarce Books, I cannot take upon me to
pronounce. What can there be more beautiful, in all respects, than
a highly embellished PERSIAN MS. ? ! I have seen and examined
many, of full three centuries growth, which had the effect of magic
while turning over the silken and diverse tinted leaves, powdered
with golden stars, and irradiated with colours of pink, and blue, and
green, as vivid and unsullied as if, at that moment, they had left the
pencil of the illuminator !
The travels of Sir ROBERT KERR PORTER, were published in two
quarto volumes, in 1822 ; embellished with a number of very spirited
and singular plates and containing some interesting particulars -
ASIA. ]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 419
Where next shall we turn our eyes, and direct our
steps, in this ancient, and, as it were, consecrated
quarter of the globe ? And how comes it to pass, that
I have allowed my " young " reader thus far to travel,
without putting into his hands those safe, and almost
indispensable guides ; afforded by the Charts of D'ANVILLE and RENNELL : names, that do not less honour
to the important study of geography, than to the
relating to Ancient Babylon. These travels include accounts also of
Georgia, Armenia, &c.; and were performed during the years, 1817,
18, 19, 20. The plates relate to portraits, costume, and antiquities,
and are not fewer than seventy-five in number. The narrative is
executed in a pleasing and lively style ; and these volumes form, on
the whole, a valuable addition to our stock of knowledge of the
countries described.
* The geographical labours of the illustrious D'Anville, are minutely and temptingly detailed by Brunet, vol . i . p. 76. His Eclaircissemens Géographiques sur la carte de l'Inde, 1753, 4to. and Antiquités Géographiques de l'Inde et de plusieurs autres contrées de la
haute Asie, 1775, 4to. are among his chief works connected with the
present department of our researches. + If the labours of Major Rennell are less general than those of D'Anville, they are, nevertheless,
highly meritorious on the score of scrupulous accuracy. Here I have
only to mention his Bengal Atlas, 1781 , folio : Memoir of a Map of
Hindoostan, with an Introduction, Lond, 1783 ; 1788 : reprinted
again and again-but to the later editions there is a Supplementary
Map, containing the new geography of the Peninsula of India, with
an explanatory memoir. The Geographical System of Herodotus examined and explained, with eleven maps, 1808, 4to. now very scarceand, equal to either, his masterly elucidations of The Retreat of the
Ten Thousand ; and his Topography of the Troud : works, that, in
their way, have never been surpassed.
+ Brunet tells us that Mons. Demanne, the heir of D'Anville, is printing, at
the royal press, a COMPLETE EDITION of the works of this celebrated writer, which
will comprehend six volumes in 4to. with an Atlas folio. When finished, it is
certain that the publications in a separate form, will lose their value." Manual
du Libraire, vol. i . p. 77.
420 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS [ASIA. .
*
countries to which they belong. We will nowlinger a
little in the western parts of Asia, and notice the
principal works relating to the HOLY LAND, and to
TURKEY-the latter, as well in Europe as in Asia, Let
Breydenbach lead the way ; and the hundred little
curious and fugitive works, as mere guides or manuals,
which were put into the hands of pilgrims, chiefly
from Venice, who were filled with a holy ardour to
visit the shrine of the Messiah . † I know more than
one friend who covets these precious morsels of black-
* Breydenbach may, if he pleases, " lead the way ; " and luckily
this wayis rendered very easy and practicable to myself, bythe ample
notices of the earlier editions of his work in the Bibl. Spencer. vol. iii .
p. 216 ; iv. 459 ; vi. 87 : Bibliographical Tour, vol . iii . p. 526. To
Breydenbach, add the Peregrination de Nicolas Huen ; Bibl. Spencer.
vol. vi . 214. Pinkerton is twice erroneous in his earlier editions of
Breydenbach, vol. xvii. p. 134 ; but is, in other respects, copious and
instructive about the early voyages to the HOLY LAND. Let the
curious, from this catalogue, get possession of the works of Doubdan,
1661 , 4to. and Eugene Roger, 1664, 4to. -both, with very pretty
plates.
+ As to "the hundred little curious and fugitive works, " connected with a Voyage to Jerusalem, many will be found in our own
tongue, printed even by W. de Worde and Pynson. Consult the Typog. Antiq. vol. ii. p. 325 : Retrospective Review, vol. ii, part ii . p. 324.
But a singular gem of this kind, printed by W. de Worde, probably
in the XVth century, is about to be presented to the Roxburghe Club
by my friend Mr. Henry Freeling, being a transcript from a unique
copy, in a most beautiful state of preservation, in the Advocate's
Library at Edinburgh. I am half tempted to extract a very droll
passage-but it must not be. Of modern times, read the Itineraire
de Paris à Jerusalem, Paris, 1812, 8vo. 2 vols. of the Marquis de
Chateaubriand, in which the measurement of the Temple of Jerusalem, by D'Anville, ( 1747, 8vo. ) is incorporated. Nor should the
work of the Abbate Mariti ( translated into English in 1791 , 8vo.
3 vol. ) containing accounts of Cyprus, Syria, and Palestine, published
at Turin, 1769, 5 vols. be overlooked.
ASIA.]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 421
letter rarity, with an ardour and insatiableness that
promise never to be satisfied . Happy state of excitation ! Next to Breydenbach, we may consider our
SANDYS* as one of the principal travellers into these
sacred quarters. His folio, first put forth in 1615, is
yet a " crack-article" with the knowing ; especially if
it be upon large paper, and the impressions are brilliant
and unsoiled.
-
In approaching Turkey in Asia, I have only to recommend--to the rich the three noble volumes of
POCOCKE, the embellished tomes of WooD, as well
as the classical production of CHANDLER ; the incidental notices of Clarke, Kinneir, and Burckhardt,
* SANDYS is still a favourite, and with justice. I cannot pretend
to enumerate all the reimpressions of his folio volume, but I have
seen copies of the first and second on LARGE paper. In any shape,
copies are reasonable . The plates, taken for the greater part, (says
Mr. Chalmers, in his Biogr. Dict. vol. xxvii. p . 140) from the voyage
of Zuallardo, Rome, 1587, 4to. are pleasing enough . Mr. Triphook
once shewed me a lovely copy of the second edition of Sandys ( in
which the platesfirst, I believe, appeared) bound in Venetian morocco
by C Lewis, marked at 3l. 13s. 6d. My friend Mr. Markland possesses
a curious copy of the edition of 1637, with a ms. copy of verses by
the author-for Sandys was also a poet. Consult Dr. Bliss's edition
of the Athen. Oxon. vol. iii . col. 97 for a rich repast of bibliographical intelligence hereupon. Mr. Chalmers, with justice, refers to
the Censura Litteraria, vol. vi. p. 132.
+ " ADescription of the East, and of some other Countries." Lond.
1743, folio, 3 vols.: reprinted in Pinkerton's collection. But who
would not prefer the primitive and embellished folio ? These are
noble tomes ; and the author rises in estimation more and more every
day. He is facilè princeps-in his department. Antiquities and
Science are the leading features of his work. Although Dr. Heath's
copy of this work produced the sum of 16l. 10s. , I can ensure the
Collector a 66 very neat " copy at three-fourths of that price.
422 [ASIA.
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS.
with the partial works of Motraye, Russell, Volney,
and Chateaubriand. * The comparatively poor Stu-
* WOOD's Ruins of Palmyra, 1753, folio, with fifty-seven plates,
and of Baalbek, anciently called Heliopolis, 1757, folio, with fortysix plates, are works of pure art ; and impart now an additional
interest from the curiosity lately excited towards the architecture of
the ancient world. Each volume is obtainable for about 41. 4s.
Chandler's Travels in Greece and in Asia Minor, were printed in two
handsome quarto volumes at Oxford in 1774-6 ; of which only 250
copies were struck off. They have been recently reprinted in the same
form. Besides Mr. Kinneir's Journey through Asia Minor, &c. 1818,
8vo. there is a valuable work (reviewed in the Quarterly, vol. ix.
p. 57, ) called his Geographical Memoir of the Persian Empire, Lond.
1813, 4to. , which should have found a place at p . 418, ante. The
illustrious name of BURCKHARDT will occupy us more particularly
under Africa ; but let his admirable Travels in Syria and Mount
Sinai grace the shelf of every professed Collection of Voyages and
Travels. A copy in fair calf binding is worth 21. 10s. De La Motraye's Voyage en Europe, Asie, et Afrique, &c. à la Haye, 1727,
folio, 3 vols. may be worth hard upon 31. 3s.: if the binding be elegant, and the impressions of the plates good. Some of these plates
are by the burin of Hogarth, which is never failed to be mentioned :
Motraye was engaged twenty six years on these travels ; and his
account of the interior of a Great Man's harem (vol. i . p . 337) is
singular enough. I mention this, because the plate, by Hogarth, is
one of the prettiest and most prepossessing : and there is a very pleasing one, by the same hand, of a dance of Turkish women at p. 176,
of the same volume. The author disclaims elegance, but confidently
relies on his sincerity and impartiality. The third volume, dedicated
to the famous Lord Chesterfield , is in French and English ; and
there are no picturesque plates in it-it being filled with maps. Mr.
Payne marks a neat copy at 21. 2s.
And here, might I not introduce a notice ofthe Voyages à Constantinople, à l'Asie, Palestine, &c. of the CHEVALIER D'AREVIEUX, Paris,
1735, 12mo. 6 vols. , of which Pinkerton's account, vol. xvii . page
129, is so warmly encomiastic ? This little tempting book of travels
is so rare as to have escaped Brunet. RUSSELL'S Natural History of
ASIA.]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 423
dent and Collector will satisfy himself with Sandys,
Aleppo ; 1756, 4to.: republished in 1794, 4to. by his brother, Dr.
Patrick Russell. " This is not only the best description of Aleppo,
but one of the most complete pictures of Eastern manners extant” —
says Pinkerton. A good copy of the second and best edition, bound,
is worth 31. 3s, The latter author's account of the plague at Aleppo,
was published in 4to. , 1791 : and may be worth 11. 1s. These works
have been honoured by several versions. Volney's Voyage en Syrie et
en Egypt, 1783, 8vo. 2 vols. of which the best edition ( according to
Barbier, vol. iv. p. 389) is that of 1799 ( l'an VII. ) augmented and
enriched in several respects. I recommend the reader to peruse Barbier's account (Bibl. d'un Homme de Gout, ibid) of the respective
merits of Volney, Maillet, and Savary. Chateaubriand's work has
been before mentioned ; see page 420.
For an account of Dr. Clarke's Travels in Syria and Asia, see
p. 360, ante. MAUNDRELL'S Journey from Aleppo to Jerusalem at
Easter, first printed in 1697, 8vo. has been not only several times
reprinted-and very recently-in octavo, but will be found in the
Xth volume, p. 305, of Pinkerton's Collection of Voyages. The
crack edition of the octavo, is that of 1721 , " companion meet, " for
the Mandeville of 1725. A fine copy of it may be worth 17. 5s. :
although that in the Stanley collection produced 31. 10s. It is doubtless a most curious and interesting book.
―
Yet-must No mention be made of Voyages up the LEVANT, including Constantinople, Syria, Phoenicia, and such like interesting
spots ? Yes : some little I shall dilate, rather than digress, thereupon. If it be only for the sake of the work of LEBRUN, something
should be said on this subject ; and yet, although in the richly stored
library of myfriend the Rev. Henry Drury, at Harrow, I have turned
over the leaves of one of the finest copies in the world -in French
red morocco binding, with the royal arms stamped " all propper" -
and although the copy possessed by his uncle, the Rev. Dr. Benjamin Heath, is described to be the " finest copy possible, in white
calf, gilt leaves" -both upon LARGE PAPER—yet, be it quietly known,
that I cannot find it in my heart to panegyrise this work, on the score
of ART-which is its usual attraction. The plates are generally
black, coarse, ill designed, worse executed, and some of them ofthe
most frightfully sprawling dimensions. The work is in three or four
424 [ASIA.
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS.
Clarke, and Volney. For Turkey generally, the excellent work of D'OнSSON must not be omitted. *
I push on towards Arabia ; and here the work of
NIEBUHR may suffice -a work undoubtedly of the
highest authority of its kind. † Darting across burning
sands and waterless deserts, I proceed to the notice
folio volumes and was published at Paris in 1714 , &c . Of more
modest, and more satisfactory pretensions, is the Voyage au Levant,
par TOURNEFORT, Paris, 1717, 4to . three vols. : reprinted often, and
translated into our own tongue. Tournefort can never be out of date.
But how came even a fine morocco copy of him to sell for the
astounding price of 61. 68. at the sale of Colonel Stanley's library ? I
speak of the Paris edition of 1717. An ordinary copy is not worth
more than 1. 10s. The gigantic undertaking, by Messrs. Treuttel
and Würtz, relating to CONSTANTINOPLE, is at length completed .
This work consists of two folio volumes, of the largest dimensions,
containing fifty- two line engravings, from the drawings of M. Molling, draftsman and architect to the Sultana Hadidgé, sister of the
Sultan Selim III . The price of the ordinary copies, is 841.: of copies,
with proofimpressions, 126l. Thus, this work is sure to find its way
among IMPERIAL Collectors ! I saw the drawings from which the
plates are taken, when I was at Paris in 1819. They are minute and
elaborate ; and give ( as I learn) a very faithful idea of the clearness
of that enchanting atmosphere, and of the characters of the buildings and the people.
* Tableau Général de l'Empire Othoman, par MOURADJA D'OISSON,
3 vols. folio, with coloured plates. The plates are beautifully executed, and the testimouy of Burckhardt to the valuable and interesting information this work contains, should alone secure it a place in
every well chosen library.
+ The work of NIEBUHR has been long and justly considered as
perfectly classical of its kind. We know more of Arabia in the
pages of this performance, ( of which the style is not less pure than
the intelligence is correct) than perhaps in those of any other individual performance . Niebuhr was deputed on his mission by the
Danish Government in 1762. Mr. Murray's analysis of it (vol. iii .
p. 187) will be read with no inconsiderable interest. His work was
ASIA.]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 425
of Eastern India, China, and Japan : territories, of
enormous extent, of marvellous varieties of character
and climate, and rendered comparatively familiar to
him, who has never crossed the Equator, by the admirable publications of SYMES, BARROW, STAUNTON, and
various French anonymous publications, together
with those of DUHALDE, GROSIER, DE GUIGNES, SONNERAT, KAEMPFER, and CHARLEVOIX. * But not a little
first published in the Danish language at Copenhagen in 1772,
4to. in the following year in French, at the same place ; but the
best edition is that, in French, which was published at Amsterdam in
1776.80, 4to. 3 vols. ; including the questions of Michaelis, published in 1774. A good copy is worth 4l . 14s. 6d : although that in
Dr. Heath's library was sold for 61. 6s. Brunet says that there are
copies on large paper, which are not finer than the ordinary size : but
of such copies, struck off on fine Dutch paper, the same conclusion
cannot be drawn. These latter are also very rare. I find none in the
catalogues of our richer libraries.
* Major Symes' account of his Embassy to Ava in 1795, appeared
in 1800, 4to- ( reprinted in 3 volumes 8vo. ) and is a work of such
established reputation, that those who are desirous of obtaining a
copy of it, in goodly calf binding, will not scruple to give 21. 12s . 6d.
for the same ; and if they aspire to a LARGE PAPER of that, and of Mr.
Turner's Tibet, they may have both volumes, in extra binding, for
71. 78. in the richly furnished repository of Messrs. Payne and Foss.
Mr. Murray has, as usual, given us some very palatable marrow, in
his extract from Symes's Ava. I come now, in chronological order,
to notice the personal, as well as the written, labours of Mr. BARSuch labours are too well known, and too highly and generally appreciated, to stand in need of my humble commendation.
The name of this gentleman will always secure, to the work to
which it is affixed , an immediate and extensive sale : but if report, or
rather common fame, speak true, there ARE labours, from the same
pen, to which the name of its director is not affixed, that can scarcely
be too much extolled and too widely disseminated . The reader, of
course, anticipates the mention of the notices of various travels, by
Mr. Barrow, in the Quarterly Review : notices, which, whenever
ROW.
426 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS [ASIA. .
imperfect would be our stock of Voyages and Travels
relating to China, if the valuable works of NIEUHOFF
reperused, cannot fail to bring increased pleasure and instruction.
They are the productions of an experienced head. The Reviewer is
at once a traveller and a critic. Si sic omnia ! But to the present
point. Mr. Barrow's works, in respect to China, comprise one volume
of Travels, &c. 1804, 4to. ; and a Voyage to Cochin China, 1807, 4to.
each volume being about 21. 12s. 6d.; and each, I believe, reprinted
in octavo. More elaborate titles are not necessary, as the works are
in the recollection of most readers .
Sir George Staunton's account of the Embassy of the Earl of
Macartney to the Emperor of China was published, with every advantage of press work and embellishment, (the plates being executed
from the drawings of the late able William Alexander) in 1797, 4to.
2 vols .; with a folio volume of engravings. Few works were more
anxiously expected by the public; and few, I will be free to maintain,
ever yet gave greater satisfaction to readers. It is reprinted in
octavo. The more recent works connected with Lord Amherst's
Embassy to the same quarter, and the delightful book of Capt. Hall
relating to Loo- Choo (for which see the Quarterly Review, vol. xviii.
p. 308, ) need only be mentioned to secure general respect. At the
head of the FRENCH SCHOOL, of Travellers into, and writers upon,
China, let the Description Géographique historique, chronologique, &c.
of DU HALDE be unhesitatingly placed. In regard to the geography
of China, it is the best work extant. It was published at Paris in
1735, in 4 volumes, folio ; and republished at the Hague in 1736,
4to, but the Dutch edition does not contain the plates ; and you
Among the reviews of Voyages and Travels, of which Mr. Barrow is the
reputed author, read that of the account of Pitcairn's Island, incorporated in the
notice of Captain Porter's Cruize in the Pacific Ocean. It concludes thus : " We
have only to add, that Pitcairn's Island seems to be so fortified by nature, asto
oppose an invincible barrier to an invading enemy ; there is no spot apparently where a boat can land with safety, and, perhaps not more than one where it can
land at all : aneverlasting swell of the ocean rolls in on every side, and breaks into
foam against its rocky and iron-bound shores. O HAPPY PEOPLE ! happy in your
sequestered state ! and doubly happy to have escaped a visit from Captain Porter
of the United States frigate, Essex. May no civilised barbarian lay waste your
peaceful abodes ; no hoary proficient in sensuality rob you of that innocence and
simplicity which it is peculiarly your present lot to enjoy. " Vol. xiii. page 383.
ASIA.]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 427
and VAN BRAAM, (Dutchmen, possessing all the fearless intrepidity of character of their countrymen) as
must add to it D'Anville's new Atlas of China, 1737, folio, with fortytwo maps -or, better still, the fourteen plates and fifty maps separately published from the Paris edition . A good copy of this Hague
impression, with such an adjunct, may be worth 51. 5s.: but of the
French, 71. 78.
Whoever wishes to peruse a little bibliographical gossip about the
Abbé Grosier, and his new edition of the Jesuit Father MAILLA's
Histoire Générale de la Chine (traduite du Tong- Kien-Kangmor) may
consult the Bibliogr. Antiq. and Picturesq. Tour, vol, ii . p. 320-321 .
This extraordinary performance consists of not fewer than thirteen
quarto volumes, put forth between the years 1777-85, of which the
last volume is by the Abbé himself, and which was published in
English in 1787, in two octavo volumes. A new edition of the whole,
much augmented, was published in 1818, in 7 octavo volumes. De
GUIGNES'S Voyage à Pékin, Manille, et L'Isle de France, was printed
at Paris, in three octavo volumes, with an Atlas folio of six maps
and fifty-nine plates, in 1809. " This account is curious ; and frequently in opposition to that of Lord Macartney's, " says Brunet.
With the travels of De Guignes, is associated the Dictionnaire François-Latin et Chinois, published in a magnificent folio volume at Paris
in 1813 ; and composed from a Chinese Latin Dictionary of Basil de
Glemona, of which the MS. is in the Royal Library at Paris. This
Dictionary is worth about 57. 58. SONNERAT'S Voyages aur Indes
Orientales et à la Chine, 1774-81 , was published in 1782, 4to. two
vols.: for a good copy of which I find Messrs. Arch giving 61. at
the sale of Dr. Heath's library. The work contains (according to
Pinkerton) 140 plates, and two maps. For the beauty of the plates,
this edition is necessarily preferable to that of 1806. Copies of the
first edition on large paper (and Dutch paper, into the bargain) are
rare and precious. One of this sort was purchased by the late Mr.
North, at the sale of Colonel Stanley's library, for 211.
A word only about JAPAN. He who possesses Scheuchzer's translation, from the high Dutch, of the famous book of KAEMPFER, published in two folio volumes, 1728, (the best edition, containing a
second Appendix) has a work " which (according to Pinkerton) continues to the present day the best account of Japan." Acopy of it is
428 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS [ASIA.
.
they appear in certain French versions, * were not to
have a conspicuous place therein.
-
Such are the principal writers of the countries here.
alluded to ; and yet, on a retrospect of the few last
pages, I cannot but be sensible both of omissions and of
imperfect details. Considering the immense kingdoms
which Asia contains, and its long and intimate connection with Europe, through Persia, by land, and bywater
across the Indian Ocean, I am free to confess,
that these pages might have been filled with a greater
variety of information ; but the nature of this work
necessarily forbade such an extended account.
lover, however, of Rarities, in this department of
bibliography, shall not be driven to despair by the
entire omission of all notices of curious and uncommon voyages ; and possessing himself of DALRYMPLE'S
The
worth 41. 4s. Consult Brunet for the French version of 1729. Charlevoix's Histoire du Japon, was published in 1736, 4to. 3 vols. and in
6 vols. 12mo. but the more methodised edition seems to be that of
1754, 12mo. in the same number of volumes.
* Nieuhoff's work appeared in Dutch and in French the same
year, 1665, folio. But the addition of some pretty vignettes, and
other cuts, to say nothing of the facility of the language, give the
French version a decided superiority. The narrative, or text, is at
once faithful, perspicuous, and interesting. The Dutch Embassy to
China, of which Van Braam Houckgeest is the author of the details,
and of which the first volume, in 4to. ( reprinted in two volumes 8vo . )
was published by Moreau de Saint-Méry, at Philadelphia, in 1797,
is a work, as far as it goes, replete with the most minute and accurate intelligence. The translation, executed under the eye of
Houckgeest himself, is all that it can be wished to be, and M. de
St. Méry's notes are at once apposite and intelligent. Boucher de la
Richarderie, in his Bibl. des Voyages, tom. v. p. 285-8, has given a
very sensible and inviting précis of this precious work. But whyis it
not continued and concluded ?
ASIA.]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 429
Collection of those in the South Seas, let him disport
himself with LITHGOW, LABOULAYE DE GOUX, STOKOVE, MONCONYS, NAVARETTI, and sundry Voyages
ofthe Jesuits. * And, if the enterprising traveller
* Dalrymple is a great name, in many respects ; and the Historical
Collection of Voyages and Discoveries in the Southern Pacific Ocean,
1770, 4to. 2 vols . (worth at any rate a sovereign a volume) may be
considered among the very best works to which that name is attached.
AlexanderDalrymple was eminently distinguished as an hydrographer;
and obtained the honourable post of hydrographer to the Admiralty
and to the East India Company. Look at Watt's Bibl. Britannica, col.
281 , for an almost countless list of his publications. His library ( sold
in 1809, by King and Lochee, was powerfully rich in Voyages and
Travels. I remember him at the sale of Isaac Reed's library, in 1807.
His yellow antiquarian chariot seemed to be immoveably fixed in the
street, just opposite the entrance door of the long passage leading to
the sale room of Messrs . King and Lochée, in King street, Covent
Garden ; and towards the bottom of the table, in the sale room, Mr.
Dalrymple used to sit : —a cane in his hand, his hat always upon his
head, a thin, slightly twisted queue, and silvery hairs that hardly
shaded his temples. .. His biddings were usually silent-accompanied by the elevation and fall of his cane, or by an abrupt nod of
the head..... But this is Biography and not BIBLIOGRAPHY.
I spring, therefore, upon " the Rare Adventures and painful Peregrinations ofLITHGOW-from Scotland, to the most famous kingdoms in
Europe, Asia, and Africa. " published in 1611 , 4to. and republished in
1770, 8vo. There is also a 4to. reprint of 1645. I was going to say
that Lithgow's book was as common as a penny- roll ; and so it may
be : but a copy ofthe first edition uncut, and upon LARGE PAPER (O che
boccone ! ) such as Mr. Evans sold at the sale of Mr. Watson Taylor's
library, for, between 30 and 40 guineas, is rarer than an unspotted turquois of an inch in circumference. " Les Voyages et Observations du
SIEUR LABOULAYE DE GOUX, gentilhomme Angevin, Paris, 1657, 4to.
are acknowledged to be singularly exact and faithful ; especially in
the religions of India and Persia. A similar character (according to
Pinkerton) attaches to the " Voyage d'Italie et du Levant, of Messrs.
Fermanel Baudouin, de Launay, et Stokove; " &c . 1665, 4to. Eight
hundred pages of Observations, " disfigured by much injudicious eru-
430 [ASIA,
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS.
have it in contemplation to return to his native country, from the farthest eastern isles of Borneo, New
Guinea, and New Holland, he will find , in the subjoined note, a few books which will help to delight
dition," (says Pinkerton) were published upon this voyage, at Rouen,
1668, 4to. The Sieur POULLet's " Nouvelles Relations du Levant,”
&c. Paris. 1668, 12mo. 2 vols. is a scarce work, and contains an excellent account, for the time it was published, of the Turkish Empire
in Asia, as well as of Georgia and Persia. The accuracy of Poullet
was established by the confirmation of Chardin.
The VOYAGES OF THE JESUITS are innumerable. Of all religious
zealots, they were at once the most accomplished and indefatigable,
and I think it must be granted, (putting the desperately foolish
main object of their religion out of the question) that the fruits of
their discoveries have been highly amusing and instructive. Setting
apart the " Lettres Edifiantes et Curieuses, " let us only pause, and
ponder on the fact-that, they have given two quarto tomes to the
world, oftheir Voyage de Siam, alone- ( 1668 , 4to. 2 vols. ) and that
not less than three pounds were paid for these Jesuitical volumes, at
the sale of Dr. Heath's library. And whoever chances to alight
upon Father Ricci, Chinese Narratives, 1617, 4to . republished under
the title of " Voyage des PP. Jesuites en Chine, " 1617 , 8vo. will see
how dexterously and efficiently the several objects of the traveller's
undertaking were accomplished. Mr. Pinkerton strikes a high note
in praise thereof : vol. xvii. p. 149 : and I request the curious to
peruse the half dozen pages of an account of similar voyages which
follow in Pinkerton. Further, I entreat Mr. D'Israeli, who is just
now so wrapt up in the perusal of a description of the East, by a
living Jesuit, ofthe name of the ABBE DUBOIS, * (a description, which
he considers as most curious and instructive) to give us, in some future
edition ofhis " CURIOSITIES," old or new-a compressed account-a
distillation or extraction-of the pith, juice, marrow, and muscles,
of these said Jesuitical voyages.
* About four or five years ago, the Abbé Dubois published a quarto volume relative to the present state, manners, and religion of the Hindoos. It has been
recently followed by an octavo volume upon the Establishment of Christianity in
India-or, rather, upon the utter hopelessness of its successful establishment.
Both books are very curious. Messrs. Longman and Co. are the publishers.
ASIA.]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 431
him in his passage homewards. The name of FLINDERS is as inseparably, as it is gloriously, connected
with that of Australasia, or New Holland.*
Or, should the same traveller wish to return homewards by land, through Turkey, Italy, and Germany,
he will find a host of mute, but not of ineloquent companions, pointed out for his choice, in the bibliographical lists ofPinkerton and Brunet. The contents of a
* Stopping one moment to recommend the curious, and still interesting account of CEYLON, in the pages of old Robert Knox, Lond.
1681 , folio, with cuts, ( 17. 10s. ) and the latest accounts extant of the
same Country, published in 1807, in 2 vols. 4to. by the Rev. J. Cordiner, (for a critique on which, or rather for an excellent account of
the leading features connected with Ceylon, consult the Quarterly
Review, vol. xiv. p. 238, ) and not to forget Dr. Davy's valuable
account of the same country, in 1822, 4to. 3l. 13s. 6d. I come, at
once, to the important publication, relating to New Holland, by CAPTAIN Matthew FLINDERS , under the title of " A Voyage to Terra Australis, undertaken for the purpose of completing the Discovery of that
vast Country, and prosecuted in the Years 1801 , 2, and 3, in his Majesty's ship the Investigator ; and subsequently in the armed vessel
Porpoise, and Cumberland Schooner," &c. Lond. 1814, 4to. two
vols. with an Atlas of plates . The text, in two large quarto volumes, is enriched with several sea views ; and the Atlas volume
contains twenty very large charts and head lands, most accurately
laid down by Captain Flinders, with references to the descriptions
and tables of longitude in the books . This Atlas volume also contains ten large plates, representing the forms of rare and non- descript
plants, found by Mr. Brown, formerly librarian to Sir Joseph Banks
and now Secretary to the Linnean Society. The intrinsic worth of
these truly scientific volumes must not be measured by their pecuniary value ; for I have known a well bound copy, in calf, sell for
only 5l. 158. 6d.
-
↑ Among the more curious works upon TURKEY, " Les Navigations, Peregrinations, et Voyages de Nicolas Nicolay, " must not be
The voyage of Captain Flinders was attended by singular circumstances . The
432 [ASIA VOYAGES AND TRAVELS.
few ofthese are briefly detailed by Boucher de la Richarderie. I cannot help however, here, particularising
FYNES MORYSON : a gossipping, but veracious and insforgotten. It was first published at Antwerp, in 1576, 4to. and I
find Mr. Roger Wilbraham (particularly distinguished for his tact in
books of this class, as well indeed as in almost every other) giving
41. 16s. for a copy, bound in russia, at the sale of the Stanley library.
Another copy of the work, printed the following year, was purchased
by Mr. Triphook, for 4l. 5s. It was translated into the Italian language, and published at Venice, in 1580, folio ; of which a fine copy,
in blue morocco binding, is in the Althorp library. The figures, with
which this volume is plentifully enriched, are engraved on wood,
and considered to be from the designs of Titian : but I should rather
say, from those of one of his pupils. The group, however, at page
154, is not unworthy of the hand of the master. The four figures
of different Religious orders are very curious, and in part horrifying.
And here, ere I quit Turkey, let me strongly recommend Rycaut's
improved edition of Knolles's History ofthe Turks, Lond. 1687, folio,
3 vols. of which a copy was sold at Dr. Heath's sale for 67. 10s.
Mr. Murray of Albemarle- street revels in the possession of the LaInvestigator, from the Commander's perpetual perseverance in his dangerous pursuits, for such a length of time, became unfit for further service ; but rather than
leave his survey unfinished , Captain Flinders put himself on board a small vessel at
Port Jackson, called the Porpoise, attended by the Cumberland sloop, to pursue
his Discoveries ; but the Porpoise was unfortunately soon after cast away on a
coral reef. He then betook himself to the Cumberland sloop, where, after surveying Torres' Straits, he sailed for the Mauritius, not then knowing that France
was at war with England. There, to the disgrace of the then French Government,
he was kept a prisonerfor six years and a half: though all other nations, whether
in war or peace, constantly favour navigators, engaged in Geographical Discoveries.
It is indeed true, that France, at that time, was governed by Buonaparte, who
would attend to no application from our Government. He did, however, attend to
an application of that patron of all science, Sir Joseph Banks, and replied,
"he could refuse him nothing ,"-but he did not keep his word. It would have
been a happy instance of rare retribution, if Captain Flinders had lived, to have
seen this little savage himself a prisoner in one of our Islands. His orphan family
have had that pleasure , some small satisfaction , for the losses they have sustained,
bytheir father's long imprisonment, and the consequent injury his circumstances
sustained.
ASIA.]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 433
tructive old gentleman, in his way. * And yet, how interminable is human knowledge, even confined to one
moignon copy, in blue morocco.. What fierce looking fellows, do
the PORTRAITS make the originals to have been ! †
* " Gossipping " as he is, there are other qualities which endear
FYNES MORYSON to the dispassionate and moral reader. His deli.
cacy and purity are equal to his love of truth ; and if subjects, or objects, are sometimes painted " to the life, " it is rather from a desire
to hold up vice to horror, than to enflame the passions by aggravating
minuteness of colouring. But Moryson shall here speak a little for
himself. His work was first written in the Latin, and then translated by him into English. It contains " Ten years travell through the
Twelue Dominions of Germany, Bohmerland, Sweitzerland, Netherland,
Dennmarke, Poland, Italy, Turky, France, England, Scotland, and Ireland," and waspublished, in rather an unseemly folio volume, in 1617 :
in which volume, the account of Ireland alone, up to the year 1613,
contains not fewer than 300 pages.
In this account, I consider the description of the character and
person of LORD MOUNTJOY, (part ii. p . 45-8) Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, as among the most minutely curious and highly interesting
specimens of its kind extant. It is a piece of Gerard Dow finishing,
in its way by which I wish it to be inferred, that its brilliancy is
equal to its elaboration. "The Opinions and Proverbal Speeches of
Nations," in chap. 3. Book I. Part iii. is a very curious chapter.
Premising, that I am indebted for my knowledge of this work to a
hint thrown out by my friend Mr. Francis Palgrave, to register it
among the more valuable books of travels — and to the opportunity
afforded by a copy of it at Althorp, belonging to the late Daines
Barrington, and tolerably well scored and marked by the pen of that
able antiquary-I send the reader to the subjoined note‡ for a more
-
+ When speaking of the Portraits of the Ottoman Emperors, I must not omit
the notice of the very superb work, published a few years since, by Mr. John
Young, entitled : “ A Series ofPortraits ofthe Emperors ofTurkey, from thefoundation ofthe Monarchy to the year 1815, engravedfrom Pictures painted at Constantinople, commenced under the auspices of Selim III. , and completed by command
ofSultan Mahmoud II.; with a biographical account ofeach ofthe Emperors."
I will first give a notion of Moryson's sketches of foreign parts. When at
DRESDEN, he thus narrates : " The horses are all of foreign countries, for there is
F F
434
VOYAGES
AND TRAVELS
[ASIA.
.
remote portion of the globe !
• The preceding
pages had been hardly completed for press, when acciintimate acquaintance with its contents, and, as I trust, for a justification of my own partiality towards it. Yet, a word about its price.
another stable for Dutch horses, and among these chief horses, one named Michael
Schutz (that is, Michael the Treasure) was said to be of wonderful swiftness. Before
each horses' nose was a glasse window, with a curtain of green cloth to be drawn at
pleasure. Each horse was covered with a red mantle. The rack was of iron : the
manger of copper : at the buttock of each horse was a pillar of wood, which had a
brazen shield, where, by the turning of a pipe, he was watered : and in this pillar
was a cupboard to lay up the horse's combe and like necessaries, and above the
back of each horse hung his bridle and saddle, so as the horses might as it were in
a moment be furnished. " Germany, part i . p. 10.
At FRIBURG, he says, " The Citizens live of these Mines, and grow rich thereby,
whereof the Elector hath his proper part, and useth to buy the parts of the Citizens. The workmen use burning lamps under the earth both day or night, and
use to work as well by night as by day : and they report, that coming near the
purest veins of silver, they are often troubled with EVIL SPIRITS. " Part i. p. II.
And when at PRAGUE, he gives the following facetious anecdote : -" I did here
eat English oysters pickled, and a young Bohemian coming in by chance, and tasting them, but not knowing the price, desired the Merchant to give him a dish at
his charge, which contained sometwenty oysters-and finding them very savoury,
he called forfive dishes, one after another, for which the Merchant demanded and
had of himfive dollars : the dearness no less displeasing his mind thanthe meat had
pleased his palate. " Part i. p. 15.
But the most interesting to an ENGLISHMAN, is what he observes respecting the
character of our countrymen towards the close of the reign of Elizabeth :-" And
give meleave to hold this paradox, or opinion, against that of the common sort ;
that the English were never more idle, never more ignorant in manuall arts, never
more factious in following the parties of Princes or their Landlords, never more
base ( as I may say) trencher slaves, than in that age wherein great men kept OPEN
HOUSES for all commers and goers. And that in our age, wherein we have better
learned each man to liue of his owne, and great men keep not such troopes of idle
servants, not only the English are become very industrious , and skilfull in manuall Arts, but also the tyranny of Lords and Gentlemen is abated, whereby they
nourished private dissensions and civill warres , with the destruction of the common
people. Neither am I moued with the vulgar opinion , preferring old times to ours,
because it is apparent that the cloysters of Monks (who spoiled all, that they might
be beneficiall to few) and Gentlemens' houses (who nourished a rabble of servants
in idlenesse, and in robbing by the high waies) lying open to all idle people for
meate and drinke, were cause of greater ill than good to the Commonwealth. Yet
I would not be so vnderstood, as if I would have the POORE shut out ofdores, for I
rather desire that greater works of charitee should be exercised towards them ; to
which we should be more enabled by honestfrugalitie, then by foolish prodigalities.
ASIA.] 435 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS.
dent placed in my hands the " Catalogue of Books in
ORIENTAL LITERATURE, and of Miscellaneous Works
Mr. Thorpe (Cat. 1823, part i . n°. 353, ) marks a " very fine large
copy" at 41. 4s.: and the octavo reprint, 1735, in two vols. (but can
it contain all ?) may be worth 17. 18.
I call it foolish, and think the vulgar sort of prodigals worthy of all ignominy, who,
with huge expences , keepe many kennels ofdogs, and casts ofhawkes, and entertain
great numbers ofstrangers, sometimes not known by name, often scoffing at the en
tertainer, always ingratefull," &c. Part iii. p. 113.
Again : "The English are so naturally inclined to pleasure, as there is no Countrie wherein the Gentlemen and Lords have so many and large parks onely reserved for the pleasure of hunting, or where all sorts of men allot so much ground
about their houses for pleasure of Orchards and Gardens. The very GRAPES, espe
cially towards the South and West, are of a pleasant taste, and I have said that in
some counties, as in Glocestershire, they made wine of old , which no doubt many
parts would yield at this day, but that the inhabitants forbear to plant vines, as well
because they are served plentifully, and at a good rate, with French vines, as for
that the hills, most fit to bare grapes, yeeld more commoditie by feeding ofsheepe
and cattell. " Part iii. p. 147.
Once more only--where Moryson speaks of the APPARELL of the ENGLISH ;
" Gentlewomen virgins weare gownes close to the body, and aprons of fine linnen,
and goe bareheaded , with their haire curiously knotted, and raised at the forehead, but many, against the cold, ( as they say) weare caps of haire that is not their
own, decking their heads with buttons of gold, pearls , and flowers of silk, or knots
of ribben. They weare fine linen, and commonly falling bands, and often ruffs,
both starched, and chains of pearl about the neck, with their breasts naked. The
graver sort of married women used to cover their heads with a French-hood of
velvet, set with a border of gold buttons and pearls : but this fashion is now left,
and they most commonly wear a coyffe of linen, and a little hat of beaver or felt,
with their hair somewhat raised at the forehead. Young married gentlewomen
sometimes go bare headed, as virgins, decking their hair with jewels and silk ribbens, but more commonly they use the foresaid linnen coyffe and hats. All in
general weare gowns hanging loose at the backe, with a kirtle and close upper
body, ofsilk or light stuffe, but have lately left the French sleeves borne out with
hoopes of whalebone, and the young married gentlewomen, no less than the virgins,
shew their breasts naked."
A curious anecdote is related of the great ages of several old men and women
who joined in a morris dance to please King James : --" The men ofHerefordshire
can witness that such examples [longevity] are not rare in England ; when, in the
reign of King James, they made a MORRIS DANCE of fifteen persons, all born in the
same country, or within the compass of twenty-four miles, who made 1500 years
between them, some being little less than 100 years old, and some far passing that
age." Part iii. p. 43. " Sed ohe, jam satis."
436 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS [ASIA.
.
connected with INDIA, '
99 -
containing thirty-eight
small pages of closely printed matter-which has been
recently put forth by Messrs. Kingsbury, Parbury, and
Allen. To the truly enthusiastic after Oriental Researches, this Catalogue will be useful, inasmuch as
the list of books is very copious, and it will furnish
them with a knowledge of the prices of the several
articles or publications introduced .....
But the shores of AFRICA are in sight ... The gale
is propitious : and there is excellent anchorage for the
vessel. Let us land, and have a bibliographical
ramble thereupon.
[ 437 ]
AFRICA.
"A ramble," indeed ! Here is a country, of which
its extreme length (from north to south) equals that of
Asia-and its extreme breadth is three- fourths of that
of the same country-of which, also, one-third of its
interior, from the " Country ofthe Booshooanas " to
the " Mountains of the Moon," is almost utterly unknown-filled, too, with burning sands, and occupied
by an endless and undescribed variety of animals,
including the most terrific of all animals, in his savage
state, MAN- here, I say, is a country, upon which
I invite the susceptible reader to ramble ! Yet he may
do so, fearlessly ; for, in a ramble of the nature to
which I allude, he may move, almost at a stride, from
Grand Cairo to the Cape ; and may pass over withering deserts, and along caverns, recesses, and morasses,
where the serpent and the tiger lurk, without even
the apprehension of molestation. Such are the charms
of BIBLIOGRAPHY !
Varied and vast, and in great part unexplored, as
is the wonderful continent, or rather peninsula, of
AFRICA, it is not a little surprising and consoling that
those, to whom we are indebted for the most copious
and correct accounts of it, are either Englishmen by
birth, or were prompted to their exertions by British
remuneration. Almost all that the Ancients knew of
this extensive country, was confined to the Northern
and Western coasts. Egypt, Tripoli, Algiers, and
Morocco, were the principal places that came
438 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. [AFRICA
within the knowledge, or were subject to the policy,
of the Grecian and Roman Empires : and if we take
into account the descriptions of the ancient Arabian
Geographers, including the labours of Edrisi, Abulfeda, and Abdollatiph, * we yet scarcely do more than
penetrate the cuticle, or the surface of the interior of
the southern portion of Africa, below the equator. As
we descend towards our own times, even the labours
* Before I come to touch upon the labours of the above travellers,
let me recommend to the curious reader's particular attention the
posthumous work of Gibbon, with the brief but instructive notes of
the late Dr. Vincent, being an " Inquiry into the circumnavigation of
Africa " it will be found at the end of the fifth volume of Mr. Murray's valuable octavo edition of Gibbon's Posthumous Works. EDRISI
flourished towards the middle of the sixth century, and was born at
the end of the fifth . His Africa can only be read and consulted in
the edition of Hartman, published at Gottingen in 1796, 8vo : the
notes being very valuable, and including copious extracts from other
Arabian geographers. Consult the Biogr. Universelle, &c. vol. xii.
page 539 for other works of Edrisi, in the course of publication.
His Geographia Nubiensis was published at Paris in 1619, 4to. in the
Arabic and Latin languages : but the title, according to Hartman,
is entirely gratuitous, and adopted without any foundation. The
edition is also very inaccurate : the blame of which the Editor throws
upon the original text, and in which he seems borne out by the evidence of Orientalists who have consulted the MS. Edrisi's first
work, under the title of " Recreation of Curious Wits, " was published at Rome in 1592, and is exceedingly rare. See the Biogr.
Universelle. Eickhorn is the ablest editor of ABULFEDA, whose
Africa, in the Arabic and Latin languages, was published at Gottingen in 1791 , 8vo. His account of Egypt, in the same languages,
was edited by Michaelis at Gottingen in 1776, 8vo. The late Pro .
fessor White, of Oxford, is the best editor of ABDOLLATIPH'S Compendium Rerum Memorab. Egypt. which appeared latterly in 1800,
at that University, in a handsome quarto volume.
AFRICA. ]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 439
of Leo Africanus, Marmol, and Cadamosto, * do not
give us all that information, which, from the more
* Let LEO AFRICANUS excite our attention and admiration ; as
from Mr. Murray's pleasing sketch of his labours, ( Travels in Africa,
vol. i . p. 42.) he is, in every respect, entitled to do. His patron was
Leo. X. and his " Africa Descriptio IX. Libris absoluta, " seems to
have first appeared in a separate form, at Antwerp, in 1556, 1558 ;
and afterwards from the beautiful press of the Elzevirs, in 1632,
12mo. (What would Mr. Lloyd [ Soc. RoxB. Soc. ] give for an uncut
copy of the work ? ) It is to be found also in the collection of Ramusio, and in an English form, by Pory, in the Collection of Purchas.
Hartman (probably the ablest editor of these oriental authors) calls
Africanus's book—“ A GOLDEN BOOK ; which, had he wanted, he
should as frequently have wanted LIGHT. "+ MARMOL'S Descripcion General de Africa, was published at Grenada, in 1573-99, folio ;
3 vols.; a book of rarity and of price : but Marmol " did not visit
any part of Africa, except Morocco, and the borders of the Desert. "
His work was translated into French by D'Ablancourt, at Paris,
1669, 4to. 3 vols . DAPPER and OGILBY (the latter being little more
than a version of the Dutch of the former) are now getting fast out
of fashion. Not so is CADAMOSTO, a much more ancient traveller.
He was indeed " the first traveller who published a regular narrative,
and (says Mr. Murray) it contains many curious particulars." But
who shall solace himself with the hope even-much more the possession-of the first edition of the Libro de la Prima Navigazione of
Cadamosto? Mr. Murray, perhaps warranted by Meuselius, (Bibl.
Hist. vol. ii. part. ii . p. 318 : see also vol. iii . part i, p. 159, ) considers this edition to be of the date of 1507, published at Vicenza, in
a quarto form which Brunet thinks is erroneously substituted for
the Mondo Novo of Vespucius, of that date ; and accordingly he
makes the first edition of Cadamosto to• be published at Milan, in
+ Mr. Murray has been led into a mistake by that plausible, but not wholly accurate bibliographer, Du Fresnoy, in supposing that the French version of LEO ,
in 1556, fol. 2 vols. is the exclusive version of Leo. Brunet tells us, that these
volumes contain accounts of Africa, Asia, and America, from Ramusio. Consul
also Meuselii Bibl. Hist. vol. ii. part ii. p. 318.
440 [AFRICA. VOYAGES AND TRAVELS.
enlightened state of the world, we had reason to expect.
Pursuing, in a great measure, the plan of Mr.
Murray, I shall first notice the aid to be derived from
the publications of D'ANVILLE, RENNELL, and GosSELIN ; and then travel downwards from the Mediterranean coast to the Cape of Good Hope ; but not
without paying especial attention to the western coast,
and to the immense territory comprised under what is
called the kingdom of Ethiopia. The land of EGYPT is
impressed upon our memories by a thousand recollections . It is familiar to us in early youth, from the
language of holy writ ; and perhaps no two characters
ever took such entire possession of the young and susceptible heart, as those of Moses and Pharoah. Nor
are the physical wonders of the country less striking.
The rise and fall of the waters of the Nile, has been a
theme (also interwoven in sacred text) which has long,
not only excited our curiosity, but, perhaps, baffled our
reasoning. And, again, how is the mind raised, by a
contemplation-whether in reality or description, of
those stupendous edifices, under the appellation ofthe
1519. 4to. But is not this volume almost unfindable ? A good
article on Cadamosto appears in the Biog. Univer. vol. vi . p . 451 : but
the author " sticks up " for the edition of 1507
* The labours of D'ANVILLE and RENNELL have been so frequently
noticed and commended, that I have here only and equally to recommend those of GOSSELIN, under the title of Recherches sur la Géographie systématique et positive des Anciens, pour servir de base à l'histoire de la géographie ancienne, Paris, an . VI. ( 1797) 1813, 4to. four
vols. The two latter volumes sell separately, for those who are in
need of being " comforted " by them. A good copy of the entire
work, well bound, is worth 61. 6s.
AFRICA. ]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 441
Pyramids ! ?* While, journeying yet more southerly,
"we are lost and confounded in the immensity " of
those ruins, which tell us-where Thebes once stood !
First, then, of EGYPT. The works of Pococke,
Norden, Savary, Denon, Sonnini, White, Hamilton,
Legh, and Belzoni,+ are sufficient to ensure every
* " The enormous size of these ancient monuments, and the solidity of their structure, promise an eternal duration ; an existence
coeval with the everlasting mountains. They are visible at a great
distance, and, as the traveller advances, seem to retire into the recesses of the desert. Their stupendous height, prodigious surface,
and enormous solidity, strike the spectator with reverence and awe,
as they recall the memory of distant ages. "-LEYDEN ; in Murray's
Discoveries and Travels in Africa, vol. ii . p. 179.
† Ofthe above, in the order in which they stand and first of
POCOCKE : but he has been already dispatched : see p. 421. Let no
pains be spared to secure a good copy of him. The first volume,
relating to Egypt, was reprinted (says Mr. Murray) in 1748, 4to. ;
but the same authority is wrong in describing Pococke's original
work to be ofthe same dimensions . I observe a good copy of this
work selling for 167. 10s. at the sale of Dr. Heath's library. NORDEN
is indeed the prince of picturesque travellers, of the older school, as
connected with the ruins of Egypt. He was a Dane, and his work
first appeared at Copenhagen in 1755, in two folio vols. in the French
language. These were translated by Templeman into English, accompanied by notes, and published in 1757, in the same number of
volumes, with the same number of plates. Barbier allows that this edition is even finer than its precursor. Messrs. Payne and Foss notice
an edition of 1805, which they mark at 57. 15s. 6d. " two vols. in
one, neat, in russia." It is, however, the edition of 1757, that the
curious " bite at," especially if it be in fine condition, and possess 164 plates, besides the original head and tail pieces. But
subsequent researches, accompanied by more curious illustrations,
have diminished the pecuniary weight of Norden; and for 71. 17s. 6d.
a well bound copy may be obtained. Miss Currer possesses a copy
Pinkerton counts 200 plates .
442 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. [AFRICA
e quisite information relating to this most extraordinary country. Of course, after the reader shall
" of it on the largest paper." M. Langles published his own
French translation , with notes, in 1795, 4to. three vols. SAVARY'S
Lettres sur l'Egypte, 1785, 8vo. 3 vols. are, it must be admitted,
sufficiently lively. They were, at first, attended with considerable
success, but I am not sure, whether, from the testimonies of
French biographers and critics themselves, Savary ought to receive a great share of credit. The reputation of his work was cut to
pieces by Michaelis, in a review in a foreign journal of oriental
literature ; which Mons. Silvestre de Sacy made intelligible and acceptable to the French public in the Journal des Savans, 1787, reprinted in the Esprit des Journaux, and in the Tablettes d'un Curieux.
See Barbier, vol. iv. p. 388. Yet, as Savary's work afforded me,
when a very young man at College, considerable gratification, I am
unwilling to shew ungrateful symptoms in return ; and will never
refuse three-fourths of a sovereign for his three volumes, when coated
in the comely attire of white calf, with marble leaves.
The work of DENON is fairly entitled to a particular and highly
commendatory notice. I perfectly remember, at M. Dulau's, when
the first copies of it were imported, in 1802, in two large folio volumes, " the learned wondered at the work, and the vulgar were
enamoured of" its execution. Such was its popularity here, that
an English translation of it (by Mr. Aikin) was published in two
quarto volumes within nine months of the appearance of the original
work. This English version exhibits a better order in the text, and
has some valuable additional notices ; but the inferiority of the presswork, and both the inferiority and diminution (from 141 to 60) of
the plates, render it, now, scarcely an object of attraction. Many
of the plates, in the original French folio, are by the burin ofDenon
himself; and exhibit much of the force and freedom, as well as ofthe
style, of Rembrandt. A copy of these noble volumes is marked at
€20. in blue morocco, by Messrs. Payne and Foss : and at 167. 168.
in boards. The French text, in three duodecimo volumes, ( it was
also published in one quarto volume) and the plates in folio, is
marked at 61. 6s. by Messrs. Arch. Upon the whole, Denon's bookin which there are too many fanciful, if not fantastical groupes―
(especially in the march and encounter of armies) can never be wholly
AFRICA. ]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 443
have examined the note last referred to, he will be
better able to judge of applying his means to the
superseded. This brings me, therefore, to the mention of another
FRENCH WORK, of repulsively COLOSSAL DIMENSIONS, relating to
Egypt-of which, according to Brunet, nine folio volumes and an
Atlas have already appeared at Paris, in 1809, &c. It was undertaken
and conducted by a commission issued under Bonaparte, and carried
on by the present French monarch. I saw, at the private library of
the King, at Paris, Bonaparte's own copy, bound in red morocco ;
but, bound in any style, works of such a form are so incommodious
and unwieldy, that they even forbid investigation, and, in conse
quence, suppress applause. To have athoroughly satisfactory apperçu
of the tout ensemble, the looker on should be nine feet high.
The Voyage dans la Haute et Basse Egypt, of SONNINI, Paris, 1799,
8vo. is an excellent work ; and so is the Egyptiaca of Professor
White, in 1801 , 4to. But infinitely preferable to either, is the
Egyptiaca of Mr. HAMILTON, in 1809, 4to : a solid, instructive, and
most accurate performance. Mr. LEGH's Travels above the Cataracts of the Nile, Lond. 1816, 4to. display the enterprise of a veracious traveller, and a perspicuous and modest writer. I trust, and
indeed believe, that this slender quarto has also appeared in octavo :
for it should be read by every one, in whose breast the mention of the
river Nile produces something approaching to peristaltic emotions !
Welcome, renowned and immortal BELZONI ! —for such are the epithets which necessarily belong to thy name. A little memoir should
accompany the notice of thy herculean labours : but, here, that must
not be. Indeed, it is the less necessary, as, in the notices of his works
in the 18th and 19th volumes of the Quarterly Review, there is so
much interest and minuteness of detail, and the relative labours and
merits of other travellers are concentrated with so much judgment,
that I need give little more than the titles of his works. Fortunate,
doubtless, it was, for this enterprising traveller, that he found in his
publisher, Mr. Murray, such a patron and friend. Besides his performances as an author, Mr. Belzoni exhibited a complete model of the ancient tomb of Psammuthis in Thebes, as well as ofthe interiors of two
chambers in the same tomb, at Mr. Bullock's Museum in Piccadilly ;
and having covered the expenses inevitably attendant on such a bold,
but, as it proved, highly popular measure, he was enabled to replenish
444 [AFRICA.
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS.
accomplishment of a particular end ; but if I were to
prescribe for a plethoric purse, I should say " buy all
that is mentioned below, and then superadd the gigantic work at present in a course of completion , put
forth under the auspices of Bonaparte, and conducted
with undiminished vigour under the royal government
of Louis XVIII. This also is noticed beneath.
From Egypt, descending southerly, we get into the
kingdom of Æthiopia, and particularly into the territories of NUBIA and ABYSSINIA. First, let the lover
ofAfrican antiquities secure the stately folio of Ludolphus, with those of Tellez and Almeida, and then .
his purse, and thereby to set out, with renewed alacrity, on other similar enterprises : and he is now, peradventure, busied in the discovery
of yet more extraordinary remains. His work " Narrative of the
Operations and Recent Discoveries within the Pyramids, Temples,
Tombs, and Excavations in Egypt and Nubia, " &c. has been recently
published in an octavo form : but his forty-four large plates to illustrate his Operations, Atlas folio, 61. 6s.: and six additional plates,
coloured, illustrative of his Travels, &c. folio, 11. 5s. must ALL be
procured by the thoroughly diligent, enthusiastic, and wealthy
Collector. A contemplation of these marvellous relics of the olden
times of Egypt and Thebes, puts the mind in a state of very singular,
but not unpleasing, excitation : so wholly different are they from the
antiquities of the more polished countries of Greece and Rome. But
when will the yet more surprising ( as I learn) collection of drawings
of Mr. Banks, jun . upon the same subjects as those of Belzoni, make
their appearance ? Expectation stretches its neck, as well as stands
on tip-toe, for a public and unwearied view of them.
*The Historia Ethiopica of LUDOLFUS, consisting of four parts
(all described in the catalogue of Messrs. Arch, 1823, no. 494) was
published at Vienna in 1695-6, folio : and the copy here referred to
is marked at 41. 4s. " bound in vellum." The work is not less rare
infine condition, than it is intrinsically valuable in any condition.
Brunet has omitted to notice a copy on LARGE PAPER; such a copy,
bound in russia, ( with the Appendix, 1694, on small paper, it never
AFRICA. ]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 445
choose, among the following distinguished Moderns,
which may more completely suit his purse as well as
taste. " Hallowed be the turf " which pillows the
head of BURCKHARDT ! -for, of recent African travelers, he, surely, was almost the foremost in the first rank.
His works are noticed below. * And what a brilliant
cluster of names succeed ! For Abyssinia, more especially, you must secure the works of BRUCE and
SALT. Who has not heard of Bruce-the romantic,
being on large)is in the beautiful library of the Rt. Hon. T. Grenville. Consult Murray, vol. ii . p. 542-3. TELLEz, et ALMEIDA Historia General d'Ethiopia, 1650, folio : again, at Coimbra, 1660.
" This work of Tellez was composed from the Memoirs of several
Missionaries, transmitted to Portugal by Almeida, and is remarkably
rare. " Murray.
-
• Ofhis " Travels in Syria and Mount Sinai, " including his “ Journeyfrom Aleppo to Damascus in the District of Mount Libanus and
Antilibanus-a second Tour in the Hauran-from Damascus to Cairo
and in the Peninsula of Mount Sinai." Lond. 1822, 21.3s.: see
p. 422, ante. His first volume of Travels was in Nubia and in the Interior of North Eastern Africa, 21. 8s. His third, just about to see
the day, is In the Hedjaz, 4to. with plates. An affecting and interesting account of this indefatigable and luckless traveller, will be
found in the xvith and xviith volumes of the Quarterly Review. Let
Burckhardt, especially when he salutes us in an octavo form, have a
central place upon the most conspicuous upper shelf in the Collector's
library. He is amongthe VIRI CENTENARII ofall ages and nations !
+ Before the reader suffers himself to be enchained by the seductive narrative of Bruce, let him procure, for a few shillings, Dr.
Johnson's translation of Father LOBO's account of Abyssinia ; but of
which the best version is that of Legrand, with additions, and an excellent map by D'Anville, Paris, 1728, 4to. An analysis is in Murray. And now for JAMES BRUCE of Kinnaird. Amore enterprising,
light, but lion-hearted traveller, never left his native hills for the accomplishment of such purposes as those which Bruce accomplished.
His professed object was, to discover the source of the Nile ; and
446 [AFRICA.
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS.
the intrepid, the indefatigable Bruce ? His " tale"
was once suspected ; but suspicion has sunk into acquiescence of its truth. A more recent work, connected with Ethiopia, has been published by Messrs.
Waddington and Hanbury.
Wemust now, still confining ourselves to the north
of Africa, strike off to the left, and travel towards the
states of Barbary, including Fezzan, Morocco, Algiers,
and Tripoli, &c.: when the more ancient names of
TORREZ, HOEDO, MENEZES, and the later ones of
whatever doubts and difficulties Larcher, in his version of Herodotus, may oppose to the truth or reality of this source, I still think
that thebalance is in a vibratory state : and the weight of Bruce seems
to be as decisive as that of the French Critic . Barbier has spoken
out like a man, and like a gentleman, about the merits of Bruce :
Bibl. d'un Homme de Goût, vol. iv. p. 384. Never did a work make
greater noise at the period of its publication , than did the travels
of this Scotch Worthy. The Monthly Review took it up immediately, and in a very animated and interesting manner. Meanwhile,
scepticism and doubt began to sit upon the brows of the grave, and
to discompose the meditations of the thoughtful. Was it a romance?
a fiction ? or was it half truth and half exaggeration ? Bruce, on discovering what he really conceived to be the source of that magical
river, THE NILE, plunged an earthen vessel into the gushing and
translucent stream .... and drank to the health of the then reigning
monarch, " King George the Third ! " ...But this is any thing but
bibliography. His travels occupied him six years-from 1768 to 1773
inclusively and appeared at Edinburgh in 1790, in five goodly
quarto volumes, with plates. The Author died in 1794.
:
The late Mr. Otridge, of the Strand, a most worthy and facetious
old gentleman, and a highly respectable bookseller, had a prodigious
fancy for this quarto edition of Bruce. About fifteen years ago, when
he hadthe exclusive employment of Kalthoeber the bookbinder-who,
in fact, lived in his house-he used to engage him upon repeated sets
of this work. " There they are (he would observe to me, pointing
to the shelf on which they stood) there they are, those delightful
AFRICA.]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 447
SHAW, CHENIER, JACKSON, ALI BEY, and LYON, *
strike us with particular attention, and claim a greater
Bruces!! The time will come, when he, who has such a copy as
anyof those you now behold, will possess a treasure indeed." The
prediction was not wholly divested of truth. A quarto Bruce, well
bound, may be yet worth 71. 7s.: but how comes it to pass that Mr.
Otridge (ó paxapins) never shewed me one of the twelve copies only,
printed upon LARGE PAPER, of this first edition, which I observe in
the catalogue of Messrs. Payne and Foss, marked at 241. “ uniform
in blue morocco, " including a sixth volume by Murray, which
contains a life of the Author ? A French translation of Bruce
appeared in six quarto, and a German one in five octavo volumes
thefollowing year. Thebest English octavo edition, is that in eight
vols. 1804, with a life of the author. This also has been reprinted
in 1813. And do these reimpressions indicate the original text to be a
work of FICTION ? I beseech the reader to run a cursory glance over
the analysis of Bruce in Mr. Murray's Africa, vol. ii. p. 74, &c. Of
recent authors, few stand more deservedly high than Mr. SALT. The
share his researches bear in the Travels of Lord Valentia and Mr.
Belzoni-and particularly his own volume, exclusively confined to
Abyssinia, Lond. 1814, 4to. rank him high in the class of Abyssinian
travellers. If I am asked, by the economical Collector, to give up
Bruce, or Mr. Salt ? I shall unhesitatingly say-forego the former,
and secure the latter.
*The latest work which treats of Ethiopia, is that by Messrs.
WADDINGTON and HANBURY ; being a " Journal of a Visit to some
Parts of Ethiopia : with Maps, &c . and Drawings of the Pyramids, " &c.
1822, 4to. 21. This work was reviewed in the Quarterly, vol. xxvii,
p. 215. In pursuing the route, marked out in theabove text, I must
necessarily compress much bibliographical intelligence in a small
space. The work of TORREZ was first published at Seville, in the
Spanish language, in 1586, 4to. and is rare in this form. It was
translated into French under the title of " Relation des Voyages de
Fez et de Maroc, traduite du Castillan de Diego Torrez, par Charles,
Duc d'Angoulême. Paris, 1636, 4to. HOEDO's Topografia y Historia
general de Argel (General Topography and History of Algiers) Valladolid, 1612, folio, is a more piquant volume for the keen appetite
of a Collector, inasmuch as Pinkerton tells us that it furnishes a
448 [AFRICA. VOYAGES AND TRAVELS.
or less share of our homage and respect. Indeed
there is scarcely one among the later of these works,
curious portion of the life of Cervantes. This rare book has escaped
Brunet; and is not observed upon by Boucher de la Richarderie.
And yet, probably much rarer, is the " Historia de Tanger, que comprehende as noticias desde a sua primeira conquèsta ate a sua mina” of
DON FERNANDO DE MENEZES, published in 1732, folio : which has
escaped de Richarderie, and upon which Brunet observes nothing.
A copy is in Mr. Rennie's library.
Of all books of travels connected with Barbary and the Levant,
that of DR. SHAW's-printed at Oxford in 1738, folio, 2 vols. , with
the Supplement in 1746-both reprinted and much improved in
1757, London, folio, 2 vols. and translated into the French, and published at the Hague in 1743, 4to. 2 vols-is assuredly the most
admirable as well as the most popular. The extensive information
and scrupulous fidelity of these volumes, render them safe inmates of
a well chosen collection. Messrs. Arch mark a copy at the reasonable price of 21. 5s. Fly, Fleance, fly ". -to secure it. De La
Richarderie has given a capital account of it : vol. iv . p. 18, &c. Let
CHENIER'S " Recherches Historiques sur les Maures, et Histoire de
l'Empire de Maroc." Paris, 1787, 8vo. 3 vols. ensure a warm reception. It is at once moderate in price, and faithful in narrative. An
English translation of it appeared in 2 vols. octavo. Nor should
PORRET'S " Voyage en Barbarie, " Paris, 1789, 8vo. 2 vols.-be long
wanting in a professed collection of books of this description
JACKSON'S Account of the Empire of Marocco, 1809, 4to. (so pithily
and pertinently reviewed in the Quarterly, vol. ii. p. 445) cannot fail
to be placed alongside the very best works which treat of that extraordinary kingdom. It has been (I believe) more than once reprinted
in 8vo. Yet let meadopt a still more decisive strain in commendation
of the Travels in Morocco Tripoli, &c . of ALI BEY ; put forth in two
goodly quarto tomes in 1816 : -anexcellent, amusing, and instructive
work. And last, though not the least in this list of commendatory
tomes, be the Narrative of Travels in Northern Africa from Tripoli
to Mourzouk , the capital of Fezzan, with a chart and coloured plates,
put forth by CAPTAIN LYON, Companion to the late Mr. Ritchie. This
truly valuable and scientific work is " accompanied by Geographical
Notices of Soudan, and of the course ofthe Niger. " It is published
at 31 3s. in boards.
Mr.
AFRICA. ]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS.
449
but what is replete with useful intelligence. As we
continue towards the Western Coasts of Africa, descending somewhat to the South, we enter upon
countries which have been perhaps yet more vividly
impressed upon the minds of modern readers, by
the exertions of the intrepid and lamented PARK : *
the second British victim to the vengeance of the
natives ! :-the persevering efforts of BROWNE, HORNEMAN, RILEY, and ADAMS.
* Ofthe works of an author, so well, and alas ! so lamentably
known, it were idle to say one word in commendation. The Travels
ofMUNGO PARK, in the Interior Districts of Africa, in the years 1795-
6-7, and during a subsequent Mission in 1805, were published, as a
new edition, in 1823 , in two volumes, quarto ; price 31. 13s . 6d. This
edition contains Major Rennell's valuable Memoir on the Geography
of Africa, a portrait of the author, and maps and plates. But the labours of Park are now to be had in all forms, and at all prices, though,
doubtless, the latter are the best editions. † I remember the great inte.
rest excited by the publication of the first journey, and the sympathy
generally felt at his untimely fate when his posthumous labours
appeared.... Peace to the ashes of this modest, heroic, and hapless
traveller ! His inemory is embalmed in the same mental cenotaph
with that of Cook and of BURCKHARDT.
Another, and another, still succeeds !" -and all, with one exception, of BRITISH growth. Thrice welcome, ye brave and unremitting explorers of crumbling ruins, burning sands, and almost interminable deserts ! I give you, here, a hearty welcome ! —and chronicle your labours with a ready hand and grateful heart. BROWNE'S
Travels in Egypt and Syria, and to Darfur, were published in 1799,
4to. and were well translated into French, with notes, and enriched
with maps, &c. by Costera, at Paris, 1800, 8vo. 2 vols. De la Richarderie (Bibl. des Voy, vol. i . p. 255) has given an excellent analysis of Browne, and tells us that " what is truly worthy of observation, in the narrative of Browne, is his Voyage to Darfur, a country
The first quarto, also possessing Major Rennell's Memoir, is a scarce volume.
G G
450 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS [AFRICA. .
As we prepare our Collection for Travels more immediately southward, let us make room on our shelves
for the valuable and curious labours of LOPEZ and
TUCKEY- Who wrote, at more than an interval of two
centuries apart, respecting the rise and course of the
great river Zaire, usually called the Congo. * Secure
wholly unknown till its description by this author. " But the French
critic betrays a little soreness in Browne's strictures upon Savary and
Volney. The first publication of HORNEMAN'S Journal of Travels to
Fezzan, from the German, appeared in English in 1802, 4to. but this is
very inferior to the French edition, in 1803, in two octavo volumes,
with a dissertation on the oases. This work contains a lively narrative of many singular and interesting adventures . But what are
these, compared with the NARRative of JamesS RILEY- " containing an account of the loss of his vessel on the western coast of Africa,
and the sufferings of her surviving officers and crew, who were enslaved by the wandering Arabs on the Great African Coast !? This
book was first published at New York, in 1816, 4to : and the following year in England, in the same form. The sufferings of ADAMS, in
his " Narrative of a Wreck in the year 1810, on the Western Coast of
Africa," &c. published in 1816, afford an equally intense interest in
perusal. Let the sympathising reader consult the Quarterly Review,
vols. xiv. p. 453, xvi . p . 287.—and from thence learn to be thankful
for a happy home in a civilised country. I may here take occasion
to recommend the earnest perusal of the two octavo volumes of the
Proceedings of the AFRICAN ASSOCIATION : " containing the journals
of their different Emissaries.
* I will begin with ODOARDO Lorez, whose Relazione de' Reame
di Congo e delle vicine contrade, &c ; first published at Rome, in 1591 ,
4to. is a volume of rare occurrence, and worth, when complete with
the maps, from 4 to 5l. There is a Latin translation, published at
Franckfort in 1598 , folio, which forms the first part of the voyages
of De Bry. But of greatly superior value, on the score of intrinsic
merit, is CAPTAIN TUCKEY'S " Narrative of an Expedition to explore
the river Zaire, usually called the Congo, in South Africa, published by
permission ofthe Lords of the Admiralty, in 1818, 4to. 21. 2s. containing fourteen engravings. Mr. Murray, in his work so frequently
AFRICA.]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 451
66
these precious tomes, if you can ; but as Lopez, from
his great scarcity, is necessarily (in bibliographical
metaphor) a slippery gentleman, " console yourself,
for his absence, as occasion and opportunity may
offer, with the performance of Cavazzi, or Labat. *
Captain Tuckey's book is yearly issuing, in reprints,
from its head-quarters in Albemarle street.
And now a word-and that a " little word "-for
Southern Africa. Yet the Western Coast, including
the vast region of Guinea, has not been bereft of
writers. Below, I subjoin a list of a few of the principal ; and exhort the reader, whether young or
old, to possess himself of the very curious, novel, and
most entertaining work of Mr. BOWDICH ; being an
account of a Mission from Cape Coast Castle to the
mentioned with commendations, has published a small chart of this
river from Captain Tuckey's narrative.
* CAVAZZI ; Descrizione dei trè Reame cioé Congo, Matouba, e Angola,
was published at Bologna in 1687, folio : a very rare book. It was
republished at Milan in 1690, 4to. and at the sale of Dr. Heath's
library, I find Mr. Heber giving the very smart sum of 21. 6s. for a
copy of this republication. LABAT's Relation Historique de l'Ethiopic
Occidentale, Paris, 1732, 12mo. 5 vols. contains a translation of Cavazzi, with an abstract of the Memoirs of a number of Romish Missionaries.
The reader must, however, first search the pages of Hakluyt,
Purchas, and Churchill, for many curious and interesting voyages to
Guinea, and other parts of the western coast ofAfrica Lindsay's
voyage, in 1758, containing the capture of Goree, by Keppel, Lond.
1759, 4to. with cuts, is worth a ten minutes inspection before the
dinner is announced, or after the tea and coffee are taken up into the
drawing room : while the tomes of Matthews, ( 1788, 4to. ) Winterbottom, (Lond. 8vo. ) and Beaver, (African Memoranda, 1805, 4to. )
are deserving of a more leisurely examination . Latterly, Meredith's
description ofthe Gold Coast of Africa, 1812, 8vo. has produced a
more general and more satisfactory impression.
452 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS [AFRICA.
.
Kingdom of Ashantee. * In regard to Southern Africa
-ifits interior have yet escaped the researches of the
most hardy and adventurous travellers, there are yet
some excellent works which describe those portions
which are nearer the Cape, and which come in more
immediate contact with European curiosity or commerce. The names of VAILLANT, SPARMANN, LICHTENSTEIN, PERCIVAL, BARROW,† are prominent in the list of
• Singularly " curious, novel, and interesting" indeed, is the work
here mentioned. It contains an account of a Misison from Cape
Coast Castle to the Kingdom of Ashantee, in Africa. &c . with plates,
sufficient, many of them, to set the reader's heart in a flutter at the
monstrosities exhibited. This really extraordinary work was written
by Mr. Bowdich, Conductor and Chief of the Embassy : and published by Mr. John Murray, at 31. 3s.
: + Vaillant Voyage dans l'Intérieur de l'Afrique, 1796, 8vo. two
vols. first edition of the first voyage : the second was printed in
1795, in two vols. 4to. and three 8vo. They have both been frequently reprinted. A copy ofthe first and second voyages, 1795, in
3 vols. 8vo. on LARGE PAPER, " best edition, very rare, plates coloured, bound in red morocco, " was sold for the very stiff price of
371. 168, at the sale of Colonel Stanley's library. SPARMANN's Voyage to the Cape of Good Hope, was translated from the Swedish into
English in 1785, 4to. two vols. An excellent work. PERCIVAL'S
Account of the Cape of Good Hope, was published in 1804, 4to.
LICHTENSTEIN appeared in English, from the German, in 1812, 4to.
Both are valuable publications. Avery ancient namesake, if not ancestor, of Lichtenstein, published an account of Constantinople, in the
German language, in 1584, folio : a work of rare occurrence. But,
doubtless of much superior value, in extent, in variety, importance,
and accuracy of detail, is Mr. BARROW'S Account of Travels in the
Interior ofSouthern Africa, Lond. 1801 , 4to . to which was added a
second volume in 1803 , 4to. Boucher de la Richarderie has done
ample justice to our countryman, by his analysis, in vol. iv. p. 245,
&c. And if, in conclusion, "the young man or "the old man, "
ask me to place a few only of the best works relating to the Southern
"
AFRICA. ]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 453
those travellers who have contributed to the enlargement ofourknowledge of this most interesting portion
of the globe, while the yet more enterprising and successful exertions of BURCHELL* have taught us that
-
parts of Africa, in his library, I shall immediately answer him-" consider Mr. Barrow as an indispensable gentleman. "
"9
* Of entirely recent date, and containing a more extensive and
important account of the Interior of South Africa, are the costly
and comprehensive volumes of WILLIAM J. BURCHELL, Esq. which
are embellished by not fewer than 116 coloured and uncoloured
engravings.
These travels were undertaken with the intention of exploring the
unknown countries lying between the Cape of Good Hope and the
Portuguese Settlements on the Western Coast, by a circuitous track
through the Interior Regions. The author, after penetrating into the
heart of the Continent, to the depth of nearly eleven hundred miles,
to a country never before described, met with obstacles which it was
found impossible to surmount, and which compelled him to alter the
original plan of his route. This alteration gave him an opportunity
of acquiring the most complete information respecting the inhabitants
of this most distant region, the nature and productions of the country,
and many interesting particulars of the nations beyond. In the geography ofthe extra- tropical part of Southern Africa, a map, founded
on numerous astronomical observations, and of an entirely new construction, will be found to present considerable improvements, and to
rectify many inaccuracies. Its size is 33 inches by 28.
In the first volume, besides the travels among the tribes living
beyond the boundary of the English settlement, there is a large portion of information respecting the Colony ofthe Cape of Good Hope,
and an account of several excursions which intervened between the
author's first landing and the commencement of his principal journey
into the interior.
In the second volume will be found an interesting account of the
native tribes ; with whom the author lived on terms which gave him
very favourable opportunities for discovering their true character.
As his views in travelling were not confined to any particular class
of observations, but were extended to whatever appeared likely to
454 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS [AFRICA. .
there are scarcely any assignable limits to human
courage and enthusiasm. And thus much for Africa.
produce useful knowledge, his researches have embraced that variety
of subjects which a journey, over ground never before trodden by
European foot, and through the strange and unknown regions of
Africa, might be expected to afford.
To each volume are added an Itinerary and Register of the Weather; and to render the whole more available for reference, and to
collect under their proper heads, the various remarks which, by being
noticed in the regular order of a Diary, are necessarily scattered in
different places, a General Index, together with a Zoological and
Botanical Index, are given to complete the work. The whole of the
engravings which accompany it, have been faithfully copied from
finished drawings made by the author. This work is published by
Messrs. Longman and Co. at 4l. 14s. 6d. per volume.
[ 455 ]
AMERICA.
Ar length we reach the largest, and latest discovered, quarter of the globe : and, in proportion to the
magnitude of this quarter, seems to be the number of
publications relating thereto. When the reader is
informed that, upwards of a century ago, Bishop
Kennett put forth a quarto volume of 273 pages, exclusively of 200 pages of Index, called THE AMERICAN LIBRARY, * containing the titles ofthe then known
* This quarto volume was published in 1713 , at the Black Swan
in Pater Noster Row ; (why are such goodly signs now swept away ?)
as"An Attempt towards laying thefoundation ofan American Library,
in several books, papers, and writings ; humbly given to the Society for
the propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts," The name of WHITE
KENNETT appears at the end of the dedication : a dedication, worth,
on many accounts, an attentive perusal. All the publications (of
which a great number of the earlier ones are to be found in the collections of Hakluyt and Purchas†) are chronologically arranged,
† At p. xii . of the Dedication, the Bishop speaks thus nobly of these two great
Collectors of Travels : " It was a glory done to this nation by Mr. HAKLUYT and
Mr. PURCHAS, (both clergymen of the Church of England) that they spared no
pains or cost to hunt after, and gather up, a great variety and plenty of such Journals and Maritime Papers, which had otherwise , long before this time, been wreckt
and lost for ever." A little further, he adds-" There be now living many industrious collectors of Voyages and Travels, Navigations , Commerce, &c. who probably, after their decease, would not trust them to the custody of a careless heir,
or mercenary administrator ; but will be glad to hear of such a public place as
this , wherein they may be safely disposed, and preserved with the memory oftheir
donour. If such a curious and judicious collector as Mr. PEPYS had known of
any such design, it is very probable that he would have given all his laborious
efforts that way, and they would, in such manner, have made a NATIONAL TREASURE to posterity." What will my friend , Mr. Lodge, of Magdalen College , say
to this ? But the Pepysian Collection, as it is now regulated, is ITSELF AGAIN :
and the spectre of its donor ceases to haunt the banks of Cam. Reverting to Bishop Kennett's Dedication, let me say one further " little word : "--- the conclusion of it must delight every intelligent mind and every virtuous heart.
456 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS [ AMERICA. .
productions which more or less regarded Americaand when he considers how the spirit of discovery,
and the love of travelling, together with the publications which record them, have increased since that
period-how, in the name of courtesy, kindness, and
even common sense, I ask, can that same reader expect to be fully satisfied with a list of the chief works
NOW EXTANT, connected with NORTH and SOUTH
AMERICA?
Away, ye rigorous and exacting critics ! - hence,
ye harsh and unrelenting judges !--for I must be even
more brief than heretofore. A world of various, and
of enticing matter, is before me: and I can therefore touch but hastily on the more ancient historians
and travellers, who have pushed their researches into
this quarter of the globe. But ere this sober strain
be touched, I exhort and entreat my " Young Man,"
in particular, to secure, with all possible dispatch, the
AMERICAN ATLAS, or Guide to the History of North
and South America, and the West Indies, which has
been lately put forth at Philadelphia, by Messrs.
Carey and Lea-the Longman, Hurst and Co. of the
New World. This admirable publication* will give
down to the period of the publication of the volume.
Index of matters, persons, and places, is added. This truly useful
volume was reprinted in 1791 , 4to . (which latter only is mentioned
by Meuselius) and both original and reprint are at this moment
sticking on stalls at some two shillings each. The book is invaluable
to a Collector ; and the spirit that is now abroad, in AMERICA,
should lead some Bostonian, or New Yorkite, or Philadelphian, to
bring the catalogue of publications down to the present times.
:
An excellent
* This publication is a small Atlas folio, consisting of fifty- three
charts ; the fifty- third containing " a Map of the principal Rivers in
the World." In this map, the curious reader will see how the Mis-
AMERICA. ]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 457
him a complete notion ofthe extent, variety, and characteristic features of the stupendous country to which
he is here about to receive a bibliographical introduction. Let me begin then with five of the more ancient worthies of American travellers and historians :
namely, ALGERIUS, DE OVIEDO, LOPEZ DE GEMARA,
LAS CASAS, HERRERA-who are here introduced, only
to be summarily dismissed : * not however withsissippi, and the Missouri, and the Amazon rivers, exceed every other
in the world. Each chart is accompanied by a marginal text, containing a summary and sensible account of the situation, extent, soil,
climate, mountains, rivers, chief towns, commerce, education, and
government, together with an historical sketch, of every portion of
North and South America, there delineated. This work is handsomely printed, and the copy before me is coloured. It was purchased of the publishers for 5l. With this Atlas, the reader may
consult that portion of North America which is excellently described
in Mellish's Geographical Description of the United States ; published
at Philadelphia, in 1822, 8vo.
* These five ancient gentlemen shall not, however, be dismissed
SO summarily," in the notes. The two first and fourth were un- 66
known to Kennett ; and the first, apparently, to Meuselius. Algerius's first work, " De Orbe Novo, Decades III." was published at
Madrid in 1516, in folio : and is necessarily a rare book. " La Historia general y natural de las Indias, islas y terra firma del mar ocean,"
of Gonzalo Hernandez de Oviedo, was published at Seville in 1535,
folio, with cuts : again, in 1547, folio, with the true relation of the
conquest of Peru, by Perez : again, in 1557, in Valladolid ; and in
1556, folio ; and lastly, at Madrid, in 1730, in folio . A new and
more perfect edition is expected (says Meuselius) from the Marquis
Truxillo. In his Suppl. and Add. (vol. x. p . 326) this first edition
is more fully described . An Italian version of it appears in Ramusio,
and a portion of it is anglicised in the third volume of Purchas's Pilgrims. Bourcher de la Richarderie gives us no intelligence of the
relative rarity and value of these editions. Bibl. des Voyages, vol. v.
p. 481. LOPEZ DE GOMARA : Primera , seconda, y terza parte de la
458 [AMERICA. VOYAGES AND TRAVELS.
out a caution to the curious--and especially to the
more wealthy Collector-to take heed to a few of the
historia general de las Indias, con la conquista del Mexico y de la nueva
España. Medina, 1553 , folio. First edition with the pure text of
the author-which fell under the censure of the Spanish government
in America. A pretty little edition of it appeared at Antwerp in 1554,
12mo. for which Meuselius ( Suppl. &c . vol. x. pt . ii . p. 327, ) refers us
to Goetzius in Denkwürdigk der, Dresd. Bibl . vol . iii . p. 444. Consult
the third volume, ( p. 227) of Meuselius for early Italian and French
versions, in 8vo. The work is epitomised in Purchas.
BARTHOLOMEUS LAS CASAS : although his history treat chiefly of
ecclesiastical matters, it is a prodigiously GREAT GUN in the bibliographical battery of Collectors ; especially if the original Spanish work,
in seven parts, 1552, 4to. be complete, and in all respects uncounterfeited. The counterfeit is printed in roman letters : the genuine in
gothic. De Bure is copious and instructive on this head : B. I. Hist.
Part II . p . 266-7. Meuselius is unusually full ; calling the author " immortalis Americanorum patronus ." Bibl. Hist. vol. iii.part ii . p. 79.
He makes out six parts ; so does Brunet, but mentions seven ; Boucher de la Richarderie, on the authority of De Bure, calls them five
parts ; so does Pinkerton ; but Mr. Beloe, (Anec. &c . vol . i . p . 10. ) says
that the Cracherode copy has eight parts : and he mentions the three
which are not noticed by De Bure. I doubt whether the eighth (in
Latin) belong to the edition. A copy of this edition, (without the
specification of the number of parts) was purchased by Mr. Singer,
at the sale of the Stanley library, for 8l. 10s. A copy, containing
three parts only, produced 71. at the sale of the White Knights
library, I saw a fine and perfect copy in the very curious library of
Sir Charles Stewart, our ambassador at Paris. It is also in the library
of Mr. Rennie, as well as a copy of the second French edition . It
was frequently reprinted in French 1579 : 1582, & c. But the
tasteful must look sharply out for good impressions of the plates (by
De Bry) of the Latin edition of 1598, 4to . The publishers, Theodore and Israel De Bry, make much boasting about these platesfor want of which, they contend, (in the preface) that all former
editions may be considered as comparatively incomplete. The text
seems to be carefully executed from the MS. copy of the author and
-
AMERICA.]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS.
459
66' helps " tendered in the preceding note. He will
not find them ignes fatui in the path in which he may
be pleased to walk.
translator. Who was he ? A copy of this edition was sold for 21. at
the sale of Dr. Heath's library ; and for 31. 5s. at that of Colonel
Stanley's . Do copies of the figures, without the text at the back,
exist ? I will not recommend the reprint of 1614 , and much less
that of 1664.
The cruelties, practised by the Spaniards towards the natives, of
which the noble spirit of Las Casas led him to complain, were justified by the slavish spirit of one of the most learned Spaniards of his
day-JOHN GENES DE SEPULVEDA-whose subserviency to Philip II.
threw a shade upon his otherwise enviable attainments : as a list of
his works, marshalled (as usual) in due order, by Niceron, may induce us to believe : Mem. des Hom. Illust. vol. xxiii. p. 346. I must
here, however, caution the reader not to confound this Sepulveda
with his old friend Lorenzo, of that name : whose Romances nuevamente sacados de historias antiquas de la Cronica de España, Anv.
1580, 12mo. produced the decisive sum of 121. 188. at the sale of
the White Knights library.
ANTONIO DE HERRERA is well designated by Bishop Kennett, as
“ the Chief Chronicler of the Indies and Castille . " His VIII . Decads of General History (Decadas, o Historia General de los Hechos
de los Castellanos, &c.) were published at Madrid in 1601-15 ; in
eight thin, or four good sized folio volumes-with copper plates.
The history is carried on from the year 1492 to 1551. This was, for
a long time, a rare and highly coveted work ; but the enlarged,
truly accurate, and splendid impression, put forth by Gonsalez de
Bavaria, at Madrid, in 1729-30, with cuts, in four folio volumes,
has rendered it little sought and little coveted ; although a copy of
it brought 61. 6s. at the sale of the White Knights library. The
Antwerp folio edition of 1728 is mentioned -only to be shunned.
A good copy of the Madrid edition of 1729 is worth 10l. 10s. It
had appeared in an English version by Capt. Stevens, in six octavo
volumes, with cuts and maps, in 1725. The Historia General del
Mundo, by the same celebrated author, was published in 1606-12, in
three folio volumes : containing, in fact, an elaborate history of
Spain, during the reign of Philip II. Mr. Bohn marks a copy of
460 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS [AMERICA. .
I can dwell but briefly on the class of General Historians, up to the present times : and if I mention the
names of Torquemada, Ogilby, Coreal, Lafiteau,
Charlevoix, Wilson, Ulloa, and Robertson, * I hope I
this desirable work at 21. 2s. Herrera is in the foremost rank ofearly
American historians.
* F. J. DE TORQUEMADA : his work was first published at Seville,
in 1615, in three folio volumes : afterwards in a much improved
form, at Madrid, in 1730, in the same number of volumes. A good
copy is worth 5l. 5s. The original edition had become scarce, and
we owe this valuable reprint to Gonsalves de Barcia. Meuselius
says the author had resided a long time in New Spain,for the sake of
promoting the Christian Religion : he introduces " many foolish and
futile things, but many also that are far from being despicable. " Boucher de la Richarderie seems to transfer this critique to the editor .
OGILBY : History of America, being the latest and most accurate description ofthe New World, and adorned with maps and other ornamentals, as ground plots, prospects of cities, and historical sculps, to
the number of 122, was put forth in 1671 , in a ponderous folio tome :
and now sleeps soundly, in spite of the " sculps, " on the bottom
row of booksellers' repositories. Yet it is praised by the Dutch
traveller Dapper, in his rival folio of 1673. Will this draw it from its
lurking place for 11. 18. ? COREAL's Voyages en les Indes Occidentales,
&c. is a translation of the Flemish Journal of Captain Abel Jansen
Tassman, with cuts : Amst. 1722, 12mo. 3 vols. The earlier portion
of this work, where the author describes the manners of the different
citizens, and especially the Buccaneers, is the more valuable. Upon
the whole, in spite of Marchand's (Dict. vol . ii . p. 179, ) damnatory
sentence, I conclude, from the Acta Erudit. Suppl. vol. viii . p . 265,
(as referred to by Meuselius) that this is a work worth sticking the
spurs into the side of a good bibliographical courser to possess.
LAFITEAU is a more consequential name. His Mœurs des Sauvages
Americains, Paris, 1723, 4to. two vols. well sprinkled with shewy
and spirited cuts, could not be obtained by Lord Holland, at the sale
of Dr. Heath's library, under the sum of 31.´ It is a very curious
work, relating chiefly to Canadian manners and customs ; the author
lived five years in Canada. It is now rare. Consult Meuselius ; vol.
AMERICA. ] VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 461.
shall not be accused of exhibiting a barren list offundamentalWriters towards making further acquisitions
iii. part i . p. 242. The same ingenious author published his Decouvertes et Conquetes des Portugais dans le nouveau Monde, at Paris,
in 1733, 4to. two vols. also with cuts : of which a good copy cannot be worth less than the last mentioned sum. CHARLEVOIX was a
writer of equal ability and distinction : his " Nouvelle France, avec un
Voyage dans l'Amerique Septentrionale, " appeared at Paris, in 1744,
4to. 3 vols.; Lord Holland gave 41. 4s. for a copy of it at Dr. Heath's
sale. It was republished in 6 duodecimo volumes, and translated into
English in 1769. His Histoire du Paraguay, Paris, 1756, 4to. 3 vols.
produced 21. 14s. at the sale just noticed ; and I find Mr. Heber giving 11. 11s . for his Histoire de l'isle Espagnole, ou de St. Domingue,
Paris, 1730, 4to 2. vols. I am not sure, whether, from the Biograph.
Univ. vol. viii. p. 229, this latter be not the preferable work of Charlevoix :-reprinted at Amst. 1733, in four duodecimo volumes. WIL
SON'S Description of America, containing conjectures of its peopling, &c.
Lond. 1739, folio, with maps, &c. is hardly worth mentioning ; but
there are tastes for all sorts of books : and so let Wilson be picked
up for 7s. 6d.
ANT. DE ULLOA'S work upon East and South America, relates chiefly
to the natural history of those countries, and was published in a small
4to. volume, at Madrid, in 1772. It is a very valuable book, as far
as it goes ; the author having resided a considerable period in Ame
rica. It was translated into French, and published at Paris in 1787,
8vo. 2 vols. The great work of Jorge Juan Ulloa, on South America,
will be noticed in its proper place. With delight I reach the labours
of ROBERTSON; and, with almost greater delight, read the applause
bestowed uponthem in the imperishable book of Meuselius. " Liber,
(says that bibliographer-speaking of his History of America) omnium
præstantissimus, . . . auctor, divino prorsus ingenio præditus, " &c.
And this is true enough. If, continues he, facts only be consulted,
there is little of novelty-[how could there be ? ] but the leading
features of the work, and the opinions given upon known facts,
carry with them an air of novelty. " But further praise-which might
indeed be brought forward from every foreign, as well as domestic
journalis totally unnecessary : and, whatever may be said of
Robertson's Biography of Charles V. ( concerning which, read some
462 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. [ N. AMERICA.
in the same department ofcollecting. I am well aware
ofa thousand incidental subjects, connected with the
mighty empire of which I am now treating, and on
which books ofthe most curious and covetable nature
have been published-but I can do little more than
allude to them* -and come at once to the leading
publications relating to
NORTH AMERICA.
In the histories of this portion of America, it
will be difficult to exclude those which incorporate
few lines at page 329, ante) I cannot but consider the HISTORY OF
AMERICA as the magnum opus of its author. Meuselius wishes that
the list of works, relating to America, prefixed by Robertson, had
been critically arranged ; rather than consisting, as it does, of the
titles of books. This masterly performance was published in 1777,
4to. in two volumes : but an additional volume was afterwards published, and the three volumes were sold for 21. at Dr. Heath's sale .
They have been republished, again and again, in an octavo form, at
reasonable prices—and translated into every language of civilised
Europe. " Give me, therefore, ROBERTSON" -methinks I hear the
" Young Man" say-" and let all preceding historians shift for themselves" There is truth, but not " the whole truth , ” in this avowal.
* Among the " curious " and " covetable " little tomes, take, for
example, the quarto volume printed at Madrid in 1641 , relating tothe
" Great River of the Amazons-and after reading Mr. Evans's note in
the Bibl. Stanleiana, no. 1113, upon the causes of its " unusual
rarity, " be sure to lock it up in your cabinet as worth at least thirty
half sovereigns. Again : respecting the Magellan Streights -peruse
what those two gallant Captains Bartolomeo Garcia de NODAL and
Gonzalo de NODAL accomplished-as written in a quarto volume, published at Madrid in 1621 , with a wood engraving of a chart (so often
missing-and about which De Bure, vol. i . p. 215-6 so solemnly
cautions the Collector) and with all its parts-that is to say, ninetytwo leaves, comprising the twelve preliminary, and fifteen concluding
N. AMERICA.]
VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 463
the United States or Colonies ; and, in such point
of view, if I omit the separate histories belonging
·----
leaves. Mr. Evans's pithy and pertinent note to the Stanley copy of
this very rare book, no. 1117, was the means of causing it to be
transported to his Majesty's library at the large sum of 31l. 10s.
Above all things, let the Bibliomaniac in SPANISH LORE consider
more than once or twice ere he indulges in the niceties and difficulties of procuring the first editions of the Epistles of the famous FERDINANDO CORTEZ in the Spanish language. These Epistles are four
in number ; but of the first, whether in Spanish or the Latin version,
no traces remain : not a copy is preserved : and it is supposed to be
either lost, or locked up in the Archivo Real of Simancas. Robertson,
with all his zeal and weight of recommendation, could never learn
any traces of it . The second and third Epistles, in the Spanish language, were published at Seville by Cromberger, a German, in 1522-
3, fol. and copies of these very rare volumes were recently sold for
261. 10s. Consult Meuselius, Bibl. Hist. vol. iii . part i . p. 267, who
is delightfully instructive : but why is Brunet so unusually barren ?
Again : Meuselius says that copies of the fourth Epistle, in the
Spanish language, have escaped his researches : but the whole three
Epistles are published entire in the first volume of the Historiadores
Primitivos de las Indias Occidentales of Barcia, Madr. 1745, folio,
3 vols. and they were subsequently printed in a separate folio form,
with the notes and additions of Lorenzano, accompanied by cuts, in
Mexico, 1770, folio-a rare and highly prized tome. Are these cuts
taken from the Latin version of the third Epistle, printed at Norimberg in 1524 ? I learn, however, that a copy of the first edition of
the fourth Epistle, in a separate form, was in the possession of Mr.
Thorpe (the Toм OSBORNE of the present day) from a collection of
valuable Spanish books, purchased by him of an Italian gentleman :
and this very precious tome-together with the two previous original
Spanish Epistles-in all probability now enrich the cabinet of my
friend Mr. Heber-the THOMAS RAWLINSON, Esq. of the present day.
Long may they greet his own eyes and those of his friends. Along
with Cortes, are frequently united the Epistles of PeterMartyr Anglerius, 1519-1532, &c .: republished in the eight Decads of his History
in 1555, folio- of which a copy is in the library of Mr. Rennie.
:
464 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. [N. AMERICA.
to Louisiana, Florida, Carolina, Canada, &c. it seems
to be only necessary to make mention of the works
of Kalm, Rogers, Wynn, Adair, Carver, Chalmers,
and the Marquis de la Rochefaucault Liancourt —
and if the reader take the pains to consult the subjoined note* he will find brief mention of the titles
Consult, here, the American Library, 1713, 4to. p. 8. Then again for
FRAMPTON'S Joyful Newes out of the New Found World, 1596 , 4to.
and the Discovery of Guiana, by Raleigh, published in the same year
and form-books, not very scarce, although in the sable garb of the
black letter. Here is no opportunity for amplification. But relating to VIRGINIA alone, read the titles of a cluster of tracts from
the Bindley library-to say nothing ofwhat appears in the preceding
pages (372-3-385) relating to that once constantly talked of country.
Tracts relating to Virginia : " Encouragement to Colonies, by Sir
W. Alexander," map, 1625. " True Relation of what happened in
Virginia since the first planting of that Colony, " map of Virginia,
1608.
1611.
" Relation of Lord De la Warre, Capt. Generall ofVirginia,"
" Plaine Description of the Barmudas, " 1618. " Smith's
Description of New England, " 1606. " State of the Colony and
Affairs in Virginia, " 1616. " New England's Plantation, " by Higgeson, with map, containing the portrait of Capt. Smith, 1630.
" Guinea's Plantation , " by the Earl of Barkshire, 1632. " Virginia
valued," by E. W. 1650. Virginia's Discovery of Silke Wormes, "
1650. A collection of Ten very curious Tracts, in one volume.
These tracts produced the ponderous sum of 10%.. But there
would be no end to this bibliographical skirmishing. See, as a guide,
Pinkerton's list, vol. xvii . p. 200.
* KALM was a Swede. He published his work at Stockholm in
1753, &c Svo. 3 vols . with wood cuts. It was published in the German language at Göttingen in 1754, &c. in three large octavo volumes, with copper plates ; and Forster translated it into English,
and published it at London in 1771 , 8vo. 3 vols. with a map and some
additional cuts . A copy is worth 11. 1s. It was hence translated
into the Dutch, and published in two quarto volumes at Utrecht in
1772. The work is chiefly valuable on the score of natural history ;
N. AMERICA. ] VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 465
and characters of the work, of each author. I am
not sure, whether, upon a dispassionate consideration,
but I cannot correctly affirm whether the account of the Esquimaux,
whom the author came in contact with in his journey from Pensylvania to Canada, be not among the earliest extant in print.
ROGERS's Concise Account of North America, 1765, 8vo . is a book
well worth a 7s. 6d. purchase. The author lived many years among
the most barbarous of the natives, and his narrative is at once perspicuous and unaffected, and his statements unimpeached. Meuselius (vol. iii . part i . 304-5) is warmly encomiastic upon this octavo
volume. Rogers was chiefly conversant with the British Colonies.
But why, in the above text, is the once famous, and always interesting, quarto volume, entitled the American Traveller, 1769, omitted ?
The author concealed his name :-it was Alexander Cluni . He made
his journies in the years 1744-5 on foot, reaching as high as the sixtyeighth degree of north latitude, as far as Cape Chudleis ; and towards
the western departments of North America is supposed to have seen
66 men and things " such as no European ever before beheld. In
1746 he reached Greenland, in the eighty-third and a half degree of
north latitude, and there he saw neither land nor ice-(" maria undique et undique cœlum. ") This is a curious volume, * and should be
snapped up, in these north-mania times, with all imaginable celerity.
WYNN's History ofthe British Dominions in North America, 1763-
1773, 4to. seems to be only a compilation from Oldmixon and
Douglas ; authors, not worth enlisting into the service of a Collector.
Different, in all respects, is the Trader with the Indians, and History
of the American Indians, by J. ADAIR, Esq. Lond. 1775, 4to.: one
of the best and most instructive books of the kind if we except a
little somnolency in discussions upon the Aborigines of America ; a
fault, or disease, not peculiar to the times of James Adair, Esq. The
---
* The author was the first to give accurate intelligence of Hudson's Bay, and to
institute an enquiry about a more successful commerce with the Americans. The
book was said to have been published under the auspices, and at the command, of
Lord Chatham ; and both the English and Americans , at that crisis, were so eager
to possess it, that it was bought and read by one party with the same avidity that it
was bought and destroyed by the other. It now RESTS IN PEACE : an example ( if
ten thousand others were wanting) of the short-lived popularity of " things
mundane."
H H
466 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. [N. AMERICA.
the last named work be not all that is absolutely
necessary to procure. And now, after this gallant
little bibliographical bark shall quit its moorings in
the Northern, to seek the Southern, division of the
NEWWORLD, it will be necessary to dash through the
breakers that circumvent those Islands-the source of
so much wealth to Great Britain-with which the
Caribbean Sea is so thickly studded, and which are
designated by the well known name of the WEST
INDIES. The anchor is therefore weighed : the sails
swell before the breezeἀμφὶ δε κῦμα
Στείρη πορφύρεον μεγάλ᾽ ἴαχε νηὸς ἰέσης,
and the gulf of Florida is cleared ...
(Iliad. lib. i. ) .
As a work of the most general and satisfactory
author was a five year's resident in the countries which he describes.
The best edition of CAPTAIN CARVER'S Travels through the interior
parts of North America in the years 1766, 7, 8, is that of 1779, 8vo.
with a map and cuts, and having some account of the author by the
late Dr. Lettsom, " Omnia utilia æque ac jucunda, magnam partem
nova" says the applauding and particularising Meuselius. But the
commendations bestowed by him on the Political Annals of the
United Colonies, &c. of which Mr. GEORGE CHALMERS is the author,
1780, 4to. are much more warm and pointed : accompanied by the
expression of regret at the discontinuation of the work. The author,
now midway between Septuagenarianism and Octogenarianism, need
desire nothingmore parænetical than the criticism of Meuselius (vol. iii .
part i . p. 315) upon his labours. Doubtless, however, of all the travels in North America, up to the period of their publication , those of
M. DE LA ROCHEFOUCAULT- LIANCOURT, published at Paris in 1799,
in eight octavo volumes, and translated into English and published
the same year in 2 quarto volumes, are considered to be the fullest
and most satisfactory. Pinkerton calls it " a work of very considerable merit." Why does Boucher de la Richarderie (vol. vi. p. 10)
omit to notice it ? Nor does it appear to be in Meuselius.
N. AMERICA.] VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 467
information, obtain, by all means, the History of
these Islands ( including that of St. Domingo) by the
late Mr. BRYAN EDWARDS-published, and frequently
republished, in three quarto, and five octavo volumes.
A good copy of the former is worth about 51. 5s. of
the latter, 17. 16s. The author is the " facile princeps " of writers in his department. But as JAMAICA
is the " facile princeps " of these British islands, so, I
ween, a perfectly beautiful, unsullied, tall , broad,
richly bound copy (peradventure by Roger Payne)
with the cuts coloured, of Sir HANS SLOANE'S History
of that Island, * (1707-1725) will be found in the
sumptuous cabinet of HONORIO. And what if a copy of
Master LONG's History, of the same island, published
about fifty years afterwards, in three quarto volumes,
and " bound by old Fraser, "+ be found lying by the
side of its precursor ?
* Whether my excellent and tasteful friend HONORIO really do, or
do not, possess such a copy, I cannot now trust to my memory to
aver: but, if he do not, he should :-" ILLE SI QUIS ALIUS ." Meanwhile it is consoling to reflect, that a copy, not far short of that so
rapturously described in the text, and bound by Roger Payne in green
morocco, adorns the shelves of the Althorp library. Dr. Heath's fine
copy was purchased by Lord Essex for 197. 19s. The plates are
described as being 430 in number. Nota bene : the work of Sir
Hans Sloane comprehends the history of the other West India islands
also. Messrs. Payne and Foss mark a " verygood copy in russia" at
12/ 12s.
copy
Such are the words of Mr. Jefferey, in his description of the
of this valuable work-confined to Jamaica alone-which was
The delay of eighteen years, which occurred between the publication of the
first and second volumes of this work, arose from the author being almost entirely
occupied with the arrangement of his far -famed MUSEUM. It is in the introduction to the second volume ( 1725) that Sir Hans gives a general inventory of his
library and museum, as it then stood ; by which it appears that the subjects of
[ 468 ]
SOUTH AMERICA.
In the bibliographical dissection of the Southern
Half of the New World, I give the reader due notice
that his attention will be briefly, if not exclusively,
directed to the kingdoms of BRAZIL, PERU, PARAGUAY, and CHILI : premising that the celebrated work
of Ulloa* may afford a good general notion of the
whole of Southern America. In other respects, and
as connected more or less with the divisions before
Bibl.
Sold for 14l. 14s. at the sale of the last mentioned library : but is now
scarcely worth two-thirds of the sum.
It has a map and cuts ; and
was published in 1774. Meuselius is strongly encomiastic.
Hist, vol. iii . part ii . page 64. May I quietly ask, who was " old
Fraser?"
*The titles of the works of ULLOA, as connected with North, South,
aud East America, are found copiously detailed in the pages of
Boucher de la Richarderie, vol. v. p . 511 : vi . p. 330. These works
have been translated from the Spanish into the French and German
languages. The Relacion Historica del Viage, &c. was published at
Madrid : 5 vols . in 2, or 3, 4to .: with cuts ; of which a large paper
copy, in small folio, was sold for 15l. 15s. at the sale of Colonel
Stanley's library. The same copy was recently sold for 61. 16s. bd. The
Noticias Americanas ( a highly distinguished work) was published in
1772, 4to.; and was translated into German in 1781 , 8vo . with most
valuable notes-and was again improved in a French edition in 1787,
8vo. 2 vols. by Le Fevre de Villebrune.
natural history alone , exclusively of 200 volumes of preserved plants, amounted
to more than 26,000 articles ... This second volume completed the vegetable
part and the animal kingdom, and the plates are continued to the number of
274." Chalmers's Biogr. Dictionary, vol. xxviii. p. 66. How does this number of
the plates tally with that above mentioned ?
S. AMERICA. ] VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 469
Garci-
— are
specified, the performances of FERNANDEZ, GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA, SOUTHEY, and HUMBOLDT,
amply sufficient for the most accurate and valuable
information.
Among the earliest writers of the local and political
history of Brazil, Hans Staden and Jean de Lery
take the lead. The work of Guerreiro may be placed,
in intrinsic worth as well as chronological order, after
those of the Dutchman and Frenchman just mentioned ; although I admit that it is now rather sought
after as an object of curiosity than of utility. The
same may be said of the suppressed work of Portuguese America by Rocha Pitta. It is therefore to
* The first edition of HANS STADEN is in the Dutch language,
1556, 4to. It was translated into Latin, under the title of Navigatio
in Brasiliam, 1592, folio. JEAN DE LERY appears to be a much more
amusing traveller : his work is fully described in the Bibl. des Voyages, vol. vi. p. 270 : and care must be taken to purchase either the
first ( 1578) or the second impression, 1580 : each in octavo. They
have curious cuts ; but the second is professed to be " enlarged both
in the text and the embellishments. " Pinkerton, who calls the work
amusing and ingenious, says that the author being a Hugonot, the
work was printed in France without his name. The figures are by
Antoine Chapin. A Latin version appeared in 1594. 4to.: and if
the sedulous Bibliomaniac will be at the pains to read the authority
first quoted, (p. 271 ) he shall find his toils well rewarded if he obtain
a clean and sound copy of De Lery. But read well Meuselius, Bibl.
Hist. vol. iii . part ii . p . 50-2. The book was prohibited in the Index
Purgatorius of the Roman Pontiff. Again, I repeat, read the " hundred notable things," and perhaps " hundred mery Tales, " of which
De Lery's authenticated volume is composed.
+ But ofequal, if not superior value, to Guerreiro, is the work of
BARLEUS -put forth under the auspices of the mighty Bleau, with
maps and elegant cuts, at Amst. in 1647, folio : accounted a rare
book by Clement-because the greater part of the impression was
burnt. Meuselius is copious and instructive. But perhaps the De
470 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. [S. AMERICA.
Mr. Southey's elaborate history, in three capacious
tomes, that the " Young must look for a " Guide'
-and the " Old " must look for " consolation : " — if
consolation can be derived from the perusal of pages,
in which, frequently, from the necessity of the case,
the most brutal atrocities are related, and the most
perfidious schemes unfolded. Mr. Southey is doubtless the " facile princeps " of the Historians of the
Brazils ; but this title is hardly commensurate with
the bearing and extent of his work, as it comprises the
rise and progress of all the European colonies, from
the Andes to the Atlantic, and from the Plata to the
river of the Amazons. His performance, of which the
first volume is , a little unaccountably, overlooked by
Pinkerton, will doubtless command the attention and
applause of posterity : and numerous will be the octavo impressions which the next half century will
scriptio totius Brasilia, Cleves, 1698, folio, which is little better than
a new impression of Barlæus, is the best work extant upon the
ancient state of Brazil. It has copper cuts. Consult Boucher, vol.
vi. p . 276-7 . The editor, or author of the volume, was I. di S.
Teresa. Bibl. Hist. vol. iii . part ii. p. 58. ROCHA PITTA's Historia
da America Portuguesa, Lisbon, 1730, folio must be bought, whenever found in comely condition, at any price not exceeding 2. 2s. ;
and yet this will hardly fetch it, as Pinkerton calls it "very scarce."
It is a volume fraught with useful intelligence. The author was a
sound-headed and honest Brasilian ; but the truths which he developed were so unpalateable to the Portuguese government, that the
sale of his book was prohibited in consequence. Boucher de la
Richarderie is pleasantly communicative. If the most diligent researches cannot put my " Young Man " in possession of Rocha Pitta,
he may procure, for a very trifle, the interesting Narrative ofa Voyage to Brasil, by THOMAS LINDLEY, 1814, 8vo.: a book replete with
interesting matter, narrated in a style of winning simplicity. The
French bibliographer has done ample justice to it.
S. AMERICA. ] VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 471
cause to be circulated of so ample and instructive a
work. *
*The propriety of the above encomium can hardly be doubted,
but at any rate not combated, by the most fastidious and hostile of
Mr. Southey's critics. The Quarterly Review, vol . iv. p. 454, &c. in the
notice of the first volume of the HISTORY Of Brazil, 1810, 4to. has
warmly and vigorously entered into the general literary merits of its
author, as a poet and an historian . It has dealt out an ample meed
ofpraise, and with justice : but another merit, as connected with this
extraordinary performance, belongs to Mr. Southey : that of enthusiasm and perseverance--which he seemed to share alone, and in
despite of the cool and slow reception of his labours with the public.
The first volume (if report speak true) did not net the author above
ten pounds—about the amount of what Milton received for his Paradise Lost. The coincidence is singular. The second volume was
published in 1817 : and the third in 1823. The work is now complete ; but I must be allowed to question, if not to condemn, the stern
and angry air of defiance, together with the excessive strain of selfcongratulation, with which the work concludes. That Mr. Southey
should feel vexed and indignant at the tardy success of such a publication, is perhaps both natural and pardonable : and that the triumphant exultation of Ovid, with the " frigid indifference " of Johnson,
should be blended, on one and the same occasion, might also be expected and forgiven. But the author had little, personally, to complain ofthe public ; or to submit, in the way of appeal, to the bar of
posterity. He was, and is, in the enjoyment of an exceedingly great,
and justly earned reputation. A work, like his HISTORY OF BRAZIL,
would not, in the nature of things, be caught up and devoured with
the avidity of his matchless Biographical Manual of LORD NELSON.
Hume, Henry, and even Gibbon, struggled hard, and despaired
somewhat, of the final success of their labours : labours, necessarily
of a more popular cast than an exclusive history of a distant country,
about which curiosity had not been so general with us as with
foreigners, and which had been rendered more or less familiar by
preceding historians and travellers. But if the popularity of this
great, and perhaps " maximum opus, " of its author, be slow, it will
Every succeeding year will demonstrate more decidedly
the importance of its contents : and when the powers of Portugal and
be sure.
472 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. [S. AMERICA
The name of Southey is worthy of its juxtaposition
with that of HUMBOLDT-the most illustrious traveller
of his day. Nothing seems too vast, too varied, too
wonderful, or too minute, for the keen eye, penetrating intellect, and unwearied exertions, of this extraordinary man. From the snow that caps the summit,
to the lichen which creeps at the base, of the loftiest
mountain, Humboldt is equally inquisitive, curious,
diligent, and happy. A botanist, zoologist, statist,
philosopher, half poet, and general enthusiast, the
genius of this traveller seems to have been peculiarly
calculated for surveying the varieties and immensity
of the New World. Accordingly, his travels and researches in AMERICA* place him as the first in the
Spain, in the New World, shall be, as they are now threatening to
be, NO MORE, then will the text of Mr. Southey's History of Brazil
be considered as a beacon and a guide to the antiquarian, historian ,
and philologist. The great grandson of its author will caress the
editio princeps as a book to be numbered among the rarest and most
prizable volumes .
I cannot close the account of Brazil without a strong recommendation of the Travels in the interior of that country, with a particular
account of the Gold and Diamond Districts, by Mr. JOHN Mawe,
Mineralogist : illustrated with coloured plates : 8vo. price 18s. This
volume also includes a Voyage to the Rio de la Plata.
* Here follows a list ofthe wonderful productions of this wonderful traveller and of his companion Mons. BONPLAND. All the remaining copies of the work are now in the hands of Messrs. Longman
and Co.; and the prices affixed are those of the original Paris publishers :
1. Relation Historique de leur Voyage aux Régions Equinoxiales du
Nouveau Continent pendant les années 1799-1804. Vol. I. Partie i .
avec l'Atlas des Cartes Géographiques et Physiques, 4to. pap. fin. 31.:
pap. velin, 31. 12s, This is now in a course of publication. It will
be complete in four volumes, 2. Atlas Pittoresque des Vues des Cordillères et Monumens des Peuples Indigénes de l'Amerique : contenant
S. AMERICA. ] VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 473
foremost rank, perhaps, of all travellers dead and
living. The range of his researches, and the space
:
60, Pl. la plupart coloriées, sur colomb. velin. Folio, pap.: fin. 251.
4s. pap. velin, figures avant la lettre, 371. 16s. Recueil d'Observationsde Zoologie et d'Anatomie comparée, faites dans l'Ocean Atlantique,
dans l'Interieur du nouveau Continent, et dans la mer du Sud : avec
Planches imprimées en couleur, 4to. liv. i . à 8 pap.. fin , 71.17s. pap :
velin, 101. 28. This work is complete. 4. Essai Politique sur le Royaume de la Nouvelle Espagne ; 2 vol. 4to. Avec un Atlas Physique et
Géographique, pap : fiu. 15l. pap : velin, 191. Complete. 5. Recueil
d'Observations Astronomiques, d'Operations Trigonométriques, et de
Mesures Barométriques, faites pendant le cours d'un Voyage aux Régions
Equinoxiales du Nouveau Continent, depuis 1799, jusqu'en 1803 .
Ouvrage auquel on a joint des recherches Historiques sur la position
de plusieurs points importans. 2 vols. 4to. pap : fin , 9l. 12s. pap :
velin, 17. 12s. Complete. 6. Plantes Equinoxiales, recueillies au
Mexique, dans l'Ile de Cuba, dans les Provinces de Caracas, de Cumana
et de Barcelone, aux Andes de la Nouvelle Grenade, de Quito et de
Perou, et sur les bords du Rio- Negro, de l'Orénoque et de la rivière des
Amazones ; Ornés de Planches. Folio liv. i . à 15. 24l. Sur Colomb.
Velin, 40l. 10s. Complete in two vols. Monographie des Melastomes et des Rhexia, et des autres genres du méme ordre—enrichies d'environ 2000 plantes nouvelles : ornés de Planches, en couleur, folio, liv.
i. à 15. 271. Sur Colomb. Velin. 45l. Complete in two vols.
It is necessary to observe that each of these is a separate and distinct
work in itself, and may be bought separately ; but, for the accommodation of those persons who wish to possess the whole, general
Titles, &c. have been prepared for forming the whole Collection into
an entire and complete Work in the following order, laid down by the
Author : —1. “ Historical Narrative," with the Picturesque and Geographical Atlas. 2. " Zoology and comparative Anatomy. ” 3. “ Political Essay on New Spain." 4. " Astronomy. " 5. " Physics and Geology." 5. " Botany, comprehending Equinoxial Plants and Monography ofthe Melastomas."
The SUM TOTAL of these stupendous labours is as follows : eleven
volumes in quarto, containing the text four volumes in large folio
containing the Botanical part : — four volumes, in colombier folio,
containing the Atlasses : four hundred engravings, ofwhich the greater
-
474 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. [ S. AMERICA.
which his publications have entitled him to occupy in
the contemplation of discerning judges, justify the
propriety of this eulogium.
part are coloured : 70 geographical, physical, and geological maps. Of
the two first of these works, the following have been published in our
own language, from the pen of Mrs. Helen Maria Williams.
" The
Personal Narrative of M. De Humboldt's Travels to the Equinoctial
Regions ofthe New Continent. " In five vols. 8vo. price 41. 1s. boards.
Four more volumes, in a course of publication, complete this work.
"Researches on the Institutions and Monuments of the Ancient Inhabitants of America." A new edition, in two vols. 8vo. with plates,
17. 11s. 6d. boards. " Political Essay on the Kingdom of New Spain, "
with maps, &c. the third edition, in 4 vols. 8vo. 31. 13s. 6d. boards .
"A Geognostical Essay on the Super- position of Rocks in both Hemispheres." By M. De Humboldt : and translated into English under
his immediate inspection ; price 14s. 8vo. boards.
To contemplate these productions as the work of ONE MAN, and of
his Coadjutor, might, in after ages, stagger belief ; if the FACT were
not established beyond dispute or doubt. And yet Mons. Humboldt
is in the vigour of life-meditating, it is said, a hop, skip, and a
jump, over the rival mountains, of the Himmalaya range, in the
Eastern world. Let him however think more than twice upon an
undertaking, which may shorten a career honourably destined to
enjoy the fruits of a painfully earned and widely extended reputation .
With him, " School is over and he may gambol lustily for the
remainder of his days.
"" -
These works, or at least the greater part of them, have been criticised in our two most popular journals the Edinburgh and Quarterly Reviews : see vol. xvi. and xix of the former, and vols. xv. and
xviii of the latter. Ample and able, doubtless, are these criticisms.
My memory charges me more particularly with those in the former
Review ; which I have reason to believe were by the experienced
pen of the late Mr. Playfair. There is hardly any thing more intellectually delightful than such performances ; where party feeling,
prejudices, and personal antipathy, have no share: where bile, ill- will,
spleen, grudgings, and heart burnings, are all squeezed out. To devote a calm summer's evening to such " readings " — in rural seclusion, or upon the beach of the ever-agitated main, (why not say at
S. AMERICA. ] VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 475
I come, in the last place, to notice the earlier Chronicles and labours of CIEÇA DE LEON, ZARATE, FERNANDEZ, GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA,-as connected with
the other great portions of South America ; namely,
Peru, Chili, Paraguay, &c. &c.; and doubting the room
to be quite sufficient for them in the text, I have consigned the bibliographical précis of their labours to the
subjoined note.* And so, looking with surprise, not
unmingled with apprehension, at the vast portion of
the world chronicled in these few last pages -- and
knowing and bewailing the imperfect outlines, or faint
execution, of those countries more particularly chronicled - I implore forgiveness of both " young" and
-" old" well persuaded, nevertheless, that HE shall be
once, παρὰ θῖνα πολυφλοίσβοιο θαλάσσης ? ) after a morning's devotion to
Barrow, or Boyle, or Newton, or Leibnitz, or Locke-what is it, butto
....the Reader shall draw his own conclusion . Humboldt has found
ENGLISH CRITICS worthy of the materials which his indefatigable
zeal and multifarious knowledge have placed before them.
* Peru is rich in her EARLIER CHRONICLES. I cannot, however,
conceive that any published history of that country appears so early
as 1480 : the year in which Pinkerton assigns a French work, printed
at Paris, and reprinted in 1545, in octavo. Meuselius takes no
notice whatever of it . In fact, the date must be an anachronism ;
since the country in question was not then known to Europeans.
The first work mentioned by Meuselius, relating to Peruvian authors,
is that ofthe Conquista del Peru, of FRANCIS DE KEREZ, translated
into the Italian, and published in 1534, 4to. It is incorporated into
Ramusio. Of the Spanish author, nothing seems to be known with
accuracy. Bibl. Hist. vol. iii. part ii . p. 19. P. CIEÇA DE LEON is
perhaps the earliest Chronicler. His Primera Parte de la Chronica de
Peru, was published at Seville, in 1553, folio ; and again, at Antwerp, in 1554, 8vo. At Rome, in the Italian language, in 1555 ;
and at Venice, in 1557, 8vo. In English, among Captain Stevens's
New Collection of Voyages. Cieça's work contains only the first
476 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. [S. AMERICA.
a fortunate Collector of Books who possesses a third
part only of the " AMERICAN LIBRARY" here described.
part of his Chronicle : there are three other parts, which Antonio
tells us have been long looked for by learned men. The intrinsic
merits of this work are very great. The author had been domiciled
among the Peruvians from his thirteenth to his thirtieth year. The
first impression of Cieça is of excessive rarity. A Dutch Chronicle
of Peru (Historie van Coninkryk van Peru) was published at Antwerp, 1573 , 4to.
ZARATE'S Historia del Descubrimiento y Conquista del Peru en el an
1555, was published at Antwerp, in 1555 ; and at Seville, in 1557,
folio ; and republished in Barcias's Hist. Prim. vol. iii. It was translated into Italian by Alphonso Ulloa, and published at Venice in
1563, 4to. It is a work of real importance ; but rather topographical than historical . FERNANDEZ published his first and second parts
ofthe History of Peru, in the Spanish language, at Seville, in 1571 ,
folio. It is a work, according to Antonio, of considerable interest.
The author was one of the followers of the accomplished, bloodyminded, and (I grieve to add) bibliomaniacal, Hurtado de Mendoza : +
and was constantly, I fear, sheathing his sword in human flesh . His
book was prohibited to be read in America, among the Americans :
such was the terror of a re- action from the perusal of the pages of
this faithful vicegerent of the Spanish government. ! Has it been ever
translated ? GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA is a more important writer
than either of his predecessors. His Commentarios Reales que tratan del Origen de los Yncas, was published at Lisbon in 1609, folio :
with a continuation, or second part, called Historia general del Peru,
&c. published at Cordova in 1619, folio : two small volumes. A new
edition of both works was published at Madrid in 1723, folio,
two vols. under the care of Barcia ; of which a copy was sold for
21. 8s. at the sale of Dr. Heath's library. I find the same price attached to this impression, in 4 vols. in Mr. Bohn's last catalogue,
n°. 11964. The first editions are of excessive rarity and high price,
even in Spain. A third edition , in thirteen octodecimo volumes, was
published at Madrid in 1800. Baudoin translated the Incas into
+ See Bouterwek's character of this nobleman. Spanish and Portuguese Literature ; vol. i. p. 186.
S.AMERICA. ] VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. 477
Let the pages of Kennett, Meuselius, and Boucher
de la Richarderie satisfy a more craving appetite,
and lead to the exhaustion of the most heavily furnished purse. And thus I bid adieu to land and sea.
After such a circumnavigation , the vessel stands in
need of repair and refitting; the keel being clogged with
every submarine production, mineral, vegetable, and
animal ...
Post varios casus, et tot discrimina rerum,
Tendimus in Latium . .
French in 1633, 4to . of which a new edition was put forth at Amsterdam in 1737, 4to. two vols . with the cuts by Picart. Of these
handsome tomes, there are only fifty copies printed on LARGE PAPER:
books to be snapped at by the graphic bibliomaniac. Rycault translated the work into English, " with sculptures, " in 1688, folio.
Consult Meuselius and Boucher de la Richarderie. " The author
(says Pinkerton) as a descendant of the Princes of Peru, has been
peculiarly minute relative to the religion, government, laws, customs, and manners of the ancient inhabitants of Peru, as well as the
productions of that country. "
To the above, let me add the very rare book of PEDRO LOSANO,
being a Chorographic description of the country, rivers, trees, and
animals ofthe provinces of Gran Chaco, Galambar, &c. (in the Vice
Royalty of La Plata, ) published at Cordova, in the Spanish language, in 1723, 4to.: the work being scarce and in much request.
It has, apparently, escaped Meuselius. And here let me ask, what
is the nature of the work called Tears of the Indians, published in
1656, 8vo. ? These "tearful " titles were common about this period; as an examination of pages 254-5, ante, may prove. In the
library of the late Mr. Rennie a copy of these Indian Tears may be
found ; and in that of the Duke of Devonshire, at Chatsworth, a
copy of the Tears of Ireland, 1642, 12mo. (the work just referred to)
will be found. My memoranda of the Chatsworth book- gems had
escaped me when I was busied with this latter work in the foregoing
pages.
478 VOYAGES AND TRAVELS. [S. AMERICA.
* I should, however, be doing violence to my
own feelings, if, at the close of this circumnavigation
of the globe, I suffered these pages to see the light
without a strong recommendation of " THE WORLD
IN MINIATURE, " now publishing for the sake of
very young Readers, and calculated, on every account,
to render them familiar with the productions, characters, and costumes of the leading nations described.
I know nothing more pleasing in its contents, more
appropriate in its embellishments, and more reasonable in its price. From a sight of such things, in early
youth, the next generation may even surpass the present, in their love of travel and research.
* It is published by Mr. Ackermann, in pocket volumes, at about
7s. per vol. and will be complete in fifty volumes : thirty are already
published . To these will be added accounts of the South Sea and
Asiatic Islands, in 4 vols. of the same size and price. A similar work,
with cuts, in yet smaller volumes, was published by the Elzevirs, in
1663, &c. under the title of Respublica Varia, in 47 vols.