



105-11244-4599
A
320021
4800
円
#
Dilsin.
DIBDIN'S BIBLIOMANIA, or BOOK-MADNESS,
A BIBLIOGRAPHICAL ROMANCE,
A NEW EDITION, WITH CONSIDERABLE ADDITIONS,
Including a Key to the assumed Characters in the Drama,
AND A SUPPLEMENT,
2 vols. royal 8vo. handsomely printed on fine paper,
Embellished by numerous Wood- cuts, many of which are now first added,
Announced by Subscription at £3. 3s. -REDUCED TO £1 . 11s. 6d.
Or on LARGE PAPER, imp. 8vo . of which only very few copies were printed,
Announced at £5. 5s. -REDUCED TO £3. 13s. 6d.
Both in extra cloth boartis.
This celebrated work, which unites the entertainment of a romance with the most
valuable information on all bibliographical subjects, has long been very scarce, and sold for considerable sums-the small paper for £8 . 8s. and the Large Paper for upwards of 50 guineas !!! On the present reprint ( undertaken by the late Mr. Walmsley) no ex- pense has been spared-the typographical execution is first-rate-many of the wood- cuts have been re-engraved , others have been added, and the whole appear to greater advantage, owing to the improved style of printing. The author has added a Supplement completing it to the present time, and a Key to the Characters in the Dialogues , who comprise the most eminent,book collectors of the time limited number of
copies have been printed, fewer in fact than of the former edition, the work must soon again be numbered among rare books .
" The Bibliomania is written in dialogues or conversations, and the characters intro- duced are well known book collectors. The
great value of the work is in the Notes, which abound with anecdotes of Books and Book
Collectors, and an Account of the rarer articles in their collections, and the prices at which they were sold. This work has in a great de- gree given a stimulus to the collecting of our early literature, and bibliography in this coun- try ; on which subject it will be always con- sulted as a first authority. "-Lowndes.
" The Bibliomania is evidently formed in
the first instance on the plan of honest Isaac Walton's " Complete Angler ; " with conspicuous
marks of the author's being deeply versed in
the Battle of the Books, ' and a familiar acquaintance with old English Literature, and occasionally with the digressions of Yorick.
Under the shape of dramatic Dialogue, the reader is equally entertained and instructed ;
the abstruser parts, with the historic details ,
being thrown into the form of notes. Many well-drawn characters are introduced, whose names will readily occur to every one in the habit of frequenting the sale rooms described by the author. It would now be useless to pass an encomium on this work, as its merits are so fully established as to have more than doubled the original price of a volume now with difficulty to be obtained. " -Gent.'s Mag.
2003
THOS FROGNALL DIBDIN, D. D.
Engravedto
Water üleurs ly. Surge Zichwood
walahilo,from a Ficture
London Published 1835. by John Major. 71. Great Pussell S
24.
mary
REMINISCENCES
OF
A LITERARY LIFE;
BY THE REVEREND
THOS. FROGNALL DIBDIN, D.D.
FECT QVODPOTY
cient
" These are the Masters that teach without scolding and chastise without stripes '
"9
RICHARD DE BURY.
BIBLIOTALE
DE
LA
LYON
18921 LONDON:
JOHN MAJOR, 71 , GREAT RUSSELL- STREET,
BLOOMSBURY.
MDCCCXXXVI.
༡
320021
LONDON:
PRINTED BY WILLIAM WILCOCKSON, WHITEFRIARS.
ΤΟ
SIR FRANCIS FREELING, BART.
&c. &c. &c.
THIS WORK
IS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED
BY HIS
AFFECTIONATE FRIEND
AND
FAITHFUL SERVANT
THE AUTHOR.
LA
DE
"
VILLE
DE
、
LYON
PREFACE.
"KEEP to Things as much as possible, and
leave Persons as much as possible alone."
"Do not over-feed us with Anecdotes of Books,
but give us as much Personal Anecdote as you
please." Such was the conflicting advice, by
Letter, as well as by word of mouth, under
which I sat down to the composition of this
Work. Recollecting however that an ancient Bard of high classical authority had
said that " the middle way was the safest, " I
resolved to abide by his advice ; and to guide
my adventurous " chariot" between objects
too passive on the one hand, and too active
on the other. It remains to be seen with
what degree of failure or success.
Dr. Johnson has somewhere told us that
Auto-biographies, even of the humblest individuals, are not written without some specific
benefit derivable from their perusal. I will
hope therefore that from a steady and impartial examination of the contents of these
vi PREFACE.
pages, some profit may accrue to the Reader.
It must not, however, be concealed, that the
task of composition has been at times both of
difficult and delicate execution. On the one
hand, there has been such an excess of matter,
or abundance of materials (fromwhichto make
a judicious selection), as to perplex me in the
extreme ; for a literary course of some thirtyfive years is not one of ordinary occurrence.
On the other hand, I have had to struggle
with difficulties so as to avoid giving offence
by the introduction of some names or circumstances in preference to others ; and, above
all, have my anxieties prevailed in bringing
forward, by way of illustration, or evidence,
the testimonies, in the form of letters, of the
LIVING and the DEAD. But, if my heart
have not greatly deceived me, I am willing
to believe that I have, in no one instance,
wounded the feelings of the former, or tarnished the memories of the latter.
The suppression of such evidence would
have been childish, and unworthy of an individual who has mixed so long and so largely
in the world as myself. I have lived in vain
if I cannot boast something like such treasures as these : and if, by the introduction of
PREFACE. vii
such " Testimonies," I have unwittingly contrived to throw my own narrative into comparative shade, I shall be to the full as well
pleased if the reader derive additional gratification in consequence. To me, at this
period of life, and under the operation of
circumstances which have suddenly come
upon me as in the hour of darkness and
difficulty, I look upon this portion of my
" Reminiscences " as upon the bright and
beautiful part of life's picture. I estimate
and treasure these " Testimonies " as my BEST
-my ONLY wealth : binding them about me
as ornaments ofgrace unto my head, and
chains about my neck* ." I am also much deceived, if, in the perusal of some of these
letters (for I will not institute the invidious
task of comparison between them) the reader
be not as agreeably instructed as surprised.
It must not be concealed however that, in
committing many of them to the press, I
have been deeply sensible of what I have
lost by the DECEASE of several of their Authors. Yet, in the length of period described,
66
* See page 300. The only infidelity of which I consider myself to have been guilty, has been, in some instances the qualifying, in others the suppression, of a portion
of the commendation bestowed.
viii PREFACE.
it were both unwise and unreasonable to suppose that ALL should have been preserved to
witness this public evidence of the value of
their communications.
In re- introducing, as it were, my former
works of which the ensuingpages maybe said
to give a sort of apperçu-I have endeavoured equally to avoid a prolixity which might be
wearisome, anda brevitywhich might be superficial or obscure. But some latitude ofrecital
may be tolerated in the account of those more
costly and elaborate performances upon which
the patronage of the Public has been so decidedly bestowed ; and if that patronage have
not led, in the end, to the enrichment of the
author, it has cheered him in gloom and invigorated him in despondency*. Uponfour
works alone there has been an expenditure,
and consequent risk, of TWENTY THOUSAND
POUNDS. Perhaps the personal history of
literature exhibits not many instances of
greater courage and daring. But I was never
willing to believe that an unwearied industry
in the production of works of a good tendency
could ultimately be overlooked by my coun-
* See page 815, post.
+ The Spencer Library, Edes Althorpiana, Bibliographical Decameron, and The Tour.
PREFACE. ix
try ; whilst I felt, and yet strongly feel, that
the quantity of employment it occasioned, in
addition to my own, was a species of PATRIOTISM Which might challenge the approbation of the wise and the good. Indeed, on
the present occasion, the support which I
have derived from so numerous and so respectable a List of Subscribers seems in some
measure to be a confirmation of the truth of
this position ; except that, in many instances,
the warmth of individual friendship may have
been the preponderating motive of action.
It was my first intention to have incorporated in these pages one entire chapter designated as " Flowers ofthe Olden Time; " but
my materials increased so abundantly, and
appeared to be of such varied and edifying
interest, that I resolved, rather than execute such a task superficially, to omit it
altogether.
" Full many a FLOWER is born to bloom unseen,
And waste its fragrance in the desert air.”
One of the greatest Collectors, in times
past, of these " Flowers, " was the celebrated
ARCHBISHOP PARKER :-whose MSS. , deposited in Corpus College, Cambridge, are yet
to be made known. Here also are deposited
X PREFACE.
the Original THIRTY-NINE ARTICLES of the
CHURCH OF ENGLAND, with the subscribing
autographs of the respective bishops ; of late
rendered familiar to us by the very curious
and instructive volume of Dr. Lamb*.
sidering that Nasmith was the first to break
ground in this very extraordinary collection
of MSS. collected by the Archbishop, and
Con-
* Dr. Lamb's work is a quarto volume, printed at the
University Press of Cambridge in 1829, of which only 250
copies were struck off. It is " curious and instructive," as
containing, 1. An Historical Account of the Thirty- Nine
Articles, from the first promulgation of them in 1553, to
their final establishment in 1571 , with two plates offac similes.
2. An exact copy of the Articles of Edward VI., in 1553,
at the end of the little book entitled " Catechismus Brevis
Christiane Religionis." The parts printed in red ink were
omitted in the Articles of 1562. 3. An exact copy of the
Latin Manuscript of the Articles of 1562 ; each page, line,
and word corresponding with the original, with fac similes
ofthe signatures ofthe Archbishops and Bishops. 4. A facsimile ofthe " LITTLE BOOK," to which the Act of Parliament of 13 Elizabeth refers. 5. An exact copy of the
English MS. of the Articles of 1571 , each page, line, and
word corresponding with the original ; withfac similes ofthe
signatures ofthe Archbishops and Bishops. 6. The Latin
edition of Day, printed under the direction of Bishop Jewel
in 1571. 7. The English edition of Jugg and Cawood,
printed under the direction of Bishop Jewel in 1571. Each
of these pieces has a distinct pagination. The reader can
scarcely doubt of the importance of such a work in something beyond a merely bibliographical point of view.
CABLIOTHE
LYON $1892 THEQUE27711 EQUE LADE VILLE DE LYON
0000000000000000000000000
HIEPVS CAN ARIENSIS DEDIT- COLBO
ROC CVM PIXIDE PRO PIFLRE IN OPEROVIO
હ
P. Audinet , sc.
SALT CELLAR OF ARCHBISHOP PARKER.
DESIGNED BY R. B. HARRADEN, FROM THE ORIGINAL IN CORPUS COLLEGE , CAMBRIDGE.
London , Published by John Major, LG Russell St Bloomsbury , Aug.151835.
PREFACE. xi
that his Catalogue* professes to contain only
the heads or titles of the several pieces examined, posterity is under no small obligation
to him for his exertions t.
* His catalogue was published in the Latin language
in 1777, 4to. with a copy, by Tyson, of Hogenberg's rare
portrait of the Archbishop facing the title. It must not be
supposed that the contents of this volume have an exclusive
reference to theological subjects. Far from it : philology
in every department will be found in it ; and poetry and
epistolography in English as well as in Latin. Inter alia,
look at page 54, for a specimen of the " Romance of
St. Grayl. "
" Thanne passeth forth this storye with al
That is cleped ofsom men SEYNT Graal,
Also the SANK RYAL icleped it is
Ofmochel peple with owten mys."
But, as a whole, this library is yet a sort of TERRA INCOGNITA.
+ It had been a joyous day for me, some six years ago,
to have been present at the commemoration of the close of
the third centenary, or jubilee, celebrated at Corpus, ofthe
election of their illustrious Archiepiscopal President to the
Mastership of the College. On that emphatic occasion, all
the plate left to the College by the Archbishop was exhibited upon the banqueting-table.
The OPPOSITE ENGRAVING ofthe Salt-cellar of the Archbishop is taken from a drawing by R. B. Harraden, Esq.
of Cambridge, from the original plate of silver and gold :
being precisely one half the dimensions of the original. The
drawing is now in the possession of His Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury, at Lambeth ; he being the NINETEENTH successor of Matthew Parker. It is most faithfully
executed by the burin of M. Audinet.
xii PREFACE.
But although the " Flowers" of which I had
contemplated the gathering, might not have
been of such ancient growth or pungent fragrance as those in the library of Archbishop
Parker, yet, I think, from the subjoined
specimen*, the reader would not have ob-
* Of all men, living or dead, it strikes me that not ONE
would have relished the ensuing " anecdote" more than the
late Sir Walter Scott, Bart.:-and I feel abundantly persuaded that he would have contrived to have brought the
venerable EARL OF SHREWSBURY, or some similar character-for the sake of his speech-into one of his historical
novels. I selected this " sparkling bit" from a very grave
but wholesome treatise-supposed to have been written by
our Archbishop Himself, and printed in the black letter by
Jugge, without date, in the reign of Elizabeth-having for
title, “ The Defence ofPriestes Marriages,” 4to.
" It chanced that there came a French ambassador to
the king's highness, King Henry the Eight ( I trust God
hath his soul) with letters, I trow, from the French king,
not long before that sent to him from the holy father of
Rome. This ambassador, sitting at the counsel table, began
to set up a stout countenance, with a weak brain, and
carped French exceedingly fast ; which he thought should
have been his only sufficient commendation of them all,
that were at the table, that he could speak so readily. The
matter of his talk was universal everywhere. But the substance was, partly, much noting the gluttony ofEnglishmen,
which devoured so much victual in the land : partly, magnifying the great utility and necessity of the French tongue,
which he noted to be almost throughout the world frequented. And in his conference, he marvelled of divers
noblemen that were present, for that they could not keep
PREFACE. xiii
jected to a more general acquaintance with
them.
him talk, or yet could not so much as understand him, to
perceive his great wit.
"Among the number of the lords, there sat the old
honourable Captain, the Lord Earl ofShrewsbury, looking
at his meat, and gave neither ear nor countenance to this
folie man, but gave others leave to talk, and sat, as he
might, shaking head, and hands, in his palsy, which was
testimony enough, whether he were not in his days a warrior, lying abroad in the field, to take air (qu ? ) of the
ground. This French ambassador was offended with him ;
and said, ' What an honour were it for yonder Old Nobleman, if he could speak the French tongue. Surely, it is a
great lack to his nobility ?' One of the lords that kept
him talk, asking first leave of this monsire to report part
of the communication to the Lord Shrewsbury, made report
thereof, yet in most courteous manner, with easy and favourable rehearsal, as might touch a truth.
6
" When he heard it, where before his head, by the great
age, was almost grovelling on the table, he roused himself
up in such wise, that he appeared, in length of body, as
much as he was thought ever in all his life before. And
knitting his brows, he laid his hand on his dagger, and set
his countenance in such sort, that the French hardie ambassador turned colour wonderfully. Saith the French
whoreson so ?" saith he; marry, tell the French dog again,
by sweet St. Cuthbert, if I knew that I had but one pestilent French word in all my body, I would take my dagger
and dig it out-before I rose from the table. And tell that
tawnie whoreson again, howsoever he have been hungerstarved himself at home in France, that if we should not
eat our beasts, and make victual of them as fast as we do,
they would so increase beyond measure, that they would
make victual of us, and eat us up.'
"When these words were reported again to the French
xiv PREFACE.
The principal, and indeed besetting, difficulty against which I have had to struggle,
has been the constant introduction, if not
obtrusion, of Self. I have been inevitably
compelled to put that " Self" in the foreground, as it were, of every picture delineated ; but not, I trust, at the expense of
injuring the effect of the middle or background of the composition. The reader
will perhaps admit the impracticability of
rendering the matter otherwise ; but to console, or to reconcile him, he may be assured
that in most instances the middle or background will be found to be the most picturesque or instructive portion of the picture.
To keep up the metaphor. TIME, which is of
so much use in mellowing the colours and
blending the tints ofthe pencil, seems to be not
less occasionally serviceable in harmonising
the productions of the pen. Much that
appear raw or glaring, in the following pages,
may, in the course of a few revolving years,
may
guest, he spoiled no more victual at the dinner after that,
but drank wondrous oft ; which, whether it was his convenance, because he had left talking, or whether for that he
was inwardly dry, the reporter of this tale could tell me
no further ; but said, that his eyes were never off him [the
Earl of Shrewsbury] all that dinner while after ! "-P. 128.
PREFACE. XV
assume a milder and a more mellow tone.
The hand, which has recorded the events or
characters described therein, will have ceased
to act ; and we may be then induced to tolerate, for the sake of the Dead, what with
reluctance we should concede to the claims
of the Living. Posterity will hold with an
even hand the balance of literary merit and
literary claims ; and in that balance I hope
to be found among those writers " who," in
the language ofJohnson, " have given ARDOUR
TO VIRTUE and CONFIDENCE TO TRUTH. "
Exning Vicarage, Dec. 1 , 1835.
T. F. D.
L
YFZELD

SHOTHÈQUE
xvii
LYON
18324
LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS.
HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS THE DUKE OF SUSSEX,
K.G.
Abbott, Thomas, Esq.
Abel, Messrs. Booksellers, Northampton
ACHESON, LORD
Adamson, John, Esq. F.S.A.
Large paper.
Addams, Richard, Esq.
Addams, Dr. Jesse
Adderley, Thomas, Esq.
Adolphus, John, Esq. F.S.A.
Alsager, Henry, Esq.
Amyot, Thomas, Esq. F.R.S. Treas. S.A.
Anders, John, Esq.
Anderson, Rev. James
Andrews, Mr.
Appleyard, George, Esq.
Arch, Messrs. John and Arthur Twelve copies.
Arnard, Elias, Esq.
Arnett, Mr. John
Asher, Mr. Berlin Two copies.
Audinet, Mr. P. Engraver
Auterac, Joseph, Esq.
Backhouse, John, Esq.
Baillie, Hunter William, Esq.
Bain, Mr.
Four copies.
Baker, Mr. George, Historian of the County of Northampton
Bandinel, Rev. Dr. F.S.A. Keeperof the Bodleian Library
BANNATYNE CLUB.
Bannerman, James, Esq.
Barling, Rev. Thomas
Barlow, Mrs.
xviii SUBSCRIBERS.
Barnard, Benjamin, Esq. F.S.A.
Baron, N. T. Esq.
Barrett, Rev. Dr.
Bartlett,
-
Esq.
Barton, Dr. Edward
Barwis, John, Esq.
Bateman, William , Esq. F.S.A.
Bazelgette, Mrs.
Bazett, Miss
Five copies.
Beale, Daniel, Esq.
Bedford, DUKE OF Large and Smallpaper.
Bentham, William, Esq. F.S.A. Three copies.
BERNARD, LADY Two copies.
Bernard, William, Esq.
Berry, R. S. Esq. Large paper.
BIBLIOPHILES FRANCAIS, SOCIETÉ DES Six copies.
BIBLIOTHEQUE DU ROI, à Paris Large paper.
Bidwell, Thomas, Esq.
Bigge, C. W. Esq.
Birdwood, Rev. William Imwood, M.A.
Birdsall, Mr. Bookseller, Northampton
Biswich, James, Esq.
Bliss, Rev. Dr. F.S.A. Registrar of the University of
Oxford
Blore, Edward, Esq. D.C.L. F.S.A.
Blower, Joseph, Esq.
Bohn, Mr. Henry, Bookseller
Bohn, Mr. James, Bookseller
BOLLAND, Mr. BARON
Bolton, James, Esq.
Boone, Messrs. Booksellers
Five copies.
Five copies.
Twenty-five copies.
Twelve copies.
Six copies.
Two copies.
Borradaile, Abraham, Esq.
Borradaile, John-Watson, Esq.
Bosworth, Rev. Dr. F.R.S. F.S.A.
Botfield, Beriah, Esq. One Large, two Small paper.
Bouch, Mr. Bookseller, Liverpool
Bouverie, Rev. John
SUBSCRIBERS. xix
Braham, John, Esq.
Brent, Miss.
Brightwen, J. Esq.
Four copies.
Bright, B. H. Esq.
BRISTOL, BISHOP OF Two copies.
Broadley, Henry, Esq. M.A. F.S.A. Large paper.
Brockett, John Trotter, Esq. F.S.A.
BRODIE, SIR BENJAMIN, BART.
Brodie, P. B. Esq.
Brown, Charles, Esq.
Six copies.
Brumelly, Henry, Esq.
Bryant, Miss
Brymer, Rev. William
BUCCLEUGH, DUKE OF, K.G. Large and Smallpaper.
Buck, George, Esq.
Two copies.
BUNBURY, SIR HENRY, BART. Two copies.
Burney, Rev. Charles Parr, D.D. F.R.S. F.S.A.
Burr, Miss Two copies.
Burrell, John Palfrey, Esq.
Four copies.
BUTLER, REV SAMUEL, ARCHDEACON, D.D. F.R.S.
F.S.A. One Large and two small paper.
Butler, Rev. Edward, D.D.
Byfield, Mr. John Four copies.
Cadell, Mr. Robert, Bookseller, Edinburgh
CAMPBELL, LADY Two copies.
Campbell, Rev. A.M.
CANNING, VISCOUNTESS Two copies.
CANNING, HON. CHARLES JOHN
Cape, Major
Capel, John, Esq.
Carey and Hurts, Booksellers
CARLISLE, EARL OF Two copies.
Carroll, George, Esq.
Largepaper.
Caton, Rev. Richard, M.A.
Cave, Mrs. Otway
Cave, Rev. John, M.A.
b2
XX SUBSCRIBERS.
CAWDOR, EARL Large paper.
Chandler, Rev. Dr. DEAN OF CHICHESTER
Chapman, Henry, Esq.
Charlewood, Colonel
Charlton, Rev. William Henry, M.A.
Charnley, Mr. Newcastle-on-Tyne
Chatfield, Charles, Esq. F.S.A.
Chauncey, N. I. Esq.
Chelmsford Philological Society
CHETWODE, SIR JOHN, BART.
CHICHESTER, BISHOP OF, F.R.S. F.S.A. Two copies.
Children, John George, Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A. Two copies.
Clarke, E. M. Esq. Large paper.
Two copies.
CLIFFORD, SIR AUGUSTUS
CLIVE, VISCOUNT
Cobbett, Philip, Esq.
COCKAYNE, HON. MRS.
Colborne, Mr. Thomas Two copies.
Colborne, J. Esq.
Collins, Mr.
Combes, William, Esq. Four copies.
Compton, Miss.
Compton, S. W. Esq. Five copies.
Compton, Charles, Esq.
Corney, Benjamin, Esq.
COTTON, REV. ARCHDEACON, D.D.
Cox, Edward Townsend, M.D.
Cox, J. C. Esq.
Cox, J. S. Esq. Cheltenham
Craig, I. T. Gibson, Esq. Edinburgh
Crawley, John, Esq.
Cullum, Rev. T. Gery, Bart.
Cureton, Rev. William
Curtis, L. J. Esq.
Currer, Miss One Large, and five Small paper.
CURZON, HON. ROBERT, M. P.
CUST, HON. SIR EDWARD, M.P.
SUBSCRIBERS. xx i
Dallas, Robert, Esq.
Dalton, Mrs.
Dalton, Rev. James
Danvers, Charles, Esq.
Darby, Francis, Esq.
DAVID'S, ST. BISHOP OF Two copies.
Davies, Mr. John, Bookseller, Shrewsbury Two copies.
Day, Miss
Debure, Messrs. Paris
Deacon, Samuel, Esq.
Deighton, Messrs. Booksellers, Cambridge Six copies.
DELAWARR, EARL
Delmar, Mrs. Twelve copies.
DENMAN, LORD Large paper.
Devon and Exeter Library
DEVONSHIRE, H. G. DUKE OF, K.G. Large paper.
Dicey, T. E. Esq.
D'Israeli, I. Esq. D.C.L. F.S.A. Two copies.
Dobie, James, Esq. Bieth
Dodd, Rev. Philip, Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty
Dormer, Daniel, Esq.
Douglass, Mrs.
D'Oyly, Rev. George, D.D. Two copies.
Drury, Rev. Henry, M.A. F.R.S. F.S.A. Four copies.
Durand, Delançon, Bibliophile Parisien
Dyce, Rev. Alexander
Dyson, William, Esq. Two copies.
Eaton, Richard, Esq.
Eaton, Richard, jun. Esq. M. P.
EGREMONT, EARL OF, F.R.S. F.S.A.
Ekins, Rev. Thomas
Elliotson, R. Esq. M. D.
Evans, Hugh Robert, Esq.
Evans, Hugh Robert, junior, Esq.
Faircloth, Richard, Esq.
Falconer, Thomas, Esq. M.D.
xxii SUBSCRIBERS.
Faulds, Andrew, Esq. Barnsley
Fazakerly, John N. Esq. M.P.
Fellowes, Rev. Dr.
FIFE, EARL OF
Fields, Andrew, Esq.
Fisher, Robert, Esq.
Flassans, Madame de
Flesher, Gilbert, Esq.
Two copies.
Fletcher, William, Esq. Dublin
Flood, Mr.
Forbes, Mrs.
Forshall, Rev. Josiah, M.A. F.R.S. F.S.A. British
Museum
Fordham, John Edward, Esq.
Foss, Henry, Esq.
France, Mrs. Two copies.
Fraser, Rev. Philip
FREELING, SIRFrancis, Bart. F.S.A. Large, two Small.
Freeling, G. H. Esq. Two copies.
Freeling, Mrs.
Freeling, Miss
Freeling, J. Clayton, Esq . Largepaper.
Freeling, Rivers, Esq.
Freeling, Charles, Esq.
Freeman, Rev. W. G.
Freeman, Charles, Esq.
Furlong, I. S. Esq. Dublin
Gamden, Rev. J.
Geeves, Mr. Bookseller Five copies.
Gilfillan, James, Esq.
Gilly, Rev. W. S. Prebendary of Durham
GLYNN, SIR STEPHEN R. BART. F.S.A.
Goddard, Rev. R.
Goodall, Rev. George, D.D. Provost of Eton College
Goodman, Edward, Esq.
Gordon, Rev. William
Two copies.
SUBSCRIBERS. xxiii
Farren, John Edward, Esq.
GOSFORD, EARL
Gosset, Rev. Thomas
Gostling, Dr.
Grant, Miss
Greenwell, James Hugo, Esq.
Greenwood, Rev. Dr.
Greenwood, Thomas, Esq.
Two copies.
GRENVILLE, RT. HON. THOMAS Large paper.
Greville, Charles Cavendish, Esq.
GREY, EARL de
Grosvenor, General Two copies.
Grosvenor, Mrs.
Gurney, Hudson, Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A. Two copies.
Gutch, J. M. Esq.
Haggitt, Rev. George, M.A.
Halford, Rev. Thomas, M.A. Two copies.
College, Oxford
Hamilton, Mr.
Hall, Rev. George William, D.D. Master of Pembroke
Hammick, Rev. St. Vincent Love, M.A.
Hammond, William, Esq.
Hanson, I. O. Esq.
Harraden, R. B. Esq.
Harrop, Mr. Altrincham
Hart, Rev. George A. F.
Hasted, Rev. Henry, M.A.
Hartshorne, Rev. Charles Henry, M.A.
Hatchett, Charles, Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A. Two copies.
Hatton, Mrs. Four copies.
Hawtrey, Rev. Edw. Craven, D.D. F.S.A. Head Master
of Eton School Large paper.
Haye, Henry, Esq.
Heber, Miss.
Heber, Miss Harriet Sarah
Heath, James, Esq.
Hennah, Henry, Esq.
xxiv SUBSCRIBERS.
Hensfall, John, Esq.
Hester, G. Esq.
Hetherington, Miss
Hhone, Mr.
Hibbert, George, Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A. Large paper.
Hill, John, Esq. Two copies.
Hill, Rev. N. Isaac, M.A.
Hill, Rev. G. R. O.
Hill, George, Esq.
HOARE, SIR RICHARD COLT, BART. F.R.S. F.S.A.
Hoare, Henry Merrik, Esq.
Hodges, William, Esq.
Hodges and Smith, Booksellers, Dublin
Large paper.
Two copies.
Hodgkinson, Mr.
Hodgson, Mr.
Holding, James, Esq.
Holford, John Josiah, Esq. Three copies.
Holland, Henry, Esq. Two copies.
Hollist, Anthony, Esq.
Holmes, John, Esq . F.S.A.
Hope, Henry Philip, Esq. Twelve copies.
Hope, Alexander, Esq.
Horseman, Rev. John, M.A. Two copies.
Hovenden, I. E. Esq.
Howlett, Rev. John, M.A.
Hughes, John, Esq.
Hume, Joseph, Esq. M. P.
Hunter, Benjamin, Esq.
Hustler, Rev. John, M.A.
Jalland, Boswell, Esq.
James, Rev. John, D.D. Prebendary of Peterborough
James, Mr.
Two copies.
James, T. S. Esq.
Jarman, G. F. Esq.
INGLIS, SIR ROBERT HARRY, BART. M. P. LL.D.
F.R.S. F.S.A.
SUBSCRIBERS. XXV
Ingraham, Edward D. Esq. Philadelphia
Ingram, Rev. James, D.D. F.S.A. President of Trinity
College, Oxford
Jones, Rev. John, M.A. Large paper.
Jones, Jenkin, Esq.
Isaacson, W. Parr, Esq.
Kennedy, Rev. Rann, M.A.
Kennedy, Rev. Benjamin, M.A.
KENYON, GEORGE LORD, F.S.A. Four copies.
Kensit, Rev. George Robert, M.A. Two copies.
Kerr, John, Esq. Glasgow Three copies.
King, James, Esq.
Kitson, John, Esq.
Laing, Messrs. W. and L. Edinburgh
Laing, David, Esq. Edinburgh
Laing, Rev. Francis, M.A.
Lang, Mrs.
Lang, Miss.
Lang, C. P. Esq.
Langdon, Mr.
Langley, William, Esq.
Langston and Haughton, Booksellers
Lawrence, Thomas, Esq.
Leckie, Mrs.
Lee, Rev. L.
LEEDS, DUKE OF
Lewis, W. L. Esq.
Lewis, Mr. Frederick Charles
Lewis, Mr. Charles
LICHFIELD, EARL OF
LINCOLN, Earl of
Livie, Mrs.
Two copies.
Large and Five small.
LITTLEDALE, MR. JUSTICE, M.A. F.S.A. Six copies.
Littledale, Edward, Esq. Three copies.
Littledale, Edward, jun. Esq.
Littledale, R. H. Esq.
xxvi SUBSCRIBERS.
LLANDAFF, BISHOP OF, F.S.A. Three copies.
Livingston, Colonel
Lockwood, Miss
Loder, Esq.
Long, Walter, Esq.
Longley, Rev. Thomas, D.D. Head Master of Harrow
School
Lucena, James, Esq.
McDouall, Col.
Mackenzie, I. W. Esq. Edinburgh
Maitland, Thomas, Esq. Advocate, Edinburgh
Major, Mr. Bookseller Fifty copies.
Man, Mr. William , Reading
Marie, Major
Markland, James Heywood, Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A. Ten copies.
Markland, Mrs. Bath
Martin, Mr.
Masquerier, John James, Esq.
Maude, Francis, Esq. F.S.A.
Maule, Rev. John
Melford Book Society.
Five copies.
Meredith, John, Esq.
Merest, James, Esq.
Merivale, Mr. Commissioner, F.S.A. Two copies.
Messenger, Thomas, Esq.
Miller, William, Esq.
Millington, Rev. R. Henry, M.A.
Milman, Rev. H. H. Prebendary of Westminster.
MORPETH, VISCOUNT, M. P.
Mordaunt, W. N. Esq.
Morgan, Thomas, Esq. One Large andfive Small paper.
Morice, John, Esq. F.S.A.
Morrell, Baker, Esq.
Morrice, Rev. Thomas
Morris, Charles, Esq.
Morris, John, Esq.
Morrison, James, Esq. Two copies.
SUBSCRIBERS. xxvii
MURRAY, SIR ARCHIBALD, BART.
Murchison, R. I. Esq. Two copies.
Musgrave, T. M. Esq.
Napier, Mr. Professor, Edinburgh
Neale, J. P. Esq.
Neeld, Mrs.
Neeld, Miss
Neeld, Joseph, Esq. M.P. Large and two Small paper.
Neeld, John, Esq. M.P. Two copies.
NEWCASTLE, HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF, K.G.
Newnham, Robert, Esq.
Nichols, Miss
Nichols, John Bowyer, Esq. F.S.A.
Nicholson, Mrs. General
Nicholson, Alexander, Esq. F.S.A. Large paper.
Nicol, William, Esq. Pall Mall
NIGHTINGALL, LADY Two copies.
NOIALLE, BARONESS DE
NORTHAMPTON, MARQUIS of
Norwich Chapter Book Society
NORWICH, BISHOP OF
Norwich Book Society
Nugee, Andrew, Esq.
Ody, R. S. Esq.
Ord, J. P. Esq.
Otter, Rev. George
Page, Admiral
Palatiano, Count
Parker, Henry, Esq.
Pawsey, Mr. F. Ipswich
Two copies.
Payne, T. I. Esq.
Peacock, W. B. Esq.
Pedder, Robert, Esq. Five copies.
PEMBROKE COLLEGE LIBRARY, Oxford
Penfold, Rev. George Saxby, D.D.
xxviii SUBSCRIBERS.
Penrose, Rev. Dr.
PEPYS, SIR WILLIAM W. BART.
Pepys, William Hasledine, Esq.
Percival, Samuel, Esq.
PETERBOROUGH, BISHOP OF, F.S.A.
Petit, Louis Hayes, Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A.
Petrie, Henry, Esq. F.S.A. Keeper of H.
in the Tower of London
Pettigrew, T. J. Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A.
Two copies.
Two copies.
M. Records
Five copies.
Phelps, John Delafield, Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A. Four copies.
PHILLIPPS, SIR THOMAS, BART. F.R.S. F.S.A. Four
Phillips, Thomas, Esq. R.A. F.R.S. F.S.A.
copies.
Phillips, John, Esq.
Phillips, Charles, Esq.
Phillpotts, T. G. Esq. Monmouth
Pickering, Mr. W. Bookseller Twelve copies.
Pickering, Mr. Bookseller, Royston
Pigott, J. H. S. Esq. F.S.A.
Pilgrim, Charles James, Esq. Two copies.
Piper, Edward, Esq.
Pocock, Charles Innes, Esq.
Ponton, Thomas, Esq. F.S.A. Four copies.
Porter, Miss Jane.
Porter, Sir Robert Kerr
Portman, Mrs.
Portman, Edward Berkeley, Esq. Three copies.
POTT, REV. ARCHDEACON, M.A.
Powell, John, Esq.
Poynder, Edward, Esq.
Poyntz, W. G. Esq. M.P.
Pratt, Rev. I. S.
Price, J. Esq. M.D.
Prodgers, Rev. Edwin, M.A. Two copies.
Rackett, Rev. Thomas, M.A. F.R.S. F.S.A.
Raine, Rev. James, M.A.
Rawlinson, John, Esq. Two copies.
SUBSCRIBERS. xxix
Ray, Mr. John, Barnsley
Reeve, Mrs.
Remington, J. Esq. F.S.A.
Two copies.
Rennell, Rev. Thomas, D.D. F.S.A. DEAN OF WINCHESTER.
Repton, John Adey, Esq. F.S.A.
RICHMOND, HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF, K.G.
Robertson, A. Esq. M.D. Northampton
Robertson, Francis, Esq.
Robinson, Mr. M.
Robson, Miss.
Robson, John Udney, Esq.
Two copies.
Rodd, Mr. Bookseller
Rogers, W. L. Esq.
Rogers, Mr. Bookseller, Newmarket
Rolls, John, Esq. Two copies.
DE ROOS, HON. MR. DUNCOMBE.
Rose, Rev. Henry, M.A.
dalen College, Oxford Two copies.
Routh, Rev. Martin Joseph, D.D. President of MagROXBURGHE, HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF Two Copies.
Rusher, Mr. Bookseller
Rusher, Mr. jun.
Rutherford, Andrew, Esq.
Sainsbury, Miss
St. Barbe, Charles, Esq. F.S.A.
Schneider, Rev. Henry, M.A.
Schneider, Robert Wilmot, Esq.
Scott, Anthony, Esq.
Severne, Samuel Amy, Esq. Three copies.
Severne, John Michael, Esq.
Setchell, Mr. Bookseller
Sharpe, Mr. Bookseller Twelve copies.
Shaw, James, Esq.
Shaw, Charles, Esq.
Shrewsbury Library
Singer, S. Weller, Esq. F.S.A. Two copies.
XXX SUBSCRIBERS.
Sisson, Rev. Lawrence, D.D.
Skinner, Mrs.
Skullthorp, Thomas, Esq.
Slade, Philip, Esq.
Slaney, R. Esq.
Smith, Horace, Esq.
Smith, Rev. Dr.
Smith, William, Esq.
Somerwell, W. Esq.
Snare, Mr. Bookseller One Large and Small paper.
Sotheby, Messrs. J. and Leigh Two copies.
Southwark Literary Society
Spedding, Anthony, Esq.
Speidell, Rev. Thomas, M.A. Two copies.
Spring, Henry, Esq.
Large paper.
Squire, Rev. Edward, M.A.
Stephenson, Maj. - Gen Sir Benjamin Charles, K.C.H.
F.S.A.
Stevenson,
Story, Mrs.
Esq.
Strafford, I. C. Esq. Cheltenham
Streatfeild, Rev. Thomas, M.A. F.S.A.
STRONG, REV. ARCHDEACON, D.D.
Strong, Mr. Bookseller, Bristol
Three copies.
Styleman, Esq.
Suckling, Rev. Alfred Inigo, M.A.
Surtees, Mrs.
SUTHERLAND, Duke of Large paper.
Swann, James, Esq. Ensham
Sykes, Mrs.
Sykes, Rev. Christopher, M.A.
Talboys, Mr. Robert, Bookseller, Oxford Four copies.
Taylor, Mrs.
Taylor, Robert, Esq.
Taylor, R. S. Esq.
Tennant, William, Esq.
Terry, Rev. Michael Two copies.
SUBSCRIBERS. xxxi
Tewart, Preston, Esq.
Tewart, Edward, Esq.
Thackeray, Rev. George, D.D. Provost of King's
College, Cambridge Two copies.
Thompson, Jonathan, Esq.
Thompson, William, Esq.
Thomson, Abraham, Esq.
Thomson, Henry U. Esq. M.D. Two copies.
Thomson, Richard, Esq.
Thomson, Thomas, Esq. Advocate Two copies.
Thorpe, Mr. Bookseller Twelve copies.
THURLOW, LORD Large paper.
TOBIN, SIR JOHN Large paper.
Tobin, Miss.
Tobin, Rev. John, M.A.
TODD, VENERABLE ArchDEACON, M.A. F.S.A. Two
Tooke, William, Esq. M.P. F.R.S.
Town, Ithuriel, Esq. New York
copies.
Large paper.
Townsend, Rev. G. Prebendary of Durham
Trevelyan, William Calverley, Esq. F.R.S.
Tucker, Messrs. and Son, Christ Church
Turnbull, W. B. D.D. Esq.
Turner, Dawson, Esq. F.R.S. F.S.A. One Large andfive
Small copies.
Turner, Charles, Esq. F.R.S. Two copies.
Turton, Rev. Thomas, D.D. DEAN OF PETERBOROUGH
Utterson, Edward Vernon, Esq. F.S.A. Five copies.
Valpy, Rev. Richard, D.D. F.S.A. Five copies.
Valpy, A. J. Esq. M.A.
Valsamachi, Lady Two copies.
VERNON, LORD Large paper.
Vernon, Edward, Esq.
Wakefield, Charles James, Esq. Two copies.
Walker, John, Esq.
Walmesley, Edward, Esq. Six copies.
xxxii SUBSCRIBERS.
Walpole, Rev. Robert, M.A.
Ward, George, Esq.
Wardell, John, Esq.
Watson, T. J. Esq.
Watt, James, Esq.
Way, Rev. William
Weale, Mr.
Webb, Daniel Hale, Esq.
Welch, George, Esq.
Two copies.
Weltden, Mrs.
WESTMINSTER, MARQUIS OF
Wheatley, Mr. Benjamin Eight copies.
Wheeler, Henry J.
White, Mrs. Kearney
Whiting, James, Esq. Two copies.
Wilbraham, George, Esq. M. P. Two copies.
Wilbraham, Miss Eliza
Wilkie, David, Esq. R.A.
Williams Three copies.
, Mr. Cheltenham
Williams, Miss
Williams, J. Bickerton, Esq. LL.D. F.S.A. Shrewsbury
Wilson, Rev. Plympton, M.A.
Wilson, Colonel
WINCHESTER, BISHOP OF
Wingfield, Charles, Esq.
Wintle, Rev. Thomas, M.A.
Wolferstan, Mrs.
Wolley, Mrs.
Woolcombe, Henry, Esq.
Worthington, W. H. Esq.
Wrake, T. F. Esq.
WRANGHAM, REV. ARCHDEACON Two copies.
Wray, Robert, Esq.
Three copies.
Wright, Mr. James
Wrightson, B. W. Esq. M. P.
Wynter, Rev. Dr. President of St. John's College, Oxford
Yatman, William, Esq.
YORK, HIS GRACE THE ARCHBISHOP OF
D
BIBLIOTH
LYS
CORRECTIONS.
Page 18, line 3 from bottom, for occupy, read occupies.
19, 12, " (called a Snow," &c.
151,
235,
277,
314,
319,
324,
327,
358,
375,
396,
397,
459,
-
-
-
-
10 from bottom, for National, read Cabinet.
11 from bottom, for in, read as.
8 from bottom, for Langton, read Langdon.
9 from bottom, for geniman, read gentleman.
17 of note, for contiguities, read Antiquities.
26 of note, for know, read knew.
5 of note, for have, read having.
10 from bottom, for History of Durham, read History of the county of Durham.
last but one, for 18, read 81 .
8 of note, for Stedmere, read Sledmere.
5 of note, for Niebührh, read Niebühr.
6 of text, for loco, read foco.
3 of note, for through, read throughout.
18 of note, for Roxburghe, read Buccleugh.
595, for superveni, read supervenit.
665, bottom line, for When, read Where.
683, line 3 of note, for Doubtlessly, read Doubtless.
Page 195. The “ Two Pilgrims in Grey" was published in one of Mr.
Ackermann's " Forget me not, " with a plate from a drawing by Westall.
Page 384. The anecdote here recorded of the death of Mr. James
Boswell, was not communicated to me by Mr. Markland ; but by a common friend of the deceased and myself.

LIST OF PLATES.
Portrait of the Author to face Title.
Archbishop Parker's Salt-cellar, p. xi. (Preface).
Portrait of Francis Douce, Esq. •
Initial Letter, B (referred to at p. 910)
Portrait of Roger Wilbraham, Esq.
The Library, Eshton Hall.
Vol. I. Page.
• 312
· 345
408
Vol. II. 557
769
• 770
952
Assumption of the Virgin
Demons
Interior of the Drawing Room of Eshton Hall
Child with a Cardinal's Hat, from a Manuscript in the possession
of Sir John Tobin
HOTHBRUG
WE
LA
LYON
1892-
ALLE
974

BIBLIOTHER
LYON
7892
REMINISCENCES,
&c. &c. &c.
AVILLE
CHAPTER I.
PARENTAL HISTORY.
My boast is not that I deduce my birth
From loins enthroned, and rulers of the earth ;
But higher far my proud pretensions rise—
The son of parents pass'd into the skies ! "
COWPER: Verses on his Mother's Portrait.
AFTER a good deal of anxious consideration, I
have resolved to begin quite at the beginning. I
have resolved, from a conscientious impulse which
it were as difficult to describe as I find it to be
impossible to resist, -to start, on these REMINISCENCES, with a tribute of affectionate respect to
the memory of my Parents. And yet, I have not
the slightest remembrance of them. They both
died when I had scarcely attained my fourth year ;
but not without leaving behind those testimonies or
memorials, of worth and excellence, mingled with
too many evidences of misfortune and affliction, which
render such memorials too permanently engraven on
the mind of their offspring.
B
2 PARENTAL HISTORY.
My father, Thomas Dibdin, was the Toм BowLING of his younger brother, Charles Dibdin : a
name, synonymous with all that is incomparable in
the nautical ballad-poetry of our country. Charles
Dibdin, my paternal uncle, made the Ocean the
principal element of his muse. No poet before him
had ever dwelt so much, and almost so exclusively,
upon its characteristics and attributes. He peopled
it with a set of human beings peculiarly his own.
Whether its surface were rippled with the breeze,
or its depths agitated by the storm, the sailor that
was borne upon that surface was always the genuine
Tar of Great Britain. Whether directing his course
"under easy sail * " into the harbour where parent,
wife, or former messmate might dwell -whether
rushing into the shock of battle, or braving the wild
uproar of the elements t-still, the love of kindred
* "Sweet is the ship, that, under sail,
Spreads her white bosom to the gale,
Sweet, oh ! sweet, the flowing can ;
Sweet to poise the labouring oar,
That tugs us to our native shore.
When the boatswain pipes the barge to man,
Sweet sailing in the favouring breeze ;
But oh, much sweeter than all these,
Is Jack's delight-his LOVELY NAN."
+ "Blow high, blow low,
Let tempests tear the mainmast by the board !—"
In this wild ballad, which has ever struck me as one of the most
spirited and tender of its class, and which was also the author's first
sea-song, the sailor solaces himself, in the very phrensy of the elements,
" In hopes, on shore
To be once more23
with Her, who divides with him the empire of his heart. The following
PARENTAL HISTORY. 3
and of country was ever uppermost in that sailor's
bosom. And how admirably was the ocean itself,
under every varying breeze and climate, under every
is singularly sweet and tranquil, after the violence and bluster of the
preceding.
"And on that night, when all the crew
The memory of their former lives,
O'er flowing cans of flip renew,
And drink their sweathearts and their wives,
I'll heave a sigh, and think on thee :
And as the ship rolls through the sea,
The burden of my song shall be,
Blow high, blow low ! " &c.
The sentiment of Dibdin's Sailor is peculiarly his own. It is never
degraded by vulgarity, nor enervated by that sort of mawkish sensibility which might be construed into cowardice. So felicitously, sometimes, is the tender passion described, that, in ordinary life, one
would think it to be the sole inmate of a sailor's bosom. The Corydons
and Damons, which cut such a figure in the days of " good Queen
Anne," seem, comparatively, to have been mere mechanical puppetsthe vehicles of whining exclamation and artificial rapture. Let—but
among thousands of beauties the task of selection is at once unneces→
sary and endless-only let the reader select that which begins
'Twas post meridian, half-past four,—
where, at the conclusion of each stanza, our honest tar solaces himself
with "looking on the moon and thinking of his Nancy." Can any
thing exceed the natural tenderness of the conclusion of the second and
third stanzas ? The other sailors are indulging themselves in the
clamorous mirth of the " grog," when our tar is little disposed to sympathise with their merriment.
" I, little to their mirth inclined,
While tender thoughts rushed on my fancy ;
And my warm sighs increased the windLooked on the moon, and thought of Nancy.
"Round went the can, the jest, the glee,
While tender wishes filled each fancy ;
And when, in turn, it came to me,
I heaved a sigh, and toasted Nancy."
B 2
PARENTAL HISTORY.
dark shadow and golden gleam, depicted by the same
felicitous pencil !
I have said that my father was the Tom Bowling
described in the well-known and justly-celebrated
ballad of Charles Dibdin's beginning thus :
" Here, a sheer hulk, lies poor TOM BOWLING,
The darling of our crew :" &c.
From what I have been able to learn, his figure was
tall, robust, and proportionate ; in strict accordance
with the words of the same ballad—
" His form was of the manliest beauty *,
His heart was kind and soft."
But, with reference to the " battle"-as alluded to in the text- what
is there of ballad- composition that approaches, within many degrees,
the " Poor Jack" of Charles Dibdin ? How thoroughly wise, good,
brave, gentle, and considerate, are the sentiments there uttered-and
yet the whole ballad is so mixed up with frequent and quaint technical
phrases, or expressions, as to render it perfectly characteristic and inimitable. I remember when this ballad was heard upon almost every
hand-organ in the street ; as often with, as without, the words. From
the town it quickly circulated into the country. In the uplands and
lowlands-by plough- boy, or waggoner-among " hewers of wood and
drawers of water,"-its cheering burden
"There's a sweet little cherub that sits up aloft
To keep watch for the life of Poor Jack,"
seemed to smooth the brow of care and to soften the severity of toil.
The religious complexion of the whole ballad is obviously striking and
instructive. The author parted with his share or property in it too
soon ; and the purchaser is said to have realised five hundred pounds by
this INDIVIDUAL BALLAD !
* The reader will probably smile at the following anecdote. So singularly were the days of my youth past, that I had never seen any one who
had had personal knowledge of my father. But, towards my twenty-
PARENTAL HISTORY. 5
It should seem that, from early youth the ruling
passion in each brother quickly and powerfully developed itself. Myfather took to the sea ; and with
such zeal and success, that, at the age of twentyfive ( 1756) he commanded the " Eagle Gally, " a
sloop-of-war-in the chops of the Bristol Channel
-carrying twenty-eight guns, with a complement
of two hundred and twenty men. My uncle, after
an education for the church, at Winchester school,
became a candidate, at the age of fourteen, for the
situation of organist to the cathedral. His youth
alone, is said to have stood in the way of his success.
At the precocious age of sixteen, he wrote and composed an opera, in two acts, called the Shepherd's
Artifice *. "
66
first year, being in company with an elderly gentleman who knew him
well, some one asked " if I resembled my parent ?" "Not at all,”-
says the gentleman, "Captain Dibdin was a fine-looking fellow !!"
That " his heart was kind and soft," there are too powerful, and at the
same time, too melancholy, evidences to prove. One, who knew him
well, described him to me as ' among the kindest-hearted men alive. "
* I have given but a brief and an unworthy outline of the talents of
Charles Dibdin. He is supposed to have written about twelve hundred
lyrical and dramatical pieces in the course of his career. His intellectual fecundity seems to have been inexhaustible. Of these pieces,
the opera and farce of Lionel and Clarissa, and The Padlock will place
him amongst the most successful contributors to the stage. The music
is peculiarly his own ; and his performance of Mungo, in the Padlock,
has, I understand, been rarely equalled—and never surpassed. It received the warmest eulogies of Garrick. I had but a very slight knowledge of him-never having conversed with him but once ; just beforemy
coming of age. He was then in the plenitude of fame and wealth. The
unrivalled excellence of his Sans Souci brought crowds to his theatre ;
and the publication and copyright of his Songs (which he seems to have
L
6 PARENTAL HISTORY.
Of my father's subsequent destiny, up to the period of his union with my mother (his second wife),
the slenderest possible materials survive. Whether,
during Lord Chatham's glorious administration, he
led these two hundred and twenty men into action
-victory or defeat—is mere matter of idle conjecture it is certain that he never could have continued inactive. Enough of the short history of
him, after his union with my mother, proves that
his was a mind which neither courted nor could
endure mere animal repose. Within three years
after his command of the Eagle, my father married
his first wife, of whose maiden name I am wholly
ignorant. He seems to have been at this time in
pretty easy circumstances, for I find a letter from
his sister Penelope to Mrs. Dibdin, in which the
latter is at once congratulated and envied on account of her good fortune. This letter is in part
so racy and characteristic, that I scruple not to
assign a portion of it to a place in the subjoined
note *. A daughter and son were the fruits of this
marriage.
composed by inspiration) were a source of yet greater income. He lived,
however, as many distinguished men have lived before him, to see public
admiration abate, and the streams of prosperity to flow in contracted
channels. He died in 1814, in his sixty-ninth year.
Southton, [ Southampton], Jan. 1759.
* DEAR SISTER, —I received your letter. A kind one, I won't call it :
for I had prided myself on receiving a long letter from you-and at last
comes a few lines, with hardly an account of your health, or of that of
one of my friends. But, however, I must forgive you now, and flatter
PARENTAL HISTORY. 7
There is too good reason to believe that this marriage was soon clouded by sinister events, totally
unconnected with incompatibility of temper or disunion of principle. In the year 1772 he became a
widower, his wife dying while he was abroad. What
directed his views to India, is altogether undiscoverable ; but finding no employment during the peace,
he became a " Rover" upon the Indian Ocean, and
in the year 1775, at Calcutta, married ELIZABETH
COMPTON, my mother.
myself with that pleasure in answer to this. Dear sister, oh how I envy
your happiness !—Yes, let me say I envy you—because I can't partake
ofit : but, at the same time, I am sure you don't think I wish you less.
No, may you abound in all the happiness this life can afford, till I wish
it less-and then you will be completely happy ! For my part, I am
quite a dull stupid creature: know nothing of what's done in the world
-or hardly partake of the social joys of company or conversation. I
live in as much obscurity as if I lived in the remotest corner of the
earth as much a recluse as if I were a nun. My dear mother is all the
company I have : who, to be sure, is the most indulgent mother that
ever a child had. But you know, my dearest sister, that it is no good
for a child to be always under a mother's wing : and I have lived oneand-twenty years under ( I wont use so harsh an expression to say
a tyrannical father, but) one, whose commands are a little too severe ;
and I don't knowbut I may turn out this summer and seek my fortune :
so if you know ever an old lady who wants a companion (but not an old
man who wants a nurse) or a young lady that wants a confidante, I am
at their service. And now I have told you my mind, you will excuse
me when I say, that I envy you, or any body, that lives in so much
gaiety," &c.
To this sister ofmy father, my mother, immediately on her marriage,
wrote an affectionate letter ; disclosing the event, and challenging her to
a correspondence which might be beneficial as well as comforting to
both parties. On this letter, my father has endorsed, "No answer ever
returned." In all probability it never reached her.
8
PARENTAL
HISTORY.
A word, with the reader's leave, respecting that
same mother. To me, she lives only by report and
in her letters letters, so tender and touching, so
characteristic of a pious, cheerful, active, resigned,
and happy disposition, developing, at the same time,
no uncultivated talents or disputable taste, that, had
the casket which contained them, and in which I
found them on taking possession of my trifling inheritance, been "rifled of its sweets-" and thousands
ofpagodas substituted in their place-I should have
considered the exchange as a robbery of the cruellest
description. The inimitable Cowper seems to have
wrought his fancy to the most painful, and yet natural, pitch of ecstacy, on a contemplation of his
mother's portrait by the hand of Art. His was a
representation of the external features. The portrait which it is my good fortune to possess, of a
parent " pass'd into the skies, " is wholly of the
features of the mind and heart ; and it is a portrait
of which the colours are perennial * . It is also a
* And yet I am not wholly destitute of a notion of her form and
face. She was of middle stature, with a clear complexion, hazel eyes,
and light brown hair ; possessed of a colour so bright and blooming,
that my maternal uncle and guardian, Mr. William Compton, used to
tell me that there was no countenance on which he gazed with such
thorough delight. He accompanied her to India, and returned in the vessel which took her over. Her cousin, Miss Boone, afterwards Mrs.
Duke wishing to make the description of her as epigrammatic as possible-has often said that she had " the colour of a milk-maid !" I never
heard of her portrait having been executed by any artist.
I might perhaps be here indulged in the venial vanity of family
PARENTAL HISTORY. 9
speaking portrait. It describes incidents as vividly,
as naturally ; overshadowed, however, occasionally
with that " pale and sickly cast of thought," which
is too often the result of frustrated schemes and
blighted hopes. It is, however, more than negative
consolation to know, that the period of her sufferings,
as a widow, was short ; indeed, the career of her
wedded life scarcely reached beyond its fifth year.
Never was a union more warm and cordial ; although, perhaps, little anticipated by either party
on quitting their native shores. My mother had
arrived in India in 1770 * , having been taken out
by her brother, Captain Compton, in his own vessel,
relationship by my mother's side ; but, without wishing to push the
point with heraldic pertinacity ( what will not heralds accomplish ? ) or
feeling the least disappointment if the conclusion be drawn from false
premises, it may be permitted me to say, that she was not only a
COMPTON, but her family bore, in crest and shield, precisely the same
form and motto as those of the illustrious family of NORTHAMPTON.
* Her chief employment on her voyage was the making of housewives (then a fashionable exercise of the needle) , and copying copiously
from the works of Milton and Pope : occasionally, however, " invoking
the muse-" as I find some verses by her, " On seeing a Man buried at
Sea, on board the Verelst, Captain Compton, when the Author was
going to India," beginning thus :
"A fine large ship, in weather fair,
Glides on the sea as if in air.”
I also find the following verses, descriptive of her passage, written
shortly after her arrival, and beginning thus :
" From India's bright and burning climes,
I send apologies for rhymes.
* * * *
"Twas fate commanded I should come,
A wanderer from my native home; :
10 PARENTAL HISTORY .
the "Verelst ;" a vessel, doomed to be wrecked * on
its return. Of her situation, employment, or course
God bless'd our ship in wind and weather,
And all was favourable together :
Our passage short, &c.
* * * *
My first arrival, much surprised ;
Could not have such a sight devised.
Blacks without clothes, a numerous crew,
My first attention blushing drew.
I look'd with wonder all around,
To find myself on steady ground.
In palanquins we stately ride,
With slaves attending by our side."
*
*
* * *
Her affectionate disposition thus develops itself at the conclusion of
this poetical epistle :
"Then blame me not, my friends most dear,
But let me often from you hear.
I'll kiss the lines with heart-felt glee,
When first your letter blesses me."
It seems that this voyage was undertaken in a state of extreme mental
agony, which arose from her determination not to marry a husband
selected for her by her uncle, Captain Frognall, and to whom she had
the most decided personal objection. She missed her "coach and four,"
but she maintained her independence. Sir Charles Raymond (whom I
can just remember when a little boy, from his mulberry-coloured suit
covered with snuff, and his giving me several gentle pats on the head,
with a large diamond flaming on his little finger ) was particularly kind
and considerate to her on her departure : acting quite the part of a
guardian. It is evident, from some part of the poetical address above
quoted, that she quitted England with a heavy heart, and with a deeplyfixed presage that she should return to it no more.
* This shipwreck took place off the island of Mauritius. At midnight the vessel struck upon a reef of hidden rocks, and broke her back
right in two. My uncle, Mr. William Compton, who accompanied his
brother, the Captain, told me, that so tremendous was the concussion,
he was thrown bolt upright in his berth. A melancholy yet instructive
lesson is to be learned from the conduct of one individual on board.
PARENTAL HISTORY. 11
of life, from her arrival to her marriage, I have been
unable to glean any materials ; except that she seems
to have had many kind and respectable friends, to
whom she now and then showed her gratitude by
courting her muse, and sending them her poetical
effusions * . If these effusions do not always run on
"all fours," they do not betray a hopelessly limping
pace.
The only means of safety for the crew was the construction of a raft ;
which being completed, every body was importuned to jump overboard,
or descend upon it as quickly and cleverly as they could-the breakers
beating a-head with an astounding uproar. The individual in question
had 1500 double gold moors, which he wished to be his companions on
the raft. He entreated my uncle, the captain, to take them under his
special protection, adding, that " he would not charge him any interest!"
My uncle, spurning his offer, told him he had not a moment to lose.
The unhappy man could not bear the thought of parting with his
mammon. He strapped the bag, in which the moors were contained, to
his waist ; and making a leap to reach the raft, the weight of the
precious metal” paralysed his efforts. He fell greatly short of the raft,
and sunk to rise no more.
66
* Among these effusions are some of her happiest efforts : they are
brief and epigrammatic. That " To Mrs. Mapleloft (a family with
whom she was very intimate) on presenting the Author with a plain
Gold Ring," begins thus :
" A plain gold ring was such a sight,
It flutter'd all my senses quite ;
As thoughts of the connubial kind
Had ceased to occupy my mind."
I give the whole of that " To the fair Diana Coles, on spraining
her ancle shortly after her marriage."
"Will you never cease romping, my dear married friend,
Though sorrow and sadness must come in the end ?
The single fair damsel may foot it away,
With romping, and gadding, and any thing gay ;
But when she is wedded, such doings should cease,
If she hopes to enjoy what is true married peace.
12 PARENTAL HISTORY.
My father was a widower of forty-four when he
was united to my mother ; whose description of him,
on her marriage, may perhaps be endured in its
place below* . He was then in command of a vessel
Methinks I behold you, just hopping around,
One foot is quite off, t' other scarce on the ground ;
With one finger held up, and a smile on your face,
Which all, to be sure, has an exquisite grace ;
When lo ! what avails such sad tricks in a wife,
Her poor ancle's sprain'd, and the plague of her life ;
As a punishment due, she sits crying with pain,
And vows and declares that she ' ll ne'er romp again."
The verses "On the Birthday of Mrs. Wynne, after her Recovery
from a dangerous Illness,” are in a grave and affecting strain ; while
those " On presenting Miss Pearson with a Cup, " begin in this sprightly manner :
"This little cup is made for you,
Sweet prattling Sally —will it do ? ”
Those " Intended for the Tomb of Mrs. H. Ross," commence thus :
66 See, cruel Death, with his destroying hand,
Hath cropp'd the fairest flower in Asia's land ;
Nor youth, nor innocence could aught avail,
Nor suppliant prayers, nor ardent vows prevail. "
But enough. The Rosses seem always to have been the affectionate
and constant friends of the author.
* This description is contained in a long and particular letter to her
uncle and aunt, Captain and Mrs. Frognall, in England, to whom she
first made known the important fact of her marriage, and on the former
of whom she wholly depended for her future support. It runs thus : -
" I am sure, my dear sir and madam, were you to see my husband,
you would be much pleased ; for without partiality he has a great deal
of true genuine humour : and every one allows that my Captain is a
most entertaining companion. For example, he plays on the fiddle, the
flute, and the drum : —sings a number of diverting songs ; and has a
particular nack of telling stories with so much humour, that he would make you laugh from morning till night. And I really think there is
no end to them: for he brings out some new ones every day. Added
PARENTAL HISTORY. 13
called the Diana, the size of a large Indiaman. My
mother was in her thirty-first year. They were
married at Calcutta by the first marriage licence
ever granted in India ; under the chief-justiceship
of Sir Elijah Impey, Knight. The original document is in my possession. For the first two yearsat the termination of the second of which I was born
-my mother resided wholly at Calcutta, my father
making coasting voyages from thence to Madras.
Here she received the attentions, and even experienced the friendships, of many leading characters
of the place * -secretly, however, sighing for a perto all this, he is quite of an active temper, and seems to mind his business with great diligence-which is, indeed, a most material thing : -for
without it, the pot would boil but very slowly indeed. In short, though
I may, perhaps, be called partial, yet I both name him and think him my
Tom often millions ! —for ten thousand is not giving him his full value !”
* To the names mentioned in a preceding page, as those of some of
her best friends, may be added those of Mr. Carter, Mrs. Palk, Mr.
Coles, Captain Patton, and others-which are humourously recorded
in a poetical scrap called "The Medley." None of those friends
shewed her, perhaps, quite so much affectionate attention as Mrs.
Johanna Ross ; whose " chit" to her, in my possession, (although her
name only is attached-as that of an aged person, from its mode of
scription) is as follows : -" How do you do, my dear Mrs. Dibdin ?
Why am I to be deprived of a sight which you know will give pleasure to your old friend and well-wisher ? So many days in the river,
and not to call at my home, is something strange ! There is a saying,
'out of sight, out of mind.' Some truth in that saying, is there not,
dear Mrs. D. ? Why yes, says you. Pray come, therefore, and spend
the day with me before you go down. Do so, sauce-box-and oblige
yours, sincerely,
JOHANNA Ross.
" N. B.-Remember me kindly to your lord and master. ”
A name, yet DEARER to both husband and wife, will be disclosed in a
few pages onwards.
14 PARENTAL HISTORY.
manent residence at Madras : for the expense of
house-rent, and the frequency of separation, did not
contribute to the tranquillity of her mind. Add to
which, the intense heat of Calcutta ( she is always
complaining of the " prickly heat "-a symptom,
however, of sound health) made her anxious for a
residence where the breeze was less burning, and
the adjacent country more picturesque ; as well as
more immediately connected with her husband's occupations * .
The reader must now be more exclusively made
acquainted with my Father ; whose adventures, or
rather misfortunes, assume, in some instances, almost the stirring character of those recorded in a
novel. They are, however, too indissolubly and too
sadly founded upon FACT. Some slight mention has
* Of the long and trying separations which these " occupations” necessarily occasioned, my mother's epistles bear frequent and affecting
evidence. It should seem that worldly matters were soon beginning to
wear rather a rough aspect; for about the anniversary of her weddingday, my mother writes thus to her absent husband : -" After having
partaken of a hearty dinner of curry, I have the pleasure to take up my
pen to tell my dear husband that I am well, and as happy as can be expected, considering my separation from the one I most love in all the
world. My happiness does not consist in any prospect of good fortune.
No, mydear ; it is owing to a resignation to the divine will—who, in his
own good time,' will open to view, or bring to pass, more pleasing
circumstances than I have lately experienced, or am likely to experience
in time to come." She, however, describes with complacency, in other
letters, " her never being idle-for what with working, and reading, and
writing (in the intervals of receiving friendly visits), the day never
passes away unproductively." And in one particular letter she talks of
having "just risen from her curry dinner, serenaded the whole time by
three sweet songsters in cages."
6
PARENTAL HISTORY. 15
been made of his being in possession of a " fine large
merchant vessel, " called the Diana, at the time of
his marriage. In the spring of the same year
(April, 1775) this vessel was hired to carry a company of seapoys, belonging to Captain Kelly's battalion, on the Madras establishment, from the port
of Tillicherry to the presidency of Bombay. The
Mahratta fleet, supposed to be abroad, was at that
time both active and hostile, if not formidable ; and
my father was appointed, " by a majority of country
commanders," commodore of a large fleet of merchant
vessels bound in the same direction. The Diana
mounted sixteen carriage guns, having on board
thirty European sailors, the same number of Lascars,
and one hundred rank and file of seapoys, with an
officer. The contract for freight was managed by a
Mr. Boddam; and the remuneration was distinctly
understood to come from the Governor and Council of
Bombay, through the intervention of a Mr. Hornby.
A more treacherous contract was never executed.
Twice the number of troops were put on board to
what was originally agreed upon ; and on myfather's
mentioning the difficulty, if not impracticability, of
supplying so large a company with water from his
own casks, he was told " the chief would put on
board water sufficient for the passage, and proper
provisions for the voyage." However, after lingering
two days, neither additional water nor provisions
made their appearance. The monsoon season was
16 PARENTAL HISTORY.
coming on, and another twenty- four hours delay
might have been perilous.
Accordingly, my father sailed, making all possible
dispatch for Bombay; " but the southerly currents
prevailing, he was obliged to put in at several places
for want of water, and did not arrive in Bombay
until the 19th of May-in all thirty days ; carrying
into that port only one leaguer of water, being in a
heavy gale of wind, with the loss of the foremast.
On the 20th the troops were landed ; and some days
after, an application was made for payment by Captain
David Scott, in the name of the whole. " What followed was rather curious, and, I should hope, so
singular as never to have been repeated.
" The
thanks of the Governor and Council were given, but
they did not think any of the ships entitled to any
pay or profit whatsoever ; alledging, that the troops
were a protection to the several ships : forgetting
that the Mahratta fleet was at this time stripped and
laid up at Geriah, for the monsoon season."
The passages in inverted commas are taken from
my father's memorial to the Commander- in- Chief,
which concludes thus : " And your memorialist,
knowing your high station as Commander-in-Chief
of the Honourable Company's forces in India, takes
the liberty of laying before you these particulars for
your inspection and indulgence ; begging leave to
mention, at the same time, that the Louisa, Captain
Tasker, received 10,000 Bombay rupees for a pass-
PARERNAL HISTORY. 17
age of some troops from Madras to Bombay, which
ship belonged to Mr. Hornby."
This memorial, so far from being written or pressed
with precipitancy, was actually not written or presented till a twelvemonth after the accomplishment
ofthe voyage. It is dated " Calcutta, May 3, 1776.”
It was wholly ineffectual. Of what materials Mr.
Hornby's conscience must have been composed, or
upon what data of logic or justice the Governor and
Council of Bombay issued their edict, it were now
idle to conjecture. The transaction is a disgrace to
all pretensions to honourable government. But a
heavier calamity speedily befel the memorialist. In
some subsequent enterprise, of which I have never
been able to ascertain the particulars, the Diana
foundered. This was a terrible blow to my father.
All the consolation derivable from intense sympathy
in the bosom of an affectionate wife, it was his lot to
experience. My mother wrote to him in a strain of
the warmest attachment and most entire Christian
fortitude * ; solacing herself with a more successful
result from another employment, of far greater im-
* The commencement of this letter is thus :-" My more than ever
dear husband-for, believe me, if possible, I have loved you better since
your misfortune in losing the Diana, than ever I did before : and I cannot help being angry with myself for not taking up my pen directly to
tell you the real sentiments of my heart. That I was shocked on thinking of the dreadful accident is certain, as I was sure you must have
suffered acutely when it happened. But a moment's reflection made
me thankful for your preservation, and unrepining at the accident, as -
no lives were lost. In a minute, hard as the stroke was, I was blessed
C
18 PATERNAL HISTORY.
portance, which had been somewhat mysteriously
disclosed to her in her husband's letter. Of that
employment, the last in which he was concerned, a
more particular detail may be acceptable.
In the autumn of the same year ( 1776) commenced
my father's intimacy with George Stratton, Esq. , Governor of Fort St. George, Madras ; and, through
him, with the Nabob of Arcot. Just at this time
public affairs should seem to have worn rather a
suspicious aspect in that quarter. Lord Pigot, the
Governor of Madras, and his right-hand counsellor,
Mr. Stratton, appear to have subjected themselves
to the probability of a severe scrutiny at head-quarwith fortitude sufficient to say, that I was sure it would eventually turn
out for the best." A little onward she writes thus : "I was at Mrs.
Ross's when Mr. Denham brought me your letter ; and I assure you the
old lady (see p. 13) behaved very kindly on the occasion : doing all she
could to keep up my spirits, and telling me that her house should be
my home in the time of your absence, if you got another ship," &c.
" Believe me, my Tom, by your frequent and affectionate letters you
have endeared yourself greatly to your Betsy; but to answer them all
now in particular would be needless, as I am in hopes you will not be in
Madras when this arrives."
In the letter just alluded to, my father had hinted to her the probable
engagement with the Nabob of Arcot and Mr. Stratton, governor of
Fort St. George, though, doubtless, in indirect, if not obscure, terms :
to which my mother thus replies : " But though I will not answer all
your letters, yet I cannot help noticing that wherein you mention that
you have a prospect in view which must not transpire till it takes place,
as a premature disclosure might mar all. The thoughts ofthat prospect
(I will not say more for fear of accidents to this letter ) gave me such
pleasure, that I cried for joy by myself." The " prospect " here alluded
to occupy the above pages of the text. It was at this moment tinged
with a golden hue. My poor mother had reason enough to shed tears of
a different description on its realization !
PATERNAL HISTORY. 19
ters in Leadenhall-street ; and before any serious and
final measures should be resorted to, there, it was
peremptorily necessary to make an early and favourable impression in behalf of the Madras governor.
An over-land dispatch appeared to be the only likely
plan to accomplish this ; and a navigator and negociator of adroitness and experience was instantly
required to carry that plan into effect—by a dispatch
up the Red Sea, to the isthmus of Suez, and from
thence to Grand Cairo, and so on to England. My
Father was pitched upon as the man.
He had just
purchased a small trading vessel called a ( Snow in
that country) , of 180 tons burthen, for 1800 star pagodas ; and with this it was resolved that he should
undertake the voyage, at the rate of 800 star pagodas
per month. The vessel, named the Expedition, was
then lying at Pondicherry; but it was ordered round
immediately to Trincomalee bay, in the island of
Ceylon, for the purpose of my father's joining her.
Not relying upon the efficacy of the nabob's promise
of remuneration, my father told Mr. Stratton that
he must lean entirely upon himself. Mr. Stratton
replied, that his word and honour were at issue in
the final and satisfactory settlement of this important
transaction. On the 14th of October, a written
charter-party was drawn up, and its contents were
approved by Mr. Stratton. The next day it was
read to the Nabob of Arcot by a Mr. Macpherson.
The nabob entirely approved ; but said " it was beneath the dignity of a prince to sign it ! " On menC 2
20 PARERNAL HISTORY.
tioning this to Mr. Stratton, the latter said " never
mind the nabob's not signing it, I will see every
thing settled to your satisfaction, according to my
agreement. "
Upon the strength of these repeated assurances,
my father prepared to get his officers and a select
crew in readiness, and to wait the final instructions
of his employers for departure. An unnecessary delay intervened. It was promised to advance 2000
star-pagodas on account ; for immediate expenses
were heavy, and the contingencies of a voyage up
the Red Sea at that time considered of precarious,
if not perilous, achievement-demanded the utmost
foresight, and a supply of every thing which might
be obtainable, in case of sudden emergencies, by
means of money. After a pretty palpable specimen
of shuffling and prevarication, 1000 star-pagodas
only were advanced ; and not till December the
16th, towards midnight, did my father receive his
final instructions-being " a large paper packet, directed to the Hon. Company of East India Directors,
at India House, in Leadenhall- street." But, as if
the safety of the entire settlement depended upon
the issue of this enterprise, he first received, from a
Captain Wolley, the following pertinent note.
" To
Captain Dibdin. You are to read this when you
go on board, and not before." On getting on board
he read as follows :
"Orders from the Nabob Wallajau, &c. To Captain Thomas Dibdin. You are not to carry a single
PARERNAL HISTORY. 21
letter except from Governor Stratton."
66
With the
large paper packet " to the East India Directors,
were delivered the final instructions from Governor
Stratton, accompanied by the following letter.
your
" SIR-The accompanying packet will give you
instructions for your future proceedings ; and I can
only add thereto, that no person whatsoever is to
know your destination, and of course that vessel
is to be employed on no other service but for the
dispatch of the packet. Enclosed are your written
instructions, which are to be opened in a certain
latitude : and you know that such is your agreement
with His Highness the Nabob : and that your fulfilling the same in the strictest sense will alone entitle you to the freight he has engaged to pay you.
This he requests I will communicate to you, and I
advise you to be punctual in the performance. I
am, Sir, &c. GEORGE STRATTON. Fort St. George,
Dec. 15, 1776 : " and sealed with the Company's
seal.
But there was yet another " note of preparation"
before departure. It was necessary to have a passport from the Nabob * ; and Mr. Sullivan, the military secretary, delivered a notification that the packet
was not to be broken open till my father had reached
the latitude 09° 00′ north. On the 23d January,
1777, on reaching this latitude, and " being to the
* The passport runs thus : -" In the name of the merciful and compassionate God. Praise be to God, the Lord of Worlds : and prayer
22 PARENTAL HISTORY.
eastward of Anjingo, " he opened his instructions ;
and read another yet more particular letter from
Governor Stratton, which could leave no doubt as
to the importance and delicacy of the mission entrusted to him. A letter, written in a more thorough
spirit of diplomacy—more circumspect, particular,
and imperative-could scarcely have been penned ;
as the reader shall judge from a faithful transcript
of it below*. Owing to the delays and consequent
tardiness of setting sail, my father did not leave the
Malabar coast till very late ; and springing a leak,
with other accidents, he did not get to Suez that
and salutation to our Lord and Master Mahomet (who is the best of
ancients and moderns) and to his descendants and friends in general.
"Whereas this dispatch from the sovereign of the Carnatic (where
he governs) to the territories of the potentates, ameers, and nobility of
Arabia (whom may God for ever preserve, and bless their mornings and
evenings) imports, that his friend CAPTAIN DIBdIn, of the ship called
Expedition, is sent to the famous port of Suez ( belonging to the Grand
Signor) with letters to the powers of Europe upon matters of importance to the welfare of Mussulmen ; he therefore hopes, from their goodness, that they will permit the said Captain Dibdin, with his ship, to
pass through their dominions, and prevent their being impeded by their
subjects or soldiers. ADIEU." The foregoing is a literal translation by
a Captain G. Mackay.
* SIR-The Nabob has acquainted me that he has freighted your
vessel for a certain time, and has requested of me to give you what
instructions I thought necessary for the execution of the purposes for
which your vessel is intended. In consequence of this request made to
me by His Highness, and the instructions received from him, I am to
desire you will, on the receipt hereof, make the best of your way to the
port of Suez; at which place you are to remain for a packet or packets
of letters from the East India Company for this Presidency ; or from
Col. Capper to the Nabob or myself; which packets you will take charge
of, and immediately return to this place ; taking particular care that
neither yourself nor officers mention any news that may come to your
PARENTAL HISTORY . 23
season. At Juddah, in the direct way thither, he
had the misfortune to have his "thigh shivered by
lightning." A sudden and severe illness ensued ;
but, preparing for the worst, and rousing all his
energies to carry the mission into execution, (having
made his Will) he dispatched his second officer, Mr.
George Romaine, to the port of Suez, under very
special instructions, enclosing the passport of the
Nabob, to carry Governor Stratton's packet from
thence to Grand Cairo, and to deliver it, at that
place, into the hands of George Baldwin, Esq. Mr.
Romaine was dispatched up the Red Sea in a large
knowledge, or any circumstances whatever, to any person : for I must
remark to you, that SECRECY is to be observed in every transaction now
committed to your charge.
"The packets herewith delivered to you, being of the greatest importance, you will take the most particular care of them ; and on your
arrival at Suez, you will leave your vessel in charge of your first officer,
and proceed immediately with them to Mr. Baldwin at Grand Cairo, to
whom you will deliver them, and consult with him about the most expeditious and safe method with which these packets may be forwarded
from thence to England. And that every precaution be taken, I am to
desire you will direct Mr. Romaine (your second officer) to accompany
you to Grand Cairo, that in case Mr. Baldwin should be at a loss for a
trusty person to take charge of these packets from thence, that Mr.
Romaine may proceed with themto England. The accompanying letter
for Mr. Baldwin I put under a flying seal for your perusal, that you
may receive every instruction on this subject which I can give you,
relative to the service on which you are employed. I rely on diligence
and attention in the execution thereof, and am to desire you will advise
me, by every opportunity, of whatever occurrences may come to your
knowledge, and that you send me what newspapers you can procure.
I wish you a good passage, and am, Sir, your most obedient servant
(Signed) GEORGE STRATTON." Sealed with the Company's seal.
24 PARENTAL HISTORY.
boat, to the port of Suez ; my father lying at anchor
in the Mocha road. From Suez the former pursued
his journey across the desert, in caravans, to Grand
Cairo, and reached that place on the 7th of June.
He appears to have conducted himself throughout
like an honest and intelligent person : and although
uneducated, his letters and accounts current * with
my father prove the particularity and fidelity with
which his part in the transaction was conducted.
On his return from Grand Cairo to Suez, he charges
only sixteen dollars " for the hire of four camels
across the desert."
On the 4th of July following, Mr. Baldwin wrote
to my father, then at Mocha, the following very im-
* One of the most curious of his letters is that dated from Yamboo,
30th April, 1777, in his way from Juddah to Suez, where the Vizier
and Murbar of Juddah are described as being upon a pretty good understanding with each other on the score of cheating, and where Mr.
Romaine was obliged to submit to almost any terms for the pilotage and
provisioning of his boat up to Suez. When he thought all matters duly
settled, he was obliged to pay "four dollars for a guard along the coast,
part ofthe way, to prevent the Burdore from attacking them :" and this,
in spite of the passport of his " Highness of the Carnatic ! "
In his General " Account Current," among the items charged during
his residence at Grand Cairo, is one " for making up a country suit of
clothes, forty-three dollars ; " another, " to a country dress, a present to
the Sheriff Tor, for his assistance, forty-nine dollars." This account was
closed by the payment of 400 dollars by George Baldwin, Esq., on account of the Hon. George Stratton, being a letter of credit, for which
he gave his receipt. It may just as well be observed, that the expense
of hiring this boat, or small vessel, from Juddah to Suez, cost my father
1375 Arcot rupees ; for which he drew a set of bills on Governor Stratton, at fifteen days sight, but whether ever honoured, is unknown.
PARENTAL HISTORY. 25
portant letter ; from the conclusion of which the
reader will observe that a breeze of no ordinary description was likely to be stirring at Madras.
66 TO CAPTAIN THOMAS DIBDIN, AT MOCHA.
" Cairo, 4th July, 1777.
“ SIR, —I was favoured with your letter from Mr. Romaine, who
arrived at Cairo on the 7th of June, in the afternoon ; and the packet
from the Honourable the President and Council of Madras for the
Court of Directors, was consigned safe to me, and forwarded on the
8th following, per Alexandria. As the conveyance from hence to any
part of Europe is as safe, and so much more expeditious by the ordinary
couriers, than it possibly can be by a gentleman on purpose, I dissuaded Mr. Romaine from proceeding any further. I ordered my
agent at Alexandria to freight a small vessel to take the packet to
Smyrna, where it most probably would arrive in twelve days, and from
thence it would require thirty-three days more to reach England. At
this season of the year the passage to Marseilles is very uncertain.
Mr. Romaine had a very dangerous and fatiguing voyage from Juddah,
and merits the reward which was appointed for him, if he had been the
conductor of the packet all the way. Had a person been necessary, I
should most certainly have concurred with your recommendation in
confiding this packet to his care. It seems, by the advices which accompany this from England, that great vacancies must be made in the
board ofMadras, and that all parties will be required to plead their
causes personally in England.
" I shall be very happy to oblige you in your particular commands,
and am, with respect, Sir, your devoted humble servant, GEORGE
BALDWIN."
This letter was not received by my father till he
had arrived at Madras ; as his physicians had advised him to leave Mocha, on account of his uniformly bad health during his continuance in the
Red Sea. He left Mocha on the 9th of June, giving
charge of the " Expedition " to his first officer, Robert Rutherford ; with a letter of very particular
instructions, in which I find, for the first time, mention made of "the return of Lord Pigot's packet,
26 PARENTAL HISTORY.
sent to Europe at the same time with Governor
Stratton's." Was it a race between the two for
priority of claim or hearing ?
The sequel is briefly narrated, involving a tale
of a sufficiently melancholy complexion. On returning to Madras, July 23, 1777, my father waited
upon Governor Stratton with his accounts, which
were approved ; and afterwards, waiting upon the
Nabob, presented him with a letter from the Vizier
of Juddah. He was requested to come again as
soon as his health would permit him, and in the
mean time to get ready his general account. He
did so, and in September brought it in ; by which it
appeared that the hire of the vessel for ten months,
at 800 star pagodas per month, amounted to 8000
star pagodas, from which was to be deducted the
advance of 1000 star pagodas-leaving a balance
due of 7000. This account, through the intervention of Mr. Stratton, was laid before the Nabob, and
approved by him; and the former told my father
that he should in a little time receive the most
part of the balance in money, and the remainder by
a negotiable order. " " This, " adds my father, " Mr.
Stratton firmly promised, on his word of honour, he
would Do for me ; but when he went from Madras,
he left the business ENTIRELY UNFINISHED." Meanwhile, Captain Rutherford pursued his voyage in
the Expedition from Mocha to Madras ; but ( from
the original document in my possession) he met with
such terribly adverse weather, as to cripple the ves-
PARENTAL HISTORY. 27
sel, and render her scarcely sea-worthy ; so that he
was obliged to go into Bombay to refit. As no assets
were put into my father's hands from the Nabob to
pay the officers and the crew, the latter necessarily
became clamorous for indemnification. Mr. Romaine, the second officer, had agreed to accept the
sum of 2331. on the faith of the Nabob's promised
letter of credit or bond ; but for the indemnification
of Captain Rutherford and the ship's company, fifty
in number, no resource was left but the sale ofthe
vessel. This was a heart-breaking expedient ; but
necessity prompted it, and she was sold to one Lewis
Baretto for 3500 rupees. Considering her damaged
state, the result might have been more disastrous.
This amount just about squared the claims of Captain Rutherford for himself personally (as chief mate
and as commander), and for his disbursements. The
sale took place in July, 1778.
:
There are other bosoms than those of a Son
which would be moved at such a sequel as this. I
know not the precise period of Mr. Stratton's departure ; but I do know that, some thirty-seven
years ago, I waited upon him-then, apparently,
a very old man-and shewing him his own handwriting, asked him " how these things could be ?"
Soft words were all I got in reply. To return to
the sufferer. My father's career was now rapidly
verging to its close. He was in fact a brokenhearted man. There appeared to be only one resource left. Sir Thomas Rumbold, who had suc-
28 PARENTAL HISTORY.
ceeded Mr. Stratton as President of Fort St. George,
was a character of known humanity and generosity ;
and to him my father resolved to make a direct
appeal, in a strain of equal simplicity, diffidence,
and pathos. The reader will endure a portion of
it, which commences by saying that " the all of a
poor but honest man was involved in the issue of
his transaction with the Nabob." It continues thus :
"embarrassed in his circumstances by the recent
loss of a vessel, in which he had embarked the fruit
of a whole life's labour, he was but just beginning
to emerge from his difficulties, and had a hope that
the produce of this voyage, doubly secured (as he
thought) by the promise of a prince and the undertaking of the governor of the settlement, would, ere
now, have enabled him to make new efforts for an
independence—which he now finds is only to be
effected by the interposition of some gentleman,
whose situation in the Presidency gives him a certain claim to attention at the durbar. Thus circumstanced, he knows not to whom he can with more
propriety, or with a better prospect of supply, apply,
than to YOURSELF : which he now presumes to do—
hoping that your benevolent interposition will not
be wanting at this crisis of his fortune."
Luckily, at this crisis, the office of Master Attendant at Nagore became vacant ; and I believe
it was exclusively through Sir Thomas Rumbold's
instrumentality that my father was appointed to fill
it. He entered upon its duties with alacrity and
PARENTAL HISTORY. 29
steadiness. In his first letter from thence, ( 10th
Aug. 1779, ) to Henry Norris, Esq. , he describes
it as " a settlement, which, if properly attended to,
might be one of the finest places in India-especially for shipping. It has a bay eighteen feet deep
at low water ; and the bar can, by a little trouble
and expense, be made capable of admitting large
ships over it." In a second letter, to Col. Maclellan, of Tanjore, he adheres to his opinion that " it
might be made one of the finest places in India ; ”
and adds, in a P. S., that " he had surveyed the
river, the island, the bay, and land adjacent ; and
sent the marine draught to the Board, which had
been pleased to compliment him, and to express
their entire satisfaction thereupon." " But the eligibility or advantage of the situation would necessarily depend upon its salary. Gen. ( Sir Thomas)
Munro, with Mr. Secretary Sullivan and Mr. Stanhope, supported by the promise of the governor, Sir
Thomas Rumbold, were anxious that this salary
should be seventy pagodas per month ; but, to my
father's astonishment and chagrin, he received an
order from Council * that he " stood on the books
* In his last letter to Sir Thomas Rumbold, dated Oct. 6, 1779-and
in which my father disclosed to him his final resolution to leave India,
and return to England as soon as might be, in consequence of some
little property left to my mother-he says, in allusion to this disappointment, " I thought you would have been able to fix the salary you were
so obliging as to promise, but I am afraid it did not meet the approbation of the rest of the gentlemen ; and should there be a salary now
thought of, I fear it must come out of your private purse ; a circum-
30 PARENTAL HISTORY.
only as Master Attendant of Nagore, without salary."
The proceeds, or perquisites of the place, depended
entirely upon boats touching there ; and these did
not average eighteen pagodas per month. To be
sure, a brisk trade might have been pushed on ; but
a brisk trade required something like a brisk capital
to begin with ; and of that, as the reader will necessarily infer, my father was wholly deprived. There
was, therefore, but one alternative left to make a
resolute effort to get possession of the bond of the
Nabob, upon which two years' interest were now
due. And as both his health and prospects were
daily diminishing, and as about this time intelligence had arrived of some little property having been
left to my mother, by the death of her uncle, Captain Frognall, my father lost no time in placing
his affairs in the hands of respectable agents ; and,
assigning to the trustees of Mr. DARKE, his principal creditor, the bond in question * , he prepared
stance which would hurt me much." After another recapitulation of
the ruinous trip to Suez, and adverting to the Nabob's consolidated
bond, upon which two years' interest then remained due, he observes
thus : " But, as that undertaking has ruined both my health and pocket,
was I so lucky as to have some friend to advance the capital of the
bond, without the interest, it would make a whole family happy ; as I
could then settle all my business to my satisfaction in Madras-pay my
passage to England-have some little matter left-and look joyously
forward to the future." He then begs the interposition of Sir Thomas
about securing him a passage in a Danish vessel which should sail from
Tranquebar the approaching season.
* Mr. Charles Darke was one of the principal, if not the principal
trading merchants of Madras, but his concerns with the Nabob of
Arcot had subjected him to immense embarrassment ; indeed, that
PARENTAL HISTORY. 31
for his departure homewards ; observing, however,
to his friend Mr. Sykes, of Madras, that " he might
return again within three years, after waiting upon
the East India Directors with his own plan or chart
Nabob seems to have involved every one who came within the vortex
of his engagements. I have heard that Mr. Darke was a creditor of
the Nabob to the amount of 100,000l. I possess a copy of my father's
letter to the trustees of Mr. Darke's estate, as well as the original accounts current between him and my father-by which it should seem,
that on the satisfaction of my father's debt, about 4500 star pagodas
would have been due to his representatives or heirs. The bond was
taken up by this government, and paid off ( I believe without interest)
in 1788 ; but a tale belongs thereto, which shall be narrated in its
proper place towards the end of this parental memoir.
The family of Mr. Darke was well connected ; and the union of his
daughter with General Floyd, one of the bravest and most honourable
officers in India, and colonel of a cavalry regiment, was an alliance of
which the father's heart might justly swell with pride. From those
who had a personal knowledge of her, I learn that she was a singularly
vivacious and original character, at times full of merriment and “ wittie
conceits." The following is one of these "conceits." Some few months
after becoming a mother, she took her infant in an open carriage to
attend one of her husband's reviews, and calling him to her, begged he
would take the child in his arms and caress it. The General was on
horseback ; and on receiving the child, the carriage drove off rapidly
from a preconcerted signal, leaving him with the infant under his arm,
galloping to replace it in the carriage. On returning to England, General Floyd was appointed commander-in-chief in Ireland. By Miss
Darke he had a son and two daughters ; one of the latter becoming
the wife of Sir Robert Peel, Bart. , the late premier. It was only the
other day, by mere accident, that I heard a trait of the characteristic
bravery of General Floyd when he was in India, and engaged in the
war with Tippoo Saib.
At the head of only 350 cavalry, he came in contact with 2000 of
Tippoo's body-guard-the élite of his troops. A contest was inevitable,
and each party was resolved upon victory or defeat. The General made
the attack, the enemy waiting in one solid, determined body to receive
it. Instead of charging with his whole little handful of men, he divided
the corps into seven companies of fifty each, and commanded only fifty
to commence the charge. They moved en échellon, without the slightest
32 PARENTAL HISTORY.
of Nagore ; which place, in his view of the subject,
might become ultimately one of the most flourishing
harbours in India. " All my father's letters seem
filled with this notion ; and it must be admitted that
it was not the notion of an inexperienced man.
Among those friends and acquaintances whom my
father would necessarily leave behind, there was one
of the name of BACON ( Captain Nathaniel Bacon),
who seems, in all the trying vicissitudes of his fate,
to have invariably adhered to him-to have soothed
him under every possible form in which solace could
be administered ; to have supported him in deed as
well as by " word of promise ; " and to have proved
to BOTH my parents that undeviating, uncompromising, unceasing friend, of which the value can
ONLY be known and appreciated by those who have
stood in need ofit. Captain Bacon appears to have
been a seafaring man, of an active turn of mind ;
of a warm heart, and of a straightforward disposition and habits * . I possess a small collection of
murmur or hesitation ; but the odds were fearfully against them. In a
few minutes they were desperately engaged with the enemy, and thinning fast in number. Then succeeded another fifty, and at a given
signal, another. The enemy, thinking there was no end of them,
fled in dismay-just as the last fifty were preparing to show themselves
worthy oftheir victorious companions.
* Between the interval of my father's return from his ill-fated expedition to Suez, and his obtaining possession ofthe master-attendantship
at Nagore, the intercourse between these warm-hearted friends was incessant. Among the amusements to relieve the languor and diversify
the monotony of an oriental life, was that of acting ; most officers, naval
and military, partaking of this recreation, I remember to have heard the
PARENTAL HISTORY. 33
his letters to my father and mother, written in all
the naïveté of a brother officer ; full of sweetness of
temper combined with the most unflinching steadiness of purpose. His heart is always in his hand.
He comforts my mother by telling her " to keep up
her spirits, to trust in a gracious Providence, and to
hope that the soil of Old England would set all
things to rights. " Indeed, he himself and family
were to have accompanied my father homewards ;
but this plan was never carried into effect, as Captain
Bacon was left my father's attorney in India to make
a final settlement of his affairs. Whenever the moment of separation between these valued friends took
place, it would necessarily be one of severe trial.
They are all three now at rest in their " long homes.”
To Captain Bacon, in particular this trifling tribute
is due, from one whom he only knew in infancyand who is in utter ignorance whether a single
branch of his family be alive to bear evidence of the
sincerity of this tribute.
"His saltem accumulem donis, et fungar inani
Munere !"
It was at length settled that my parents should
go in a Danish ship from Tranquebar on the Coromandel coast, to the Cape of Good Hope, and from
late Colonel Marshall, of Madras, say, that "he had often dressed my
father for the part of Serjeant Kitely, than whom few played it better."
Captain Bacon was to have played Commodore Trunnion in some new
piece, purposely written to develop his powers.
D
34 PARENTAL HISTORY.
thence in a Dutch ship to England. This plan,
both on account of the war between England and
France, and the reasonableness of the charge, was
indispensable. Before quitting Madras, my father
wrote to his friend Mr. Petrie * , a member of the
council, for a letter of introduction to the Governor
of the Cape. The letter, written
"Warm from the heart, and faithful to its fires,"
was dispatched to him quickly. It breathed the very
spirit of a finished gentleman and a tried friend. It
is brief ; but I shall select only one passage. " Deceived by those who professed a friendship for you
-deserted by those, who, from their promises were
bound by the ties of honour to stand by you in the
hour of need-and distressed in a very singular
manner in your present situation, you become possessed of those claims to my assistance, against
which, thank God, my heart has never been shut.
May you and Mrs. Dibdin recover
your health, and experience many comfortable years
in Old England." From Colombo, and just before
* *
* It is a pleasing rather than curious coincidence, that a NAME, SO
beloved and respected by the father, should be entitled to at least equal
affection and respect by the son. In the ever-varying shiftings of life's
scene, it is unspeakably gratifying to record the steady attachment and
warm-hearted virtues of some few old friends ; among whom none are
entwined round the author's heart by stronger cords than THE INDIVIDUAL whose name is here incorporated.
66 ** nec gratior ulla est
Quam sibi quæ PETRIE prescripsit pagina nomen. "
PARENTAL HISTORY, 35
he sailed, (January 30, 1780, ) my father received
the following pleasing letter from Mr. Brohier, the
Resident. " Dear Sir. As your departure draws
near, Itake my last farewell of you, your dear lady
and son, by a reiteration ofmy best wishesfor your
health and happiness ; a prosperous voyage ; with a
joyful meeting of all your friends in Old England.
May the blessings of God attend you always, is the
sincere wish of, Dear Sir, your most obedient humble
servant andfriend-S. BROHIER.”
In the month of April, the vessel reached the
Cape ; but my father's health was rapidly declining
before he left the country. A complication of disorders, with a broken-down spirit, brought on an
inflammation of the bowels. After a short but severe illness, borne with exemplary patience, he expired (according to the testimony of ONE whose truth
was as undoubted as her affection) in " great resignation to the divine will *." As I have said in the open-
* The " testimony" above alluded to, is the letter written by my
mother to her aunt, Mrs. Frognall, herself recently become a widow,
immediately on the death of my father at the Cape. A more moving
picture of mental desolation can scarcely be conceived. It is as follows :
" Very great, indeed, my ever dear and kind Madam, are the trials of
your poor Betsey, who is now left a disconsolate widow in a strange
land, without a friend near her. Unfortunate as the married state has
been, the great love the dear departed had for me, makes his loss an
almost insupportable affliction. His great resignation to the divine will,
and wish to be with his Saviour, is, therefore, now my greatest comfort ;
for never poor creature was more patient than he was under the most
dreadful pains. The original cause of his death was a decay of nature
or consumption, as he had laboured under many disorders a long time.
To describe what I have undergone, and still feel, would be impossible.
D 2
36 PARENTAL HISTORY.
2
ing of this parental memoir, I have no recollection
whatever of the figures or countenances of those about
whom I am speaking ; but I have something more
than an indistinct recollection of the moment, when,
the boat nearing the side of the vessel, the coffin,
which contained my father's body, was lowered into
it—and the boat was rowed slowly and solemnly towards the shore. There are distinct remembrances
in children of an earlier age than I then was, but
this I do distinctly remember. No tomb ever marked
the spot of his interment. The reader will readily
imagine the feelings of HER who was left behind.
Only three days elapsed between the death of my
father and the necessity of my mother's departure
from the Cape, in a Dutch company's vessel, called
the Hoysom, of which a Mr. Endemans was the captain ; and on board of which there was not one lady,
or single person, that could speak English except
herself and her female black servant. Her miserWere it not for my child, and a black woman-servant ( which I brought
from India) , I should really be quite stupid with grief. Oh ! my dear
Madam, if I should ever be so blessed as to be under your protection
again, I shall never know how to be half thankful enough for such a
happiness ; as I may say with certainty that I have never known true
bliss since I left you . And did I not, in this my great distress, have a
firm reliance upon a merciful God, who heareth the prayer of the widow
and the fatherless, I should be wretched indeed ."
In a letter to my Uncle, written on board the ship Hoysom, about the
same time, she says, " In my husband's will (which was made at
Judda), I am left whole and sole executrix and possessor of every
thing he died worth ; and if it had been a million, I am sure he loved
me so well that he would have done the same." Then follows an allusion to the ill-fated bond of the Nabob.
PARENTAL HISTORY. 37
able, forlorn situation is sufficiently developed in the
letter quoted in the last note ; but there are other
letters from her which throw a yet more darkening
gloom upon her sorrows.
The vessel was bound for Middleburg, in Zealand.
When it arrived I know not, but from that spot
my mother was doomed never to move.
There may
be an intensity of sympathy in a BROKEN HEART,
from the effects of which the hardiest temperament
may not recover. With my mother, there seems to
have been no spring of mind to counteract her bodily
ailment, whatever it was. The BOND OF THE NABOB,
which had precipitated her husband's departure, was
ever uppermost in her thoughts * , and haunted her
* This bond is expressly mentioned in her will, and in almost every
letter which she wrote to her confidential friends. A❝tale” ( as referred
to at the end of a preceding note, p. 31 ) , is said to be connected with
it. It shall be as briefly told as possible. Some sixteen or seventeen
years after the death of my parents, a gentleman of the name of Latham was at an evening party in the city, when (as the fashion was in
those days) some one was called upon to sing a song. He sang one of
Charles Dibdin's sea-songs. Mr. Latham, who had but just returned
to England after a long residence in India, immediately observed, " that
is one of Tom Dibdin's songs : the words are precisely his." He was
corrected in this error ; and then added, " there is a good slice of property
for his son, or heir, if he have left any behind him, as a bond of the
Nabob of Arcot is paid off, and the assets are lying in the hands of Mr.
Darke, to be paid to the claimant. ”
Bythe merest accident this intelligence reached the ears of my uncle
and guardian, Mr. William Compton. Not a moment was to be lost,
We both waited upon Mr. Latham, and found him quite firm and confident ofthe fact. Letters of administration with probates of the wills
of my father and mother annexed, were instantly taken out, and addressed to the house of Kindersley, Watts, and Co., of Fort St. Georgeappointing them agents or attornies to collect the assets due to me. At
38 PARENTAL HISTORY.
hours of retirement. At length, nature gave way.
A "wounded spirit, " like hers, was glad perhaps to
take shelter in the grave from a prolongation of
bodily sufferings ; and although the leaving her only
child in a foreign country -without one friend,
scarcely one acquaintance, to stand by her in her
latter moments * -might have torn the breast of any
mother into a thousand pieces, yet she appears to
have resigned her breath with that tranquillity and
that consciousness of ultimate happiness which was
to last for ever, which renders such a departure INSTRUCTIVE beyond every other earthly lesson. She
says, in her will, dated Oct. 10, 1780, that " she
this time all was hope, if not ecstacy, in my own bosom. The sum
due, with the accumulation of interest, was estimated at several thousand
pounds. A college friend, more in earnest than in jest, asked me "if
I would take 3500l. for the chances ?" Upon every consideration, I
declined this offer. At length came the answer from Messrs. Kindersley, merely acknowledging the receipt of the documents—which had
cost, I think, about 30%. Asecond letter from the same quarter quickly
succeeded. A "little cloud" was beginning to make its appearance in
the horizon of my hopes. The third letter contained matter which
wholly darkened the entire firmament ; and from that day to this ( some
thirty-six years ago) the appropriation of the assets in question remains
wholly unaccounted for. There can be no doubt, however, as I am
compelled to believe, that the circumstances of the holder of the bond
were too desperate to justify the indulgence even of a shadow of hope
of success.
* Let it be allowed me here to apply the beautiful and too apposite
verses from Pope's Elegy on an unfortunate Lady.
" By foreign hands thy dying eyes were closed,
By foreign hands thy decent limbs composed ;
By foreign hands thy funeral rites adorned ;
By strangers honoured, and by strangers mourned ! ”
PARENTAL HISTORY. 39
should like to have a modest tombstone placed upon
her grave, with a few lines to the purport of an unfortunate traveller being, through mercy, in the arms
of Redeeming Love. " She then adds, that " she
dies in charity with all mankind * ." I believe, as in
the case of my father, the spot of her interment was
never indicated by a tombstone.
"With many a proof of recollected love
Together down they sink in social sleep ;
Together freed, their gentle spirits fly
To scenes where love and bliss immortal reign."
THOMSON.
On a revision of what I have written, I feel that,
whatever laudable motives might have induced the
raising of THIS MONUMENT (in the absence of all
others ) to the memories of those so endeared to me,
some apology seems nevertheless due for its extension, and, probably in part, wearisomeness of detail. But if the heart runs away with the head, it
is difficult to attend to the observance of the " certain boundaries ” prescribed by Horatian authority.
* Her will is in parts very quaint, but written with the utmost composure and self-possession. Among other things, she observes, in a
codicil, thus : " I, Elizabeth Dibdin, have likewise by me a MARRIAGE
SETTLEMENT of twenty thousand rupees, of which I never received a
farthing, or laid any claim to, on the creditors, when my husband died .”
This settlement is in my possession, with the seals and signatures of my
parents and the two trustees, "Hercules Durham and James Urwin."
It seems that 10,000 rupees were actually vested in them, and 10,000
more wereto be so vested : but what has become ofthe absolute property,
and what was the result of the contingent property, are, I fear, EQUALLY
UNRESOLVABLE. So dark, so impenetrable, seems to be the cloud which
has set upon the earthly destinies of my Parents !
40 PARENTAL HISTORY.
Should there, however, be any one yet existing (as
I have reason to think there may) who might take
more than an ordinary sympathy in this narrative,
the time devoted to it will not have been devoted in
vain—and the abuse of the reader's patience may be
appeased by this confession.
At page 9, I have intimated that by the maternal line, there may
have been some former affinity between my family and that of the
illustrious house of NORTHAMPTON. By my father's side I know of
nothing particularly distinguishable, beyond that of my great grandfather, a successful if not eminent merchant, having built houses, and
founded that village near Southampton which goes by his name, Deepden.
There is, however, a Debden in Essex. It is certain that my father's
family were established in Hampshire.
41
CHAPTER II .
SCHOOLBOY DAYS.
"The tear forgot as soon as shed ;
The sunshine of the breast. "
So says or rather sings-the celebrated GRAY,
It may be however a questionable dictum, whether
in verse or in prose. In five out of eight parties in
which I remember the truth of the above position to
have been doubted and impugned, the decision was
against the tear being quickly forgotten, and the
sunshine being uniformly unclouded. It is a mere
matter of personal experience, and is not worth the
mooting. The sequel will at least prove that " sunshine " was paramount to shower.
It will be seen, from the conclusion of the preceding chapter, that, if I was not to be exactly considered as
" The child of misery, baptised with tears,"
yet my infancy was one of incessant solicitude to my
parents ; a solicitude, not bereft however of many
hours, and days, and months of unspeakable transport to sympathising and grateful bosoms. There
is always hope where there is offspring. In essaying
to lift up the veil of futurity, as to the probable des-
42 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.
tiny of a child, wishes are reasons ; and reasons are
too frequently as transparent and unsubstantial as
the dews of the morning. My mother's letters are
a striking exemplification of this truism. It is evident that, while her heart was half breaking from
the gloomiest forebodings, her spirits assumed an
artificial and even joyous tone. She calls the attention of her husband, when absent, to their only child
-to what a comfort and blessing that child might
one day be to them ; and yet, while hanging over
his cradle, or caressing him in her arms, it is evident
that she was secretly indulging a wish, or pouring
forth a prayer, that the miseries of the parent might
be for ever unknown to the offspring—
"No sigh that rends thy father's heart and mine !"
Never was a limited and united family broken up
more speedily and more sadly. Indeed, I have frequently compared myself to a floating piece of timber, in a wreck, which has accidentally and luckily
reached the shore. I was brought over from Middleburgh, very shortly after my mother's death, by a
total stranger, one Captain Smith, who took care to
charge enough for the voyage. If he had taken as
good care of the object for which the charge was
made, it had been a little more creditable to his
character. My person was almost wholly neglected.
Ardent spirits, (the potent Schedam, in some of its
varieties ! ) however diluted, had made sad havoc with
a young stomach ; and when I was landed, I have
SCHOOLBOY DAYS. 43
been told that I presented a melancholy spectacle,
with scarcely half a dozen hairs upon my head. I
could walk with difficulty ; and had no appetite.
Most fortunate it was that I was consigned to ONE,
who never ceased, from the moment I came under
his roof, to make my wants, and wishes, and comforts, commensurate with all the means which he had
in his power to gratify them : who, from my fourth
to my twenty-first year, proved himself to be a GUARDIAN in deed as well as by name. That "one" was
my mother's younger brother, Mr. WILLIAM COMPTON; appointed in her Will to that office. On receiving me, it was necessary to adopt immediate measures for conveying me into the country, for the establishment of my health, and placing me in some
small retired school, where, when that health was
established, the common rudiments of education
might be taught. But every thing necessarily depended on the kind feeling and constant care of those
with whom I might be placed.
I was again fortunate. Mymother's aunt, the widow
of Captain Frognall (both of whom have been mentioned in the preceding pages) had quitted Plympton, in Devonshire, for Reading, the capital of Berkshire. Here she had a comfortable house in Castlestreet, and lived very respectably on a handsome
income. She was at this time in her seventy-sixth
year ; and for the last five years was bed-ridden.
Her temper was soured-probably from her long
confinement ; but she had an ever vigilant and rest-
44 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.
less suspicion ; and loved sometimes to act the part
of a tyrant with inflexible rigour. Her sister feared
her, and her niece, about thirty-five, trembled under
her threat of castigation. She never had the least
personal affection for me : the only child of a niece,
whom she affected sometimes to extol to the skies
" for her talents and her virtues." Her delight was
to thwart and tantalise me. But I believe the main
spring of this conduct to have been a knowledge that
a third of her income was to come to me at her decease. Add to which, my uncle had discovered that
she was a debtor of some 150l. to my father's estate.
In consequence, she undertook to get me clothed,
educated, and boarded, at the least possible expense,
in order that she might have a longer period for the
payment of the debt. My clothing and education
cost only 20l. per annum.
I had but one suit of
clothes a-year, all of the same colour, and of the
stoutest cloth that could be procured ; and on the
first day of wear, a sedan chair was always sent to
convey me from school to spend the whole day at her
house. It was in vain that I protested against this
mode of conveyance, as a confinement wholly disagreeable and abhorrent to my feelings. She persisted in it, saying " it was the proper way to shew
that I was come of genteel parents." I once broke
a window to obtain a little air, and in consequence
narrowly escaped the " extreme punishment ” of domestic discipline. To this was added a determination to deduct the amount of the reparation of the
SCHOOLBOY DAYS. 45
damage from my quarterly payment. I remember,
there was a large cupboard, and a small beaufet, in
or rather lived : a bedThese were well filled
the room in which she sat,
room upon the first floor.
with plate and china ; and my attention, especially
as I got on towards my tenth year, was usually and
perhaps naturally directed to them.
On taking now and then a sly peep, she used to
observe it, and invariably to chide me for it : sometimes saying, "what! because you see a Frog for
the crest, you think all these fine things will one
day be yours which they shall never be-" and
then she would command me to leave her presence.
It must in truth be confessed that she was a sad old
tyrant *.
It is now time to notice the school, and to make
mention of SCHOOLBOY DAYS. I have said that I
was fortunate" in having been transplanted to
Reading-in spite of the tyrannical worryings of an
old aunt. I was eminently so : for had I been
* She died at the advanced age of eighty-three, in the year 1788.
A handsome square stone monument, encircled by an iron railing, in
St. Mary's churchyard, attests the place of her interment. She is there
described as CLEMENTIA FROGNALL, widow of the late CAPTAIN FROGNALL, commander of the Duke of Dorset East Indiaman. The inscription concludes with the following quaint line : " What she was, the last
day will shew." As to the " finethings " of plate and china above alluded
to, I am in utter ignorance of their present destination. As my great
uncle was a frequent trader to the East, it is probable that the china was
ofa superior description . But the crest of afrog seemed to be so naturally
the property of a Frognall, that its leaping into other quarters may be
fairly regretted without the slightest imputation of selfishness . For its
own sake, I should have preferred it to the plate.
46 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.
placed with the leading school of the town, at that
time rising into considerable distinction under the
magisterial hands of Dr. Valpy, I might not have
been able, from my then extremely delicate state of
health and tender age, to have braved the buffettings of a hundred boys, and endured the hardships,
in whatever mitigated form, of fagging. I was
placed, therefore, with a Mr. JOHN MAN, who lived
in an obscure part of the town, called Hosier's-lane.
His establishment was small, and his terms were proportionably moderate. He was a singular, naturally
clever, and kind-hearted, man : had a mechanical
turn ; and could construct electrifying apparatuses,
and carve a picture frame. His studio, of this description, was at the top of the house ; and many an
hour do I remember to have spent therein, gazing
with surprise and delight upon the mysteries of
turning, planing, and chisselling. He had married
a Miss Baker, and succeeded to the school of his
father-in-law. Old Mr. Baker lived in the house,
occupying a study. He wore what was called a buzwig, and usually appeared in a large, flowered, dark
green camlet-gown. He would frequently admit me
within his study ; give me books ; and once, seeing
me very attentively engaged over a large family Bible,
with cuts *, came up to me with a solemn, measured
* Of these cuts, ONE almost scared me out of my wits : and what is
rather curious, I do not remember to have seen another impression of
the same plate, although (as the pages of the Bibliotheca Spenceriana
SCHOOLBOY DAYS. 47
pace, and stooping down, and patting my head, thus
addressed me : "Mind your learning, my child, and
you may become what you please." I knew nothing
of the import of these words at the time spoken ;
but, although I do not think I was eight years of
age, they made a very particular impression upon
me. I thought much of them, wrote them down,
and showing them to his daughter, my mistress, was
told that they implied-" mind and always get your
lessons well, or else you will be sure to be whipped. ”
This was sufficiently intelligible.
The preceding is, perhaps, a little out of the order
of time ; but having dispatched the father-in-law,
let it be permitted me to indulge in fond remembrance of the daughter, and of her husband, my first
schoolmaster, MR. JOHN MAN. Their unremitting
attention and kindness perhaps saved my life. Often
do I remember to have heard my mistress say, that
on passing through the boys' bed- rooms, the last
thing at night, and seeing me asleep, ( in the same
bed with her eldest son * ) she would " wonder
and Bibliographical Decameron may attest) my researches in this particular department of art have not been very limited. The cut in question consisted of the order or degrees of demons, according to their
horrible forms, and supposed power of working evil. Lucifer, with a
crown upon his head, sitting, was marked No. 1 ; a huge and dreadfully convoluted serpent, with his mouth open, and an elongated sting,
was No. 2- --but enough.
* His Christian name was HENRY. Our attachment was as that
of brothers. It " grew with our growth and strengthened with our
strength." We were also class- fellows : but, as he himself would often,
48 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.
whether I should live to see the morning light ?"—
so weak and emaciated appeared to be my condition.
But, when up and stirring, few could be more alive
to what was passing around me ; and the boys delighted to make me sing them a Dutch song* . Mrs.
Man had four small children. Hearing them address their parents by the familiar titles of father
and mother, it seemed to me to be natural to do the
same ; and their tenderness fully justified the appellation. Here I remained six years, making little
progress in anything but writing, arithmetic, and
French.
But, so strangely are our habits formed, from some
early impressions which take deeper root than others
-so oddly do we appear to see, think, reason, and
act, in this plastic state of existence, from sources
which seem now to be wholly unintelligible, if not
forgotten-that, in after-life, I know of few things
in after-life, readily and cheerfully admit, we were unequally yoked ; for
I generally outstripped him in getting the lesson first, and he would cry
dreadfully if I " went up to say " without him. In the month of
January, 1808, I married him to a widow with a small family, and he
survived his marriage only a few years. He had a fine manly spirit,
with an affectionate heart, and had a sincere regard for me. He died
prematurely of an erysipelas in the arm.
* As I came over in a Dutch vessel from the Cape (see p. 42, ante), on
board of which not a single creature of the crew could talk English- and
as I remained some time in Middleburgh, where the Dutch language
was necessarily the only one spoken-I became so familiarised to it that
I spoke it almost as fluently as English. The lads, who always love
something out of the ordinary course of things, were constantly putting
me upon singing one of these songs-of which all traces of recollection
both of words and tune have long ago perished.
SCHOOLBOY DAYS. 49
which have had a more decided effect upon me than
some of those which occurred during my " schoolboy
days " at Reading. Towards my eighth year, my
health became settled and strong and my constitution good ; and any bodily exertion, for that season
of life, could be successfully encountered. There
were few big lads, and none exceeding their fifteenth
or sixteenth year. If I was petted by the senior
boys, I affected great superiority over my juniorsnot so much in years, as from their being in an inferior grade in the school. As I reached my tenth
year, I seem to have become enthusiastically enamoured of Soldiery and of Letter-writing. From
my weekly allowance of threepence, I regularly deducted one halfpenny for a sheet of foolscap paper,
and the ponderous residue was as regularly devoted
to the purchase of laths, and scraps of deal, to make
swords for my troops. These troops were wheeled,
marched, and countermarched-in column and in
line to the number of about twenty-five, with incessant clatter and din, especially of a half-holiday.
And when, by means of my weekly allowance, the
hostile weapons were all completed, that sum was
regularly devoted to the commissariat department,
in the purchase of cakes for my faithful followers—
nothing, however, preventing me from the weekly
acquisition of the said folio sheet of foolscap. Upon
that sheet, strange as it may appear, I was in the
habit of writing accounts of the conquests of counE
50 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.
tries, by means of British valour, led on by the
scribe himself ; and when it came to the turns of
France and Spain, I took care to make the subjugation of those countries sufficiently complete. I read
this enormous mass of absurdity, which I had concocted, every Monday morning at the head of my
regiment, with a loud voice, and it was received with
three hurras. My reading, out of school- hours, was
wholly of the same complexion. I was allowed to go
into my master's private room whenever I pleased.
It was sufficiently well filled with books. A large
arm-chair was near the fire- place, with a set of Hume
and Smollett's History of England, with cuts, close
at hand. I was for ever taking down these volumes,
and reading nothing but the battles of Henry V.,
Edward III. , and John Duke of Marlborough. The
engraved portraits of those illustrious warriors, with
that of the Black Prince, seemed to rivet what I
had read more strongly upon my memory. At this
time of day, I ought to have been second only to
WELLINGTON !
Let me not, however, quit the sanctum sanctorum
of my indulgent master, without just mentioning
that, it was here, for the first time, I caught, or
fancied I caught, the electric spark of the BIBLIOMANIA. My master was now and then the purchaser
of old books by the sack-full ; these were tumbled
out upon the floor, the arm-chair, or a table, just as
it might happen. The work that first caught my
SCHOOLBOY DAYS. 51
eye, and fixed my attention, ( although I could not
read a word of the text), was the small octavo edition of Sandby's Horace, with cuts * . How
" I long'd to call the sparkling treasure mine !”
There is sometimes stealing across one-it is
stealing across me at this moment-a recollection
of the pure, keen, exhilirating joyfulness, relished
in early youth, by the participation of pleasures
which are not only gone, never to return, but of
which the sources, in after- life, seem to be scarcely
credible. And yet what, in after-life, from sources
however deemed more rational and permanent, has
been equal to the rapture of those of early, unsuspicious, uncontaminated YOUTH ? Where are now
the soft, sweet, moonlight nights, when the whoop
of " Ispy high +" re-echoed through their stillness,
* I have mentioned this anecdote, with some trifling but most true
additamenta, in the Bibliographical Decameron, vol. iii . p. 376. For
an account of Sandby's Horace, see Introduction to the Classics, vol. ii.
p. 109 ; fourth edition.
† It was the custom, at the time of which I am speaking, for young
ladies—the children of respectable tradesmen in the immediate neighbourhood-to take evening lessons of reading, writing, and arithmetic,
at boys' schools. There were several at the above school, and after our
pedagogical task was at an end, the girls and boys would unite in bands,
or circles, of a moonlight night, to partake of the above game, singing
the well-known invitation, thus :-
"Girls and boys come out to play,
The moon doth shine as bright as day ;
Come with a whoop, come with a call,
Come with a good will, or not at all."
Then followed the game itself-carried on sometimes till nine o'clock.
My late friend, Mr. Douce, once shewed me a most curious note upon
these homely lines -which he loved to repeat emphatically.
E 2
52 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.
and made the heart of the hearer throb with ecstacy?
-the warm and golden sunsets, after bathing in the
salient stream * , and coursing each other along the
adjacent meads ? the bright and beautiful mornings, when, after a night of tempest, the yellow pear
and the ruddy apple, plentifully strewn upon the
grass, invited the ready trespass, and repaid the
hazard of the enterprise ? And all this while, I
speak nothing of the ordinary Games † of boyhood ;
which need not be particularised. And then came
the Holidays-the approach to which was marked
by the notched stick, by the formal letter of announcement, by the indulgence of hopes and schemes
too wild even to take more than momentary possession of the most ardent youthful imagination.
* This " salient stream" was a branch from Pope's " Kennett swift,
for silver eels renowned." It divides the town ofReading into nearly two
equal parts, and is soon lost in the Thames, just below. The place of
bathing was called Old Orchard, not far from Coly Park.
† I am not sure whether there were not some amusements for which
the preparation was as joyous as the participation. I speak of kitemaking, and more particularly of slate, or dump- melting ; the latter a
dangerous, and always a doubtful, process. On leaving school, I had no
rival in this art. My cocks and dumps used to come out from the melting process perfect and sparkling : -attested by the screams of joy of the
bystanders. In anticipation of pleasure, what could exceed that of the
fire and fireworks on the fifth of November ? I have sat from morn till
night, on a style, watching the progress of each rising cloud, from the
apprehension of an unfavourable evening : —and then, on that same
evening, whatever caused such heart-boundings, such shouts of delight,
as the blazing tar-barrel, the crackling faggots, and the coruscations of
the squib, cracker, catherine wheel, roman candle, and skyrocket—as
the fire of the two latter intersected each other in their radiant but
quickly perishable orbits !
SCHOOLBOY DAYS. 53
I know not how it is, but, in hanging upon the
remembrance (if I may so speak) of these rapturous
days, it should seem as if the individual describing
them could not have been the same human being
with him who is described. It should seem as if,
like the snake, we had slipped a slough, and come
out a fundamentally altered creature. It is with the
mind as with the features ; the alteration is marvellous, and, in some countenances, traces of what
the features were in early youth are scarcely discernible. Yet it is the same heart that has been
beating ; they are the same sinews and muscles that
have been put in constant motion ; the same eyes
which have contemplated ; the same hands which
have grasped. Well is it for us, if changes, more
serious than those which affect the external form,
have not been wrought within us ; well is it, if that
heart's blood has not been dried up by sordid avarice
-those hands not been active in the commission of
irreparable mischief those eyes not been prone to
gaze only upon what is vicious and worthless. I
apologise for this digression ; but there are some,
yet living, to whom it will not be altogether considered as a mere " flourish " of words.
Before quitting this scene of earliest youth, I
cannot help noticing one or two more things which
may at least be considered as important as those
which have preceded them. My passion for drawing commenced before I had attained my ninth
year ; and that passion was much gratified, if, in
54 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.
distributing copy books, my master happened to give
me one which possessed ( as it was then the fashion )
a picture, or engraving, more taking than that of
my comrades * . I instantly set about copying itbut was too poor to have any thing beyond a slate
pencil : though once, with a pen, I had the audacity
to strive to grapple with the head of Dilworth or
Vyse (I forget which) prefixed to the boys' spellingbooks t. I remember to have mastered the velvetcap quickly enough ; but the solemn and sour visage
of the sage defied my powers of imitation. Mymaster's brother, a very original character, Mr. Henry
Man , Secretary of the South Sea House, came
* By a curious coincidence, one of the pictures or prints which used
to make a great impression upon me, was that of a grenadier, with the
Cumberland-cap-beneath which was this ballad line :
"He would be a soldier, would sweet Willy O!"
In a book, with this very print, my mother wrote all her little poetical
pieces ; and in another book, with the same ornamented exterior, my
father made copies of his correspondence in India.
+ In these spelling-books was the well-known tale of Brown, Jones,
and Robinson : a tale which I believe to have never been surpassed in
its hold upon young minds. A wood- cut of the drowned youth ( I now
forget which it was) had always the strongest claim upon my attention,
and called forth many a vain effort at copying.
This "
He was original character" lived in Fenchurch-street.
rather a wag than a wit--but was very much above the ordinary in- habitants of his locality. He had a small, dark, brilliant eye-what Thomson calls a " roguish twinkling, in each eye”—and a dry, but droll
tone of voice. His pen was in constant exercise, upon topics not always connected with matters of the " South Sea." The speculators in lotteries—at a time when Bonaparte was elbowing all the neighbouring potentates-used to employ him to write lottery puffs, to be placarded in large letters in the streets. I remember one-singularly quaint and
SCHOOLBOY DAYS. 55
now and then from London to pay us a visit. He
used to notice me very much-knowing the peculiarity of my situation ; and seeing me fond of drawing, asked me if I should like to have some colours ?
I jumped with joy at the proposal, and asked for
blue, red, and yellow. The first use I made of
them was to paint paper flags for my soldiers ! But
I did not always make this legitimate use of them ;
for a due portion of cunning and conceit frequently
induced me to get sly possession of those books of
my schoolfellows which contained prints, and unmercifully to daub and disguise them with the use
of these primitive colours.
I totally forget what Latin grammar we made use
of, but I think it was the Westminster ; where there
is a wood- cut of boys clambering up a tree and
shaking the fruit down into the laps of their comoriginal. Tickets were sixteen guineas each. The author makes sundry
suppositions-supposing Bonaparte to defeat, or to be defeated ? Again,
supposing the Austrians to make an onward, or a retrograde movement?
Again, supposing Prussia to be more or less influenced by this forward
or backward operation ? The reader, wondering what will be the result, is called upon to say " What then will be the price of the lottery ticket ? Answer : SIXTEEN GUINEAS.”—Mr. Henry Man (who was the
elder brother) wrote some amusing pieces of poetry, which will be
found in two volumes of posthumous works, published in 1802. Among
these, a parody upon the song of " Jolly Dick the Lamplighter," contains a few good hits. It begins thus :
" I'm Billy P―t, the minister, Lord Ch- -m was my dad ;
Though both our views were sinister, yet mine were the more sad."
At page 208 of vol. ii . there is a short poem upon " Delicacy," which is,
in parts, as original as it is sweet and tender.
56 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.
panions *. This was myfavourite page ; but when
I was told that it was a representation of the tree
of knowledge, of which the fruit could not be obtained without cultivation and gathering, I seemed
to gaze upon it with a yet more intense interest. In
Latin authors, I reached Cornelius Nepos before
my departure, with an occasional acquaintance with
Corderius, Esop, and Phædrus ; authors, not the
best calculated to smooth the ruggedness of classical
literature to the understanding of early youth t. I
have mentioned the word Holidays : but to me they
were known only as a cessation from book-toil, and
* Some notion of this print may be gathered from a fac simile of the
same sort of subject in the Bibliographical Decameron, vol. I. p. 101 .
I rather think the English original is in Lilly's Grammar.
+ Surely, some more facile and successful method of instructing
youth in the Latin tongue is yet a desideratum ? The dry compression
of Cornelius Nepos, and the downright crabbedness of some parts of
Phædrus, are not calculated to allure young minds to become enamoured
of the Roman classics. Grammar, the philosophy of language, is a terribly spiked six-bar gate to scramble over at the very threshold of our
efforts. What abstract notion has the sharpest youth of a noun-substantive, an adjective, a gerund, a supine, &c. ? But he must plunge
chin-deep into them ere he turn over the pages of the first author. And
in translating, might not easy literal versions of popular passages, of
a graphic or dramatic description, in ENGLISH HISTORY, be made subservient to a quicker mastery of the language itself? What does a lad
of nine years of age care, or understand, about consuls, ædiles, lictors,
and Heathen Mythology ? Of the latter, a quiet word, in sober sadness. Why are the names (but these are nothing compared with the
recorded actions) of gods and goddesses transferred, in a body, to the
end of Latin Dictionaries ? Why are youthful eyes suffered to glance
over such details of absurd and vicious narratives !—such a compound
of fraud, profligacy, and monstrosity ! Were I to narrate my own experience, in others as well as myself, these remarks might assume the
sterner form of an unanswerable monitor,
SCHOOLBOY DAYS. 57
not by locomotive change. I spent them uniformly
at school; and had the option been granted me
(which it was not) I should have made it my deliberate choice for the society of my master's children, with the uniform kindness of their parents,
was, to my habits and disposition, infinitely preferable to the strait-laced discipline and snappish severity of a great aunt. During those holidays I was
occasionally taken on a visit to the family of one of
my schoolfellows, of the name of SHEERWOOD, a
farmer at Purley, about four miles off. The impression received on these visits, from the kindness
and courtesy of the parents, together with a personal affection for one of the sons, of the name of
JOHN, was never, for a moment, diverted or weakened
during a course of forty years. Although I left
Reading in my twelfth year, and never afterwards
saw the father or mother, yet, so deeply was a sense
of their kind conduct impressed upon me, together
with my unceasing attachment to their son, that, in
myfifteenth year, the worth of THAT family was made
one of the subjects of my earliest hobbling muse * .
* The kind-hearted reader, taking the will for the deed, will endure
what follows, as the crude conceptions of a grateful heart. The " hobbling" verses, above alluded to, are comprised in a "PASTORAL" divided
into two parts ; and supported, after the fashion of our forefathers, by
certain characters, hight Damon, Thyrsis, Phillis, Corydon, and others.
In the first part-the scene being laid altogether at Purley-Thyrsis
thus descants upon the virtues of the worthy farmer.
He, that is bless'd with every generous art ;
Who acts the husband's and the parent's part :
58 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.
There was also another schoolfellow, very much my
senior, of the name of Billinghurst-a sharp, proHe, who can see the helpless group appear,
And with relief bestow the pitying tear !
He, that is bless'd with an ennobled mind
To cheer the wretched, and the oppressor bind.
Assist me, swains, inspire me, every muse,
To sing for SHERWOOD, who shall dare refuse ?
For whom do swains with early vigour rise,
Pour forth their prayers and vows with ardent eyes?
For whom do annual ploughshares cut the land,
And numerous rustics toil , a willing band ?
For whom do cornfields wave their golden grain,
And herds and flocks stretch far along the plain ?
For whom doth heaven refresh'ning show'rs distill,
Why roars the torrent, and why flows the rill ?
For whom do sheep their grateful voices raise,
And faithful shepherds tune their sylvan lays?
For whom do sing the rustic nut-brown maids,
And deep-grown bow'rs, and thickets, from their shades ?
All, all, for SHERWOOD. See the lark on high,
In praise of Sherwood, warbling mount the sky!
For him, the birds in airs melodious sing,
For him, doth bursting nature tell the spring :
For him, the rosy maids their garlands bind,
For him, the wreath is round their brow entwined :
For him, in praise of him, I've bent my way,
For him, to Phillis have I tuned my lay!
The second part of this motley effort opens with " SCENE, a Wood :
Moonlight." Thyrsis is leaning on the tomb of Sherwood. He gives
vent to his sorrows in a protracted strain, of which the following may
be considered a sufficient specimen.
Ah Cynthia ! now in luckless hour you rise,
In mournful time you mount your silver car ;
Alas ! you traverse through the enamell❜d skies,
In Damon's woe, or Thyrsis' grief to share.
Thou wood, that strik'st with gloomy awe the mind,
Involved in deep and everlasting shade—
No comfort here my restless sorrows find,
For here, in your retreat, a SHERWOOD's laid.
SCHOOLBOY DAYS. 59
mising youth, and very partial to me. He preceded
me in my removal to London, and closed a premaAh Philomel ! begin your warbling strain,
Swell every note, and tune a sadder lay ;
Our master's gone ; has left the rural plain ;
And silent sleeps, inanimated clay.
Ye nymphs, and swains, that used at noon-tide hour
To dance with jocund pipe, and heart-felt glee,
Leave, leave your rosy garlands in the bow'r,
View Sherwood's tomb, and sigh and weep with me !
Come then, and tread the consecrated ground,
And softly bring your fav'rite hooks and reeds ;
Here swains and nymphs, now stand in order round,
And leave, for sadder rites, your flow'ry meads.
Or if ye wish, with downcast look, to strew
With fragrant flow'rs his tomb, ye nymphs advance ;
For here, shall morn her choicest gifts renew,
And nightly fairies round his grave shall dance.
Ah why delay ! Begin ye rustic maids,
Be present shepherds, tune a mournful lay;
Pour solemn music through the gloomy glades,
For Sherwood sleeps, inanimated clay.
* * * *
No more the village shall with joy abound,
Or peace and pleasure lead their jovial train ;
No more shall vocal mirth and songs resound,
Or gay contentment laugh along the plain.
* * *
*
*
But-"Claudite jam rivos pueri, sát prata bibê runt." Such, in afterlife, continued to be the deep impression made from acts of kindness
shewn to me in early youth, that, in the infatuated moment when I
resolved upon the publication of a certain volume of poetry, I designed
a vignette for the title-page, in which there is a tomb with the word
SHERWOOD inscribed, and over which the branches of a tree are drooping. JOHN, the second son of the above lamented parent, died about
four years ago, leaving behind substantial property, and a name worthy
of all the virtues of his father. He was my particular crony—but I had
not seen him for twenty years before his decease. His eldest brother,
60 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.
ture career of ignominy and disgrace, in a foreign
land, as a common malefactor * . Such are sometimes our beginnings-who shall predict our endings? I cannot, at this moment, recollect any other
EDWARD, died several years previously. The youngest son, RICHARD,
after being the most successful practitioner of surgery, for many years,
at Reading, has now retired to the immediate neighbourhood of that
town-in the full enjoyment of character, competency, health, and five
hunters : his eye yet retaining the sparkling lustre and good humoured
expression of his early youth.
* He was apprenticed in London, with a Mr. Baker of Salisburysquare ; a respectable apothecary, and the brother of Mrs. Man. He
was sufficiently expert in Latin, and soon made himself useful to his
master. He had also a very pretty patrimonial estate, and might have
been about seventeen when he found me out at my second school, at
Stockwell. We corresponded briskly together. One day I was surprised by the sudden appearance of a post-chaise at the door of the
school, and by two gentlemen immediately leaping out, and inquiring for me. It was Mr. Baker with a friend. My letters (as it should
seem) were left open in Billinghurst's desk-Billinghurst himself
having run away. It was supposed that I might have been privy to
his decamping, and I was asked what I knew about it ?—and what was
the purport of his last letter to me? I had then scarcely entered upon
my fourteenth year ; and replied, immediately, that I knew " nothing
about his movements" —and that his last letter to me contained an earnest request that I would write for him " AN ESSAY UPON LOVE !"
The words no sooner escaped me than Mr. Baker and his friend, laughing heartily, sought their post- chaise, and returned. I never saw my
old schoolfellow again.
Poor fellow !-thorny and perilous as is sometimes the path of love,
it had been well for him if he had chosen it in preference to that which
he afterwards so pertinaciously pursued. He became embued with all
the wild principles of the French revolution, in its maddest days ; went
over to America, I know not upon what account ; attempted to disseminate the same principles there ; and even assumed the character of
a spy for that object. He was seized, tried, and hung up under the branch of an oak !
quis talia fando
Temperet a lacrimis ?
SCHOOLBOY DAYS. 61
favourites or cronies in this, the first, stage of my
SCHOOLBOY DAYS.
At It length came the moment of departure.
was necessary, in the opinion of my uncle, that an
onward movement should be made ; and that the
insufficiency of the discipline of an obscure school
should be exchanged for something near London,
which might give an immediate polish to the young
candidate for learning. The terms of a new school,
at Stockwell, were brought down and read aloud by
my uncle himself. They were minute and elaborate ; and never was the well-known adage, " omne
ignotum pro magnifico, " more strictly applicable
than on this occasion. I seemed to stare with my
understanding as well as with my eyes as I heard
these terms. A new world of intelligence was opened
" Globes "—" lectures "—" a covered playground ”—merchant's accounts ” —" the Spectator "
and " dancing” —were as magical words, heard for
the first time. I rubbed my hands with ecstacy,
and longed for the day of departure. My uncle
accompanied me to give my master the necessary
previous quarter's notice : and on leaving me I
sought my bed-but found not its repose. I was
about to take leave of THOSE, who seemed to have
supplied the place of parents ; and the next morning my swoln eyes and dejected visage told a tale
that could not be mistaken. I then began to hate
the thought of deperture ; but the day and the hour
came in due course and I broke away with loud
to me ;
62 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.
sobs from those who, for upwards of six years, had
performed the parts of faithful guardians and vigilant preceptors. My old aunt declared she would
not see me on quitting, as she disliked " taking
leave ; " but magnanimously sent me half a guinea
to mitigate the supposed agony of separation ! Of
all my earlier schoolfellows, THREE ONLY, to my
knowledge, now survive * .
I arrived at Stockwell ; situate within three miles
of London Bridge on the Surrey side a flat and not
very picturesque portion of the beautiful county at
the foot of which it stands. It was then only a
small village, with a small chapel. It is now almost
merged in the densely inhabited neighbourhood of
Kennington and Brixton ; and two spacious churches
may be said to attest at once the populousness and
devotion of the inhabitants. In point of size and external respectability, my late school- residence shrunk
into insignificance compared with that of my new
one. The Master was assisted by his son, fast growing up to maturity ; and a regular usher ( as it is
called, ) who taught Latin and French. His " terms ”
* These are, Messrs. Markand James Morrell, brothers ; now resident,
the one a brewer, the other a banker, at Oxford : men of affluence and
respectability. The third is the second son of my master, Mr. William
Man, resident in the old town of his nativity. His sister, the only other
surviving branch of their parents, lives in the same town. If friendliness of disposition, and amenity of temper, entitle any man to respect
and esteem, my old schoolfellow is entitled to the largest possible share
of it from myself. He loves science, and he loves books ; and solaces
the necessarily tedious hours of bachelorship by a due portion of reading
and reflection, and ingenious mechanical exercise.
SCHOOLBOY DAYS. 63
were a piece of pompous inanity. You would have
supposed that education was only to be obtained
under his roof. He wrote a sort of stiff, copperplate hand, and that was almost his only acquirement. His lectures upon geography were of the
veriest common-place description, and they were
"few and far between." He was a coxcomb in the
dress of that day ; although he must have been little
short of fifty. His cocked hat, powdered queueperuke, black satin breeches, and silk stockings,
were objects of mingled admiration and respect with
the boys. He was a great man for effect ; making
pauses, and clearing his voice before he commenced
those monitory addresses which used to precede evening prayers. And of what common- place materials
were those addresses composed ! He loved to inspire awe ; knowing that he could not generate affection. He was a tyrant, without being exactly
cruel ; but his manner of inflicting " the extreme
penalty" for disobedience, ill- conduct, or rebellion,
was provokingly and unnecessarily severe * .
* The punishment, here obviously alluded to, took place in a private
apartment : half a dozen of the upper boys-of which, to my horror,
I was invaribly selected as one-being called upon to be spectators.
The senior boy preceded ; holding upright, before him, the awful instrument of castigation. The culprit was in his immediate rear ; and
the other boys, followed by the master, closed the solemn procession.
The culprit stript, and knelt by the side of a chair ; and we stood with
mixed fear and disgust around him. The master was a left handed
man, and struck deliberately and heavily ; and the evidence of his power
was simultaneous with the stroke. But he had a sad method of torturing, by prolonging the punishment between each stroke with quota-
64 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.
Meanwhile, whether the merits or demerits of
my Master were the greater, I was conscious of a
sudden and strong progress in intellectual attainments. My master's son took to me with great
kindness, and never withdrew his affectionate and,
as it were, patronizing attention. He taught me
French and drawing. The Usher, educated at
Westminster school ( a yet better French scholar)
was also exceedingly attentive ; telling me he
would never let me have any rest till I read Voltaire and Virgil with equal facility. I now began
to buy paper and pens on a comparatively wholesale
scale ; and whenever the cupboard, containing new
school- books, was opened, I usually contrived to take
a peep at its miscellaneous contents : -Chambaud,
Wanostrocht, and Perrin : my old friends Dilworth
and Vyse : Phædrus, Selectæ, Ovid, and Virgil :
Ainsworth and Young : Addison and Johnson :
slates, slate-pencils, and copy- books : writing paper,
drawing-paper, and black-lead pencils. All these
seemed, to my inexperienced eyes, to be inexhaustible
treasures of incalculable value. The accidental possession of an odd volume of Shakspeare, containing
Macbeth, the Midsummer Night's Dream, and the
tions of trite sentences from the Book of Proverbs-as, among others,
"He that spareth his rod hateth his son," &c. Once, on making this
quotation, a spirited boy, in the agony of pain, turned his head round,
and bellowed out, " Yes, sir, but you are not MY FATHER !" The weapon
seemed to drop powerless from the operator's hand, and the punishment
instantly ceased.
SCHOOLBOY DAYS. 65
Merry Wives of Windsor, excited me almost to delirium : —and oh ! yet more fatal result, to try my
pen at a drama ! I shunned the ordinary games of
youth ; rose early, sometimes at five, to pursue alternately drawing and dramatic composition ; and,
ere my fourteenth year, was the author of three exceedingly bloody tragedies. A simple but severe
incident entirely cured me of this mania ; but my
love of art was, if possible, increasing every day. I
cannot describe what I used to feel on looking over
the engravings by Heath, from the pencil of Stothard,
in the volumes of Harrison's Novelist's Magazine.
Indeed they merit the closest attention and the
warmest admiration of maturer lifet. Among the
* It was this. I had brought these plays (of which I now recollect
only the names of two—viz. Jasmin and The Distressed Brothers,)
home to my aunt, Mrs. William Compton ; a lively and sensible woman,
and much disposed to humour my vagaries in many ways. I begged
she would read them, and challenged her approbation. She did read
them, or as much as she liked of them ; but studiously pronounced no
opinion. One evening, on retiring to rest, and receiving the bedchamber candlestick from the servant, I found a piece of paper at the
bottom of the candle, to keep it steady in the stick, upon which my
hand-writing was but too visible. I stopped-and read " Act III.,
scene V.," and found it to be a fragment of my beloved Jasmin ! Retracing my steps with a precipitancy which may be well conceived , I
enquired of the servant “ where she had got this ?" " Sir,” said she,
"my mistress gave it me as WASTE PAPER to light the fire."
+ The designer and the engraver of these charming little specimens
of their earlier efforts in art, have recently paid the debt of nature—each
"well stricken in years." Those who would lay the foundations, "“ strong
and deep," of a collection of the British School of Art, will do well to
furnish themselves with choice proofs, when obtainable, of the above
specimens. To commend the talents, or to declare the reputation of
F
66 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.
latest occupations at my new school, connected with
art, was the assisting my master's son in scene-painting, for the performance of little after-pieces on halfholidays. But this was sometimes a very severe
operation ; as I used frequently to be called up by
him, in the depth of winter, at five, and even four, in
the morning, that we might do a good stroke of work
together before school- hours. Even at this very moment do I remember how often my knees trembled,
my teeth chattered, and my whole frame " shook to
its very centre, " as I dressed myself-looking out
upon a sky studded with a million stars, and feeling
an atmosphere which seemed to convert my very marrow into ice *. Perhaps the evidences of an early
STOTHARD, our domestic Raffaelle, were equally a waste of words and
of time. Had his colouring even approached that of Watteau, his compositions had been invaluable. Loveliness, grace, and innocence, seem
to be impressed on every female countenance and figure which he delineated. His productions are almost countless. My friend Mr. Masquerier possesses about 1000 engravings from his pencil. Mr. James
Heath was, to Stothard, what Woollett was to Wilson, and Bartolozzi to
Cipriani and Kauffman. He once told me that he rescued the two
most precious pieces of his property from a devouring fire, in carrying
off his child, and the plate of The Death ofMajor Pearson ; while the
Late Mr. Duppa did his utmost to refrain him, from an apprehension of
its proving fatal to himself—and tore his coat into two.
* Our scene of operations was in a back brick kitchen, with now and
then scarcely any thing better than the semblance of a fire to warm and
cheer us. The cook left some cold tea, the night before, to be warmed up,
and we had a sufficient quantity of bread and butter : but we had only
one wretched candle to work by. The scenes were almost entirely
architectural. The afterpieces acted, were chiefly translations from
Berquin. In rehearsals, I remember I was a most severe disciplinarian.
SCHOOLBOY DAYS. 67
enthusiasm, in one particular pursuit, were never
more strongly indicated.
My residence at Stockwell continued two years ;
and in spite of the shallow pretensions of my master,
it was neither unprofitably nor unpleasantly spent :
for I had perfected myself in writing, and hated
"merchant's accounts " more lustily on leaving than
on commencing them. Having just got enough of
French and Latin to make me emulous of a more
intimate acquaintance with them, it was deemed advisable to remove me to what was called a Classical
Academy. There was, to be sure, a neighbouring
school of that description at hand, called Loughborough House-but the very approach to that
mansion of learning struck a timid man, like my
uncle, with a sort of awe. On a board, shaped in
the segment of a circle, and supported by two posts,
was read this exceedingly emphatic inscription :
Loughborough House : for the education ofnoblemen and gentlemen's sons." These were the quack
66
days of education.
I almost forget now by whose instrumentality it
was that I went to my third and last school-but I
think it was through a Mr. Sutherland, a public
notary, in Birchin-lane, that my uncle was persuaded
to remove me to a Mr., afterwards Dr. GREENLAW :
whose seminary was situated between Brentford and
Isleworth ; and, as a prelude, we were asked to meet
him at dinner. He was a Scotchman, as was his
F 2
68 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.
friend Mr. Sutherland. I was much pleased with
him at the first interview ; for he had a sort of manly,
joyous air about him, so very opposite to the starch
priggism of my late master, that, keeping my eyes
and ears exclusively occupied with what he might do
and say, I was resolved to bring home a pretty accurate remembrance of that day's symposium. It was
then the fashion to drink lustily after dinner. At
dinner, he spoke to me across the table, and challenged me to drink a glass of wine with him. It was
for the first time I had been so challenged, and I
thought it a solemn point of duty to fill my glass
deliberately to the brim. He smiled, and said, he
hoped we should always be good friends. We continued so throughout the whole of our connexion.
When he told my uncle and myself, after dinner,
apart, that he had lads of thirteen and fourteen who
had mastered Horace and Virgil, and could write
hexameters by the score, I could not help feeling
secretly ashamed of my own backwardness.
I now approach that period of my youthful career,
when, as the imaginative and reasoning faculties take
a ready spring and a wide range, the passions begin
to assume an intelligible, and sometimes a very formidable, aspect. Had these faculties and passions
received a luckless bias, by indiscriminate indulgence
on the one hand, or by irrepressible severity on the
other, there is no saying whether a result, at least as
fatal, although assuredly not so disgraceful, as that
SCHOOLBOY DAYS. 69
recorded in a preceding page * , might not have been
the consequence with myself. I could trust my own
heart thus far as to be incapable of vindictive passion, and sordid, base desire—as well as of everything
which had a tendency to meanness of spirit, sly suspicion, or insolent tyranny. I entered my new school
with a determination to excel, and in the end to stand
quite at its top. There were between threescore and
seventy boys, many of whom were much my superior
in size, age, and understanding. I had along lea-way
to make up, having been grounded scarcely in anything. For the first time, the Greek ( Eton) grammar was put into my hand ; and although I do not
pretend to have looked at it with a secret assurance,
like a Brind†, as if I should master it by inspiration,
yet I got briskly on, and, in due course, was admitted
to Homeric honours. It were difficult to describe
the secret swellings of pride and gratification in my
* Page 60.
+ My old schoolfellow, Mr. W. Man, mentioned at page 62, ante,
writes to me thus, touching this extraordinary character : " Connected as
you are with literary men, I should do wrong not to notice that wehave
here (at Reading) a brewer's drayman, of the name of GEORGE Brind,
between thirty and forty years of age, who had never received other education than that of reading, writing, and the first rudiments of arithmetic,
taught by a woman at a child's school. Afew months since, having seen
a Greekbook, ofwhich the characters excited his attention and curiosity,
he fancied he could instruct himself in that language ; and, as he informs
me, has since made so much progress, without any assistance, as to read
and understand it pretty well, but finds the greatest difficulty in its pronunciation ; or, as he calls it, in sounding it—from never having heard it
spoken. He seems quite confident he shall completely master it. Helikewise tells me, within the last month he has attempted Hebrew, and finds it
70 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.
bosom when I was called up to receive a copy of
Clarke's Homer *.•
By this time I was not only " well on" (as they
say) in the school, but with my schoolfellows. I had
not been a twelvemonth before I had classes to prepare
for the upper usher, an exercise in which I particularly delighted. Meanwhile, nothing could exceed
the kind attentions of those to whom the ménage
was intrusted. The house itself had been a noble
one ; and had, both within and without, a most cheerful air. The dining- room was large and lofty †, and
the sleeping- rooms were spacious and airy ; but the
play-ground was unworthy of its accessories ; yet we
always rambled far a-field when a great sport, such
as cricket, prisoners' base, or football, was in view.
How shall I describe the fluttering emotions of my
heart, when, after parading through Twickenham
meadows, I first reached the summit of Richmond
Hill, and gazed from thence upon a landscape lighted
very easy-much more so than Greek-and does not doubt of succeeding. He thinks of attempting Latin next. He is quite a rough subject,
such as draymen usually are ; but his features remind me of those of
Bonaparte." This anecdote is quite a la Magliabecchi !
* It is the ONLY school-book which I now possess : sufficiently defaced by interlineations and marginal etymons. At the moment of possessing it, how little could I dream of describing the splendour and
rarity of the first edition of that work, on LARGE PAPER, of a quarto
form, of which an account may be seen in the Introduction to the Classics, vol. ii. , p. 55, fourth edition.
† On the ceiling of this dining-room was painted, delicately and
prettily enough, some mythological subject of a marriage, where Venus
was sprinkling flowers with a plentiful hand ; and upon this painting I
would gaze almost as frequently as upon the viands before me. It
SCHOOLBOY DAYS. 71
up by an autumnal setting sun * ! Meanwhile, it
may be quietly affirmed, that my academical progress
was once given out as a subject for twenty-four hexameter verses. Alas !
the ceiling, the room, the verses, with the whole suite of apartments,
have irrevocably perished.
66
* It is not with an exclusive view of intruding any thing so puerile
and imperfect as the strains of an unfledged muse, that, in support of
the radiant picture above described, I venture here to state how it affected
me-again and again-by a frequent repetition of the view, and as fre- quent an invocation of the muse. I had now become quite infected
with the passion of versifying : aut insanit homo, aut versus facit :"
and there was nothing like RICHMOND or TWICKENHAM MEADOWS to give the vigour of inspiration to my numbers. What follows must therefore
be endured-as part and parcel " of the Philosophy of the Human
Mind. The poem of " Twickenham Meadows" is the third in a volume
to be hereafter described. The motto is happy enough :
66
" Quà pinus ingens, albaque populus
Umbram hospitalem consociare amant
Ramis." HOR. lib. ii. Ode. 3.
Having Denham's Cooper's Hill in “ my mind's eye," the following is
the attempt to describe the view from that of Richmond Hill.
Lead me, my Muse, to Richmond's tow'ring Hill,
Where endless plains the mind with transport fill.
66 Heavens, what a goodly prospect spreads around !"
With trees, and lawns, and bow'rs, and winding rivulets crown'd .
Yon distant hills aspiring to the skiesAnd the whole view in glowing grandeur lies.
The copious THAMES still vindicates his reign,
Now lost, now found, now hid, now seen again.
The num'rous flocks that bleat along the meads,
The lowing herds, and loudly- neighing steeds ;
The echoing chant of birds that fill the grove,
Transport my mind with Nature's bounteous love.
How bright and varied smiles the boundless view !
What glowing tints of carmine's richest hue
Warm the whole scene ! Oh ! here my thoughts could stray,
And mark with rapture the departing day.
72 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.
was decisive, if not rapid. Horace, Virgil, Livy,
and Tacitus, Herodotus and Homer, were becoming
From the Hill, the Muse makes a sort of natural digression to Richmond
Park ; and there she gives vent to rather an impassioned tone of feeling.
Now bear me to some shadowy deep-brown grove,
Where pale-eyed Contemplation loves to rove ;
Where hooded Silence stalks with measured pace,
And Meditation shews her solemn face.
"Tis RICHMOND'S PARK affords this much-loved sceneTo lie reclined 'midst bow'rs of richest green ;
Where towering elms their beauteous foliage spread,
And oaks majestic rear their ancient head.'
The well-shaped firs, and deep'ning chesnuts rise,
The ash, the beech, the poplars seek the skies ;
While the brown nut, and spreading shrub below,
In firmer beauty, and rich order grow,
Here, wrapt in thought, Philosophy retires,
And pale-eyed Study feels her native fires ;
Here Peace delights, Contentment holds her seats,
Wisdom here dwells, and Solitude retreats.
A sort of retrograde movement is then made to TWICKENHAM ; and
POPE being a kind of poetical synonyme with that place, the bard is thus
approached and appreciated.
But haste, and bring me to yon sloping mead,
Where Twit'nam's self displays her beauteous head.
Pleased as I pass the winding shore along,
And cull each flow'r to decorate my song,
POPE's peaceful mansion brings my willing mind
To explore his garden and his grot to find.
With softest step I'll tread the hallow'd ground,
Where with immortal bays the Nine their favʼrite crown'd.
The fairest flowers around the spot shall grow,
The daisy redden, and the violet blow:
The rose, the pink, the hyacinth adorn,
And the rich laurel consecrate his urn.
Ambrosial fragrance fill the sacred place,
And lavish Nature pour her happiest grace.
Oh NAME for ever loved ! oh bard admired !
Whom Phoebus warm'd, and all the Nine inspired !
SCHOOLBOY DAYS. 73
familiar to me ; but nothing took such entire possession of the very strongholds of imagination and
reason as the glorious ILIAD ! My little Reading
To whom the sister Graces lent their aid,
And rural elves fantastic homage paid ;
For whom the Naïads left their wať'ry bed,
And Thames, spontaneous, rear'd his hoary head ;
For whom each swain in sprightliest form advanced,
And buxom maids in rustic order danced ;
For whom the Muse hath pour'd her genuine fire,
Enhanced each theme, and struck her choicest lyre ;
While ELOISA, in her awful cells,
Religion's dictates, and Love's passion tells ;
While airy sylphs around Belinda fly,
And guard the Lock that's destined ne'er to die ;
The critic in thy ESSAY wond'ring sees
Rules so concise, and maxims sure to please :
In thee MORALITY assumes her power,
And Satire stings the breast that never felt before.
HORACE to thee his classic tribute pays,
And finds his temples crown'd with British bays.
O'er unknown-vulgar flight inspired to soar,
HOMER invites thee to his welcome shore ;
To thee his harp in generous triumph gives ;
Adorn'd in British strains, each bard transcendant lives.
No more, ye trees, no more his lay shall sound !
No more, ye bowers, his swelling note rebound !
No more, ye winding paths, ye deep-grown shades,
Ye grots umbrageous, and ye mossy glades,
No more, responsive to each well-wrought taleIn sadness now with drooping head bewail !
Mute is his strain, his once-loved lyre unstrung,
Fate stops his voice, and Silence seals his tongue.
Here, as I tread, with solemn pace, the ground,
Adeathlike awe and stillness breathe around ;
&c. &c. &c.
It is just possible that these verses, the production of a lad of little
more than fifteen, may possess some other claim to attention than that of
having been taken from a very rare volume.
74 SCHOOLBOY DAYS ,
regiment * seemed to be resuscitated, and marshalled
in array before me as I flew with Hector, or shouted
with Diomed, for the battle. I could with difficulty
resist the impulse of bespeaking a δολιχόσκιος ἔγχος, and
seven-bull- hided shield, of a neighbouring artificer.
But these incipient notions cooled in due course ;
and when I had mastered the first twelve books of
that immortal poem, the version of Pope was put
into my hands. It filled me with an admiration
which I am unable to express ; and yet its "Ovidian
graces " did not altogether escape my notice and observation. I was for ever " trying my hand" at a
rival translationt, which my master would good humouredly endure.
However, a more rational source of rivalry was in
themes, a didactic English prose composition, every
Saturday afternoon (sad inroad upon a half holiday ! )
upon a given subject, specified by a trite Latin motto ;
as, "Carpe diem”___ “ Principiis obsta”- Quo semel
* See page, 49, ante.
66
+ Especially in the pitched battle between Hector and Ajax ; the
parting of, Hector and Andromache ; the storming of the Grecian ships
by Hector, and the battle of the Gods. The way in which Homer
makes all these fierce conflicting deities take part with their favourite
mortals, while the thunders of Jupiter are rolling over their heads in a
canopy of dense black clouds, is truly magnificent and sublime. But
of mortal heroes, Hector was my favourite-and will always be the
favourite of every gallant-hearted schoolboy. I remember reading, long
before I got through Homer, Fitzosborne's Letters (which awakened
many pleasing, and I may add elegant, thoughts) , where the comparative merits of the versions of Homer by Dryden, by Addison, and Pope
are estimated ; and also the Monthly Review of Cowper's version, which
raised the merits of Pope in a tenfold degree in my humble estimation.
SCHOOLBOY DAYS. 75
est imbuta recens"-" Pallida mors equo pulsat," &c. ,
and divers others of the like quality. To see, in the
upper classes, the solemn, woe-begone countenances
with which some lads-indeed, most lads-sat down
to master the obvious difficulties of such a task * ; the
hunt in Addison or Johnson for a successful crib ;
the scratchings out and scratchings in ; the feverish
restlessness, ending sometimes in tears of absolute
despair-were a sad but not uncommon sight. For
myself, I generally contrived to illustrate the moral
propounded by some tale dressed up in the oriental
style of fiction, by which I got rid of a great deal of
dry, difficult, commonplace remark, and stiffness of
diction. Meanwhile, I had so mastered the French
language as to carry about me, alternately, Telemachus and Gil Blas, as pocket companions : and
if there be one period of these " SCHOOLBOY DAYS "
upon which I look back with the consciousness of
* The " difficulties" are not only obvious, but with some boys necessarily insurmountable. Experience and reflection are the basis of ethical
composition, upon which reason is to be exercised ; but how are these
three requisites obtainable in a lad of from fourteen to sixteen ? I have
known instances where hours have been spent in the construction of
the first sentence. Some few boys, however, had a resolute fancy, and
ready diction, to " advance
Some desperate doctrines, and be right by chance ;"
but in secret they had an abhorrence of the task. POETRY, whether in
Latin or English, was always a favourite topic of rivalry : especially with
those whohad a knack at hexameterising. I still preserve a Latin prizepoem upon Gold, in which certain hobbling hexameters are eked out to
the extent of two hundred lines.
76 SCHOOLBOY DAYS.
having been more thoroughly happy than another,
it is that, when, in the last six months of my residence, being a parlour-boarder, and the captain of
the school, I used to sit in the branches of the mulberry tree, in my master's garden, alternately plucking the ripe fruit and reading the last-named authors.
Never, surely, did the sun, before or since, appear
to go down with so golden a hue, or orchard trees
to be canopied by so ultramarine a sky !
And yet, although, both with master and boys,
nothing could go on more smoothly—and although I
was confident, in a short time, of being quite at the
top of the first class-I began to be weary of school
discipline, and impatient of school confinement. Long
walks always brought me back again to the same
point whence I started. Mulberries were only ripe
in September. The clang of the up- rising, ringingin, school- bell, fixed in an elm tree, became insupportable ; and dancing and fencing were miserable
afternoon substitutes for fishing, bathing, and cricket.
The ploughboy " whistling o'er the lea, " the solemn
flight of the crow, or the rapid volition of the pigeon,
were absolutely objects of deeply-fixed envy * . But
* It seems absurd, and scarcely credible, that for a schoolboy-never
shrinking from getting a task, and having a decided love of learningsuch a feeling should possess me, but it did. I would sometimes have
given anything and everything for a stroll, on a sunny afternoon, to
Osterley Park, within the distance of two miles. I loved to look upon
its antiquated red-brick exterior-but far more did I enjoy the aviary,
filled with exotic birds, and situated in a sort of coppice wood, with a
small lake of water, into which a fountain sent forth a gushing stream .
SCHOOLBOY DAYS. 77
the latter months of my residence were rendered more
endurable by the establishment of a debating club in
the upper school-room, of which I had the honour to
be elected the first president. My principal adversary in debate, as well as in classical lore, was a
youth of the name of KING * . It was now time to
think of looking forward to the line of life in
which my future destinies were to be concentrated :
when, after divers anxious consultations between
Dr. Greenlaw and my uncle, it was resolved that I
should be sent to COLLEGE-a resolution, which, at
the time, filled me with something approaching to
awe and dread.
This place had an indescribably magic charm for me ; and when a parlour-boarder, I was constantly strolling thither, reclining on the grass,
and devouring the pages of Thomson, Pope, and Shakspeare. On revisiting this spot some three years ago, I found an entire metamorphosis. The aviary had disappeared : the lake was dried up : the trees
were cut down. But, as an antidote to this misery, Lord Jersey, its
owner, had given me permission to examine the LIBRARY of the mansion, where two volumes (the Morte d'Arthur printed by Caxton, and
the only thoroughly complete copy of Coverdale's Bible of 1535) , entirely reconciled me to the disappearance of the feathered tribe. Two
SUCH volumes cannot fail, in every vicissitude of the BIBLIOMAnia, to
hold their heads as high as ever.
* Now a respectable clergyman, and eminent teacher of youth. He
was always a well-grounded scholar for his years, and very much
my superior in grammatical accuracy.
78
CHAPTER III.
COLLEGE LIFE.
" I never hear the sound of thy glad bells,
OXFORD, and chime harmonious, but I say,
(Sighing to think how time has worn away) ,
Some spirit speaks in the sweet tone that swells,
Heard, after years of absence, from the vale
Where Charwell winds."
BOWLES.
How sweetly and how truly do these " speaking"
verses describe the exact emotions of my heart !
Forty-two years have passed away since I put on the
freshman's gown-yet on every revisiting of ALMA
MATER, there should seem to be some secretly- stirring spirit, which, if it gently chide me for hours
neglected, and studies shunned, still assures me that
I have not lived altogether an unworthy or unprofitable Son. There is, and ever will be, an unspeakable pleasure, as well as a defensible pride, in this
declaration. Peace to the spirits of such, who have
revisited the ivied walls and grey battlements of
EITHER university with emotions less honourable
and consoling ! I was matriculated an independent
member and commoner of St. John's College during
the vice- chancellorship of Dr. Wills ; a name that
merits to be enrolled among those of the later
COLLEGE LIFE . 79
WORTHIES * of the University. Dr. Dennis was the
then president of the college. I had the slightest
possible knowledge of him ; as, in those days, the
distance between an independent freshman and the
head of the college was great, unless an immediate
approach was to be obtained through the medium of a
letter of introduction. I had nothing ofthe sort ; and
why St. John's College was selected for me, neither
my late master nor myself were ever able to ascertain t. The introduction to the tutor, the Rev.
Michael Marlowe, was one that afforded me the
66
* Dr. WILLS died in 1806, leaving to the value of about 15,000l. to
the college of Wadham, of which he was the president ; and procuring
the rescinding of an old and barbarous statute, by which that headship was to be always filled by a Bachelor. He was succeeded by Dr.
Tournay, also a bachelor ; and Dr. Tournay having resigned the headship in favour of Dr. Symons, in 1831 , this latter now warms the Warden's lodge by all those hospitable rites and makings-welcome, which
are only to be thoroughly and joyously accomplished by means of the
PLACENS UXOR," as well as the " DOMUS." Of Dr. Tournay I had
scarcely more than a slight knowledge, during the very few latter years
of his life ; but I saw and found enough in him to account for the
estimation in which he was held by the university, and especially by
the high Tories. His heart was warm and liberal ; his understanding
strong and acute. If you only granted him his premises, he would
build such a superstructure upon them as it would be very difficult
to shake or pull down. He was a very Cornish wrestler in argumentwary, powerful, decisive : while the asperity of his invective was frequently softened, or accompanied, by a sort of heart's chuckle, which
appeared to disarm their terror. His table was always an abundant one,
and his puns would sometimes circulate as briskly as his hock. At one
of his symposia, I was proud to receive his hearty concurrence in commendation of that most marvellously-described night battle, in Mr.
Gleig's account of the campaign in New Orleans ; and for his good taste
in this behalf (as I told him), " I could almost forgive his outrageous
Toryism !"
+ The scholars and fellows are elected chiefly from Merchant 'Tailors'
80 COLLEGE LIFE.
sincerest pleasure *. He was a gentleman and a
scholar, uniting great diffidence with undoubted
attainments. His conduct towards me, from first
to last, was uniformly that of a sensible and kindhearted man. In the third year of my residence,
he succeeded to the presidentship, on the death of
Dr. Dennis, by the unanimous votes of the Fellows.
I regretted that, as a commoner, I had no vote to
bestow, or he should have had a dozen from me,
had I the means of giving them. On his election,
the whole college (dependent and independent members) went en trein to do homage to Christ Church.
I thought this a very humbling piece of vassalaget.
I had scarcely entered upon my studies, or joined
my class, before I began to be conscious of my comSchool, in Suffolk-lane, London. Thomas White, Lord Mayor of London, was founder of the college in 1557. There is a whole-length portrait of him at the upper end of the college dining-hall. It is a hard,
brown, ochery picture, but genuine-and, I dare say, a faithful resemblance. The History of Merchant Tailors' School has been written by
the Rev. H. B. Wilson, 1812-14, 4to.
* The first interview with Dr., then Mr. Marlowe, was short ; but
civil and decisive. One thing has ever since struck me. Dr. M. told
Dr. Greenlaw that he thought I might maintain myself very respectably as a commoner for 120l. per annum. To be sure, in those days
port wine was to be had of Mr. Sims for 17. 58. per dozen. Claret was
utterly unknown at any table.
† We were received by the dean and chapter, as I supposed it to be,
in full costume and formality. Dr. Cyril Jackson (than whom few
men could dress themselves in the robes of authority with greater dignity and effect) was the Dean. What took place I know not ; but we returned in rank and file, as we had issued out. In due course, the
whole college was regaled with a sumptuous dinner by the newlyelected president, who came to our several common-rooms for drinking
wine, to pledge us, and to receive in return the heartiest attestations of
COLLEGE LIFE. 81
parative backwardness ; or rather of my premature
entrance upon COLLEGE LIFE. Two years of stiff
and steady discipline with a private tutor should
have preceded it. The want, too, of an education
at a public school was fancied to be felt ; but my
tutor, often seeing my misgivings and anxieties,
spared me as much as possible. I always took pains
before going up, and fancied I could master Herodotus and Xenophon with comparative ease ; Demosthenes and Longinus required closer grappling
with. Still all these lectures had only the air of
schoolboy proceedings : nothing lofty, stirring, or
instructive was propounded to us. There were no
college prizes ; and lecture and chapel were all that
we seemed to be called upon to attend to. After
lecture, the day was our own ; and oh ! what days
were these.
Boating, hunting, shooting, fishing-these formed,
in times ofyore, the chief amusements of the OXFORD
SCHOLAR. They form them now, and will ever form
them; being good, and true, and lawful amusements
in their several ways, when partaken of in moderaour esteem and respect for him-the masters by themselves, the bachelors by themselves, and scholars and commoners each in their particular banqueting-room. I remember one forward freshman shouting
aloud on this memorable occasion , as the new president retreated,
" Nunc est bibendum ; nunc pede libero
Pulsanda tellus !"
The stars of midnight twinkled upon our orgies : but this was a day NEVER to COME AGAIN. Dr. Marlowe sat thirty -three years in the president's chair of St. John's College.
G
82 COLLEGE LIFE.
tion. But who shall describe the inward glow of
delight with which that same scholar first sees the
furniture of his rooms as his own-and his rooms, a
sort of castle, impervious, if he pleases, to the intruding foot ! Everything about him begets a spirit
of independence. He reads-he writes-he reposes
-he carouses, as that spirit induces. All that he
puts his hand upon, is his own. The fragrant bohea,
the sparkling port ; the friends, few or many, which
encircle him ; while the occupations of the past, and
the schemes for the coming day, furnish themes
which alternately soothe and animate the enthusiastic coterie. The anticipations of the morrow
keep the forehead as smooth and the heart as warm
as when the day of sport and of pastime has closed.
There can be no let or hindrance. A lecture, which
occupies a class only one hour, is as an intellectual
plaything. It is over, and half the college is abroad ;
some few to wend their solitary steps " where the
harebells and violets blow," and to return upon the
bosom of Isis beneath the trembling radiance of the
moon : —after having visited the ruins of Godstow, or
entered the sacred antiquity of Iffley *.
* The ruins of Godstow Nunnery are almost ideal, so scanty are the
materials left. The history attached to them, whether real or feigned,
is quite of a romantic cast of character ; but the reader may see as
much gossip as he pleases connected with this nunnery in Hearne's
Historia Gulielmi Neubrigensis. The dwelling upon Godstow, brings
Wolvercote, an adjoining village, to my recollection ; where once lived
one of the most excellent of men, and kind-hearted of friends—Mr.
CHARLES SWANN, a paper-maker. He died some twenty years ago,
COLLEGE LIFE. 83
But I am dealing in generals, when, to be instructive, I ought perhaps to particularise. It was
and has been very recently followed to the grave by his only son, a
barrister full of promise.
The church of IFFLEY has always struck me as being among the
most compact, perfect, and interesting specimens of what is vulgarly
called Saxon (but correctly Norman) architecture in the kingdom. Its
western entrance, and the zigzag ornamented arches within, upon which
the stunted tower is built, are full of attractions, which the thoroughly
initiated only know how sufficiently to appreciate. The style of its
architecture is, in almost all respects, similar to that of St. Peter's in the
East, at Oxford; of which some notion may be formed by looking at the
plates, and especially of that of " the doorway under the porch," in one
of the numbers of Dr. Ingram's popular work, entitled " Memorials of
Oxford."
Of the village as well as ofthe church ofIffley, thus called to remembrance, let me be indulged in expressions to which that remembrance
gives birth. That spot had often been the scene of many a pleasant
and many an innocent recreation . Early and late have I been an inmate in the house of one of its most respectable inhabitants, now, peradventure, numbered with the silent dead. Often, as the eleventh hour
of night was striking by GREAT TOм, have I unmoored my little bark,
at the extremity of the garden, " washed by the refluent wave," and
made onwards for home ere the midnight bell marked the certainty of
an imposition. Some twenty-three or four years ago, all the events or
imagery, imparted in these few pages, rushed upon my recollection-to
which I gave vent in the following would-be poetical attempt-referring
to the earlier period of a freshman.
As thus enthusiastic he pursues
His varying round, his destiny at length
Leads him to enter, as a student free,
Thy cloister's pale, and academic bowers,
BELOVED OXFORD ! There he thrives. There shines
And glitters in his own conceit. His days
To learning little, and his nights to mirth
Much, are devoted for a while. And yet
Th' instructive volume oft times duly spread,
Is seen upon his desk. 'Tis History
Of Ancient Greece or England, from thy pen,
Mitford or Henry; or from his who late
G 2
84 COLLEGE LIFE.
some time, and not till after keeping two or three
terms, that I began to adopt what is called a systemHath writ of Italy's illustrious sons,
Immortal Roscoe. Next, ' tis sweet romanceHow Amadis or Arthur through the fields
Ofwar, triumphant, shook their blood-stain'd lance,
And, like the stubble by the whistling wind,
Drove recreant knights before them. Then his breast
Feels the full glow accordant-then by turns
He'd legislate like Solon, or would fight
Like Fier-Bras. To mathematic skill
Indifferent ; but of ancient classic lore
(Transmitted in the everlasting page
Ofgrave Thucydides, or Livy eloquent)
Enamour'd much. And thus the first two years
His studies ( if a name so lofty may
Be fix'd to such pursuits) are mark'd. But oh !
His pleasures, how transcendant ! Down the stream
Of Isis, on whose banks the flowrets blow For aye in song, he guides the rapid skiff;
And like an Indian, freed from vassalage,
Sniffs oft the gale delicious : while his heart
Is lost in transport unalloy'd with care.
His vigorous hands the ashen sculls apply,
And soft beneath the yielding waters play.
Then on he glides towards his favourite spot :
Makes fast his little bark, secure from surge
And tempest sudden ; and on shore he leaps
Triumphant, at his skill delighted. If
Thy blooming meads, and art-instructive church,
O IFFLEY ! fail to tempt him, forward he
To neighbouring Sandford bends his hast'ning step,
By curiosity or hunger driven.
The silver eel is dress'd ; the sparkling ale
From choicest flagon, mantled with brown dust,
Nutmeg ' yclept, is brought in meet array
And studied form. His hunger thus appeased,
And slaked his thirst, he quits the lowly roof
With joy unspeakable, of place and time
Regardless ; till from Botley's Hill the sun,
COLLEGE LIFE. 85
atic course of reading ; the love of liberty, or rather
of unrestrained recreation, having kept me previously
very much out of college. Abingdon, Blenheim,
Newnham-in short, a new world, with a new set of
ideas ! But I had usually a pocket companion in
the shape of a volume of English poetry or the drama.
I had purchased Bishop Newton's Milton, Warburton's Pope, and Theobald's Shakspeare : but none
took a stronger hold of me, in those days, than
THOMSON ; and I loved his Castle of Indolence beyond measure * . Of his Seasons, Spring was my
Slow moving to his western bed, makes broad
The shades of coming eve : and down the stream
The gently-stirring zephyr wafts thy sound,
GREAT TOM ! like cannon heard at Dover cliff
From Calais' shore, and dreaded more. Anon
He hurries with quick step, and pulse increased ,
Till his moor'd bark he loosens. Now the tug
Of skill and strength against th' opposing stream
In vain ! Bibliography, p. 5.
* The above were my first book purchases, at a Mr. Collins's, in
Change-alley, near my uncle's residence, in Walbrook. They were put
up in the window at marked prices, and I think I was upwards of a
week fluttering about that same window, in the agonising hesitation of
purchasing or not. I disdained to let the shopman carry them home,
but took them triumphantly under my arm, and deposited them in
a trunk. Collins was the most diminutive man I ever had business
with ; but he knew business well. His shrill pipe and twinkling little
dark eyes (especially when looking at you over the rim of his spectacles)
cannot be easily forgotten. His shop was absolutely choked, and his
windows were darkened, with books. He used to get his flying dinnermeal behind a stack of books, from which he darted with great alertness when a customer entered his shop. He died some years ago, and
was succeeded by his nephew, Mr. Wardour. But the book-shop exists
no longer-and boots and shoes now occupy the place of quartos and
octavos.
86 COLLEGE LIFE .
66
favourite and how natural the preference ! How
many summer suns " have " rolled unperceived
away" while, in the deepening glooms of Bagley
Wood, or near the magnificent expanse of water at
Blenheim, I have been seated with some one of the
above authors in my lap ! Thefuture had nothing,
then, so entirely rapturous as the present.
At length a sort of literary ambition began to be
stirring within me. It was in the power of every
one to row, sail, hunt, shoot, and fish ; but to " build
the lofty rhyme," to store the memory with deeds of
other days, to think, speak, and write well, were objects which seemed to me to be of a more exalted and
commanding cast of character. Still I was thrown
upon myself and my own resources : there was no
common link of sympathy. In my fellow-collegians,
with some very few exceptions, I discovered no very
obvious sparks or indications of a desire to strike out
of the ordinary routine. But if I sought solitude, I
found instruction in the society of those " who speak
without opening their mouths, and who chastise without the infliction of stripes *." Two works, at this
* The expression is in Richard De Bury's Philobiblon ; a work, about
which there is mention made, almost to raving, in the Bibliomania, p.
245-7 ; Bibl. Decameron, vol. iii. pp. 229, 230 ; and Biblioth. Spenceriana, vol. iii. p. 237. Some two or three years since there was published a literal English version of the quaint and curious original Latin
text. To this version are subjoined notes, apparently destined only to
be the channel of unprovoked and unjustifiable abuse of the English
CHURCH and her MINISTERS. It is as difficult to divine, as it is to
justify, the motive of such vituperation.
COLLEGE LIFE. 87
crisis, contributed, instantly and most effectually, to
fasten me to my seat, and to make me a constant
inmate of college. These were Boswell's Life of
Johnson and D'Israeli's Curiosities of Literature.
Although composed of wholly opposite materials,
they affected me in nearly the same degree. With
Johnson and Boswell I used to sit hour after hour,
and day after day, in our groves or gardens-a very
paradise of their kind * . I seemed to be one, however insignificant, of the circle described ; and never
knew how to admire sufficiently the masculine understanding, the vigorous reasoning, and colloquial eloquence, of the great sage of Litchfieldt. D'Israeli
was the companion of my evening hours and lone
musings beyond midnight. I once saw the gothic
battlements outside my window streaked with the
* These are the work of BROWN ; and if ever Cowper's precept of
giving " ample space to narrow bounds" were realised, it has been in
these delightful gardens. It was said, that when George III. paid his
first visit to Oxford, he declared that his dominions did not contain such
a specimen of gardening skill—and yet they are comprised within a
boundary offour acres !
+ There is now in circulation a pocket edition, under the editorship
of Mr. Croker, of this delightful and matchless piece of biography,
forming part of an edition of Johnson's entire works. This edition will
run upon all fours through every civilised country in the world. May Iexpress my regret, or perhaps disappointment, at the autobiography
of the Great Seer in his very earlier years ? To be sure, anything
coming from such a man has a distinct and peculiar zest ; but the record
of puling infancy and diseased childhood, together with an imperfect
statement of youthful studies and pursuits, has not much hold upon the
imagination or the memory.
Upon one of these " battlements ” there used regularly to perch, as
the darkness of night came on, a grave, large, and apparently well- fed
OWL. He commenced his hootings almost as regularly, but in a more
88 COLLEGE LIFE.
dapple light of the morning, as I retired to rest
closing "the Curiosities of Literature." I was always equally surprised and delighted to see from
what sources the " curious" intelligence contained
in this work was derived. Never was truth attired
in more attractive garments than in these volumes ;
and to them I owe my early passion for ENGLISH
PHILOLOGY-a passion, which can only cease with
my existence.
I loved history exceedingly; and, strange to say,
took a violent affection for Rushworth's Collections,
as a portion of that of our own country. Beyond
measure was I pleased with that historian's account
of the reign of James I *., and the developement of
subdued tone, as the nights became moonlight. On one of these
occasions I was seized with a fit to compose an ode, published in my
Poems, entitled, “ Ode to the Moon, with my College Window open.”
It was precisely at one of these D'Israelite studies that I composed the
lines in question, which begin thus :
66' Solemn, serene, congenial, hush'd in peace !
All nature in reposing grandeur lies.
Through the thin tranquil air,
The owl pours forth her hollow tone ;
Whilst melancholy, thoughtful, and alone,
I view with cheerless eye her progress through the skies."
* Upon what exact data, I know not, but Mr. D'Israeli, whose instructive " Curiosities" has always been appreciated by me as they
deserve to be, is smitten with a most uncommon attachment towards the
memory of James I., upon whom he writes an express volume in laudatory strains. He was at once encouraged and hardened in this predilection by his friend the late W. Gifford , the well-known and muchdreaded editor of the Quarterly Review. I am more than surprised,
being well nigh astounded, at such a partiality. He, who has attentively
perused a celebrated little volume, entitled " Truth brought to Light by
Time" (common and cheap enough), 1651, 4to. , may see and be con-
COLLEGE LIFE. 89
the intrigues of Gondomar and Buckingham, in negociating the marriage of Charles with the Infanta
vinced of the infamy of the protection given by James to Carre, Earl of
Somerset, and the Countess of Essex, at the very moment when the
hands of that abandoned couple were stained with the blood of Sir.
Thomas Overbury, whom they had caused to be murdered in the Tower.
James must in his heart have known them to have been privy to that
murder, and yet he forgave and caressed them ! So true is the remark
of Lord Clarendon, that he “ could not resist the influence of fine clothes
and a handsome person." His predecessor would have taken especial
good care to have elevated the couple in question to an Haman-like
altitude. And then, the decapitation, the murder, of Sir Walter Raleigh,
during the peaceful reign of the same James !
Good Mr. D'Israeli, reconsider your judgment. And yet I have no
hopes of its reversion ; for, in the recent edition of his Curiosities of
· Literature, vol . ii . p. 322, the author refers us to this very " Enquiry
into the Literary and Political Character of James I.," and tells us that
he is perfectly satisfied with the view which he had at first, in these
"Curiosities," taken of the Scoto-Anglican monarch. It seems that the
chief ground of his inference, or eulogy, is, that James had " preserved
for us a peace of more than twenty years." But surely this is not a
correct logical datum for such a conclusion. The peace of a country is
not strictly a personal, or a national question, per se ; it must depend in
a great measure upon the disposition of other countries. A man may
be among the most peaceful of citizens or of farmers, but he may have
a very quarrelsome neighbour. His windows may be repeatedly broken,
or his fields as repeatedly trespassed upon. He must then defend that
aggression. Thus, feuds in ordinary life are engendered, and national
feuds arise frequently from causes comparatively as sure yet as trivial.
When James I. ascended the throne, there was a disposition to peace
abroad. France was wearied and exhausted with the wars ofthe league;
and Spain, not able to trespass upon England by land, had the wings of
her fleet so thoroughly clipt by the destruction of her Armada (the
Trafalgar action of that day) , that she was in no wise able to make
the slightest hostile effort. But the real secret may be supposed to lie
in the consummate address of CECIL, the prime minister, upon whose
shoulders the mantle of his uncle seems to have been so gracefully cast.
Let any man study the " Memorials" of Sir Robert Winwood, Cecil's
secretary, and he may not only be convinced of this fact, but in other
respects have the toil of perusal abundantly rewarded by the fruits to
be gathered from a solid and instructive work.
90 COLLEGE LIFE.
of Spain. But Henry's history was the sort of
"Hortus Adonidis" from which I strove to gather
ripe and unperishing fruit. He was always on my
table ; and when I could, his authorities were by the
side of him. Hume was my sofa companion ; but
his reign of Elizabeth ( which I believe to have read
through four times at the least) has always struck
me as a piece of composition scarcely to be equalled.
It is also very carefully got up on the score of authorities ; while all the author's Tudorian propensities and attachments are most adroitly interwoven in
the narrative and reasonings of the text * . Strange as
may seem the juxta-position, yet Burton and Gibbon
were frequently lying upon the same sofa or table.
From causes utterly remote from each other, I loved
these authors alike in respect to steadiness of attachment—although Gibbon always commanded a more
consecutive attention and a more frequent reflection.
The latter, in his "Account ofhis Life and Writings,"
was among the most winning of authors ; and in his
"Decline and Fall " seemed to be the most dignified
and instructive of historians t. I read him, in the
* Take, for example, the reasonings on both sides of the question for
liberating or executing Mary, Queen of Scots, as urged upon Elizabeth
by Cecil and Walsingham. You become, by turns, the advocate of
each measure ; so nicely, ingeniously, and cogently do the arguments
seem to run. For PATHOS, what, in the whole compass of English
history, is comparable to Hume's account of the execution of the unfortunate queen-from the moment of her rising from her early bed to
that of laying her head upon the block ?
+ Timewas, some thirty years ago (see More's Utopia, 2 vols. 1806) ,
that I made much of BURTON's Anatomy of Melancholy, from the
COLLEGE LIFE. 91
last mentioned work, with such authorities as I
could muster together ; but what was a lad of
eighteen to do with the " Body of the Byzantine
Historians ?” The shelves of the college library
afforded, I believe, about one half of their number,
cubical quarto of 1621 to the tapering folio of 1678, being in possession
of these, and of all the intermediate editions. My copies were tall, clean,
and goodly in all respects ; and to that of the last was prefixed an impression, bright as silver, of Albert Durer's grand print of " Melancholia," being a female personification of Melancholy. These copies
were all bound in picked russia, by Faulkener ; for then, Charles Lewis
66 was not." What an extraordinary book it is, and what a most extraordinary portion of it is the chapter upon " Love Melancholy !" I was
grateful for the octavo reprint ofit, which has gone through two editions :
but Burton has not yet been clothed in the editorial garb which ought to
encircle his shoulders.
66
Of GIBBON it were idle now to speak, as criticism has been drawn to
its very dregs concerning him ; and we look to receive from the Rev.
Mr. Milman an edition of his great historical work (for great, "
questionless it is) in which the subtle ore of infidelity will be extracted
from the stratum of the text, and innuendoes met and encountered with
the courage of a Christian scholar and critic . To my judgment, in
later life, Gibbon has, what Johnson describes Gray as having, ".a sort
of strutting dignity, loving always to walk on tiptoe." He tires sooner
than any other historian, from his narrative being too often clogged and
encumbered by the drapery of words. But his mind had a capacious
grasp, and he was perhaps the most ambitious of all historians ancient
or modern. His way lay through thorns and brambles, in the midst of
bog, and sometimes of darkness ; but he seemed to glory in mastering
them. From the second century of the Christian era to the middle
of the fifteenth, on the capture of Constantinople, he chose a path for
himself ; and in that path no successor can walk without borrowing
largely ofthe light which the volumes of the " Decline and Fall" cannot fail to supply him.
I have, however, something like “ a crow to pick" with the conclusion
of Gibbon's Account of his Life and Writings. It is not only hypocondriacal, but it is almost cowardly. At least, a brave Christian would
not so express himself. The author talks of the " abbreviation of time
and the failure of hope, always tinging with a browner shade the evening
92 COLLEGE LIFE.
but who could encounter such a phalanx as a matter
of mere amusement * ?
Still there was something wanting, as I mellowed
down towards the third year of my standing, to
render a COLLEGE LIFE thoroughly congenial and
satisfactory. College exercises were trite, dull, and
uninstructive. The University partook of this distressing somnolency. There seemed to be no spur to
emulation and to excellence. Whatever was done,
was to be done only by means of private energy and
enthusiasm. The STATUTES were at that time a sort
of caput mortuum ; and yet the members of the University were taught to view and to estimate them as
of life:" as if THIS life were to lead to NO OTHER : as ifthe grave were for
ever to hold both the body and spirit of man. Well might the most
brilliant of all Pagan lyrical poets exclaim,
"O beate Sexti,
Vitæ summa brevis spem nos vetat incohare longam.
Jam te premet nox, fabulæque manes,
Et domus exilis plutonia," &c.
but, for a man like Gibbon, born and writing in the eighteenth century,
to close such an "Account" in a strain so querulous and unphilosphical
(to say the least) is altogether as pitiable as surprising. How fine is
the burst of YOUNG:
"Life's a debtor to the grave.
Dark lattice, letting in ETERNAL Day !
Death gives us more than was in Eden lost.”
Even the homely couplet sung in the evening hymn of our metropolitan
churches is infinitely preferable to the Gibbonian philosophy :—
" Teach me to live that I may dread
The GRAVE as little as my BED."
* This "phalanx" consists of about 50 folio volumes, published at Paris
between the years 1645-1819. They may now be had for about thirty
pounds, but were once not purchasable under threescore and ten guineas.
I remember Mr. Heber telling me, that, on procuring a set abroad ( I
think in the Low Countries) , he was obliged to take them about with
him, loose, in a travelling carriage, upwards of fifty miles, tumbling
COLLEGE LIFE. 93
the ancient Roman was taught to look upon the Rubicon, the sacred boundary of his confine-beyond
which it was sacrilege to pass. The beadles paraded
in rustling silks and glittering maces to St. Mary's,
to the Divinity School, and to the Theatre. Sermons
were preached, degrees conferred, commemorations
celebrated; gaudies, or college anniversary festivals * ,
went their joyous and spirit-stirring rounds ; and
dinners and deserts were at once plentiful and expensive. But, taking one day and one term with
another, there was a sort of "dull, aching void, "
which, with young men of aspiring notions and ardent imaginations, nothing could thoroughly compensate or reconcile. The laws of the university
were as the heavy sedge, or sea-weed, which only
about in all directions, and “ threatening to bury him beneath the ruins
of the Lower Empire." This magnificent, and to the historical collector indispensable, set of volumes, together with the publications of the
Councils, Fathers, and Ancient Classics, reflects immortal honour upon
the PRESS OF FRANCE.
* Each college has its PATRON SAINT. St. John the Baptist was ours.
On that day, June 24th, the hall was set out with flowers and garlands,
and the dinner consisted of every luxury in season. The larger gracecups were ranged upon the high table, for the senior fellows and visiting
dons ; the sideboard glittered and groaned beneath the weight of other
old and massive plate-plate, which had been concealed during the civil
wars, and not melted down to serve the royal cause, as that of many
other colleges had been. Altogether, the sight and the festival were
joyous and grand. In ancient times, however, the day was ushered in
with pious solemnity ; and even thirty-five years ago, the junior members were expected to take the sacrament in the morning-a most startling and unfit prelude to the Saturnalia of the day. This custom is wisely now more honoured in the breach than in the observance."
94 COLLEGE LIFE.
encumbered exertion and darkened hope * . Talents
like those of Canning or of Copleston would doubtless have burst every " searment ; " but the aliment
of an ordinary understanding required treatment of
a more intelligible and invigorating nature. There
was, as before intimated, plenty of private or individual energy, which only wanted sympathy or encouragement to break forth into public distinction ;
but the arms of Alma Mater dared not then embrace
or cherish the hopes of her offspring. She might
have commended the zeal, but she had neither the
wisdom nor the spirit to " move one finger" in giving
it a right direction.
At length an experiment was made to break
through all this miserable thraldom and melancholy
state of things. Several members of several colleges (in the number of whom I was as proud as
happy to be enlisted) met frequently at each other's
rooms, to talk over and to concoct a code of laws, or
of regulations, for the establishment of a society to
be called a " Societyfor Scientific and Literary Disquisition." It comprehended a debate and an essay,
to be prepared by each member in succession, stu-
* Suppose any sensible man, or half a dozen sensible men, had at this time set themselves to the task of remodelling these statutes, and
had perfected the very plan which, about a dozen years afterwards,
should seem to have been adopted by acclamation-would that remodelling have been then approved ? Or would the remodellers have been
called LUNATICS ? So true is it, that, in legislation as in education, there
seems to be " A TIME TO SOW AND A TIME TO REAP."
COLLEGE LIFE. 95
diously avoiding, in both, all topics of religious and
political controversy. There was not the slightest.
attempt to beat down any one barrier of university
law or regulation throughout our whole code. We
were to meet in a hired room, at a private house,
and were to indulge in our favourite themes in the
most unrestrained manner, without giving ingress to
a single stranger. Over, and over again, was each
law revised, corrected, and endeavoured to be rendered as little objectionable as possible. At length,
after the final touches, we demanded an interview
with the vice-chancellor and proctors ; and our
founder, WILLIAM GEORGE MATON * , of Queen's
College, Messrs. STODDART, WHITELOCK, FALCONER,
(of Christ Church, Queen's, and Corpus colleges)
were deputed to meet the great men in office, and to
report accordingly.
Dr. Wills was then vice-chancellor, of whom some
* When the first sheet of this work was printed off, this excellent
man, and early and undeviating friend, was LIVING-an ornament to his
(medical) profession, and an honour to human nature. He was the
first gownsman to whom I had a letter of introduction on my entrance
at St. John's. Our acquaintance soon mellowed into friendship, and
that friendship " grew with our growth, and strengthened with our
strength.' In life's bitterest moments-when those whom we love with
an intensity of parental affection are about to be taken from us-the
sympathy and skill of my departed friend were alike manifested. And
what an ENTRANCE was His into his profession ! How much of the
honourable profit of years of toil was first devoted to the discharge
of those debts which his high sense of honour told him to be due to
the memory of a Father ! Dr. Maton died a bachelor, in his sixty-first
year, leaving the bulk of his fortune to an elder niece.
96 COLLEGE LIFE.
slight mention has been already made *. He received
the deputation in the most courteous manner, and
requested that our laws might be left with him, as
much for his own particular and careful examination
as for that of other heads of houses or officers whom
he might choose to consult. His request was readily
and as courteously complied with ; and a day was
appointed when the answer of the oracle might be
obtained. In about a week, according to agreement,
the same deputation was received within the library
of the vice-chancellor, who, after solemnly returning
the volume (containing the laws) into the hands of
our worthy founder, addressed them pretty nearly in
the following word. " Gentlemen, there does not
appear to be anything in these laws subversive of
academic discipline, or contrary to the statutes of
the university-but (ah, that ill-omened BUT! ) as
it is impossible to predict how they may operate, and
as innovations ofthis sort, and in these times , may
6
* See page 79, ante.
+ It was during the full swing of the French Revolution, and Oxford
was at the time tenanted by numerous EMIGRANTS. Many of these
emigrants (clergymen) were of the most meritorious character ; civil,
unobtrusive, diligent, and well-educated. I was intimate with several,
and too happy, on all occasions, to shew them every civility without
doors and within . I have walked with them at one time to Blenheim,
and at another to Abingdon ; and they have again and again " broken
my bread and tasted my salt." Round the groves of St. John, or at
sunset from Headington Hill, how often have we perambulated ! And
well do I remember, on the Abbé * * * and myself assisting each
COLLEGE LIFE. 97
as it
have a tendency which may be as little anticipated
may be distressing to theframers ofsuch laws,
Iam compelled, in the exercise ofmymagisterial authority, as vice-chancellor, to interdict your meeting
in the manner proposed." The deputation was not
altogether unprepared for such a reply; as there had
been previously frequent conferences between the
dean of Christ Church and Dr. Wills, and the
former was somewhat prone to consider innovation
and revolution as synonymous * .
other's memories through the first eclogue of Virgil, and coming to the following passage,
66 Impius hæc tam culta novalia miles habebit ?
Barbarus has segetes ? En quò discordia cives
Perduxit miseros."
the Abbé burst into tears, exclaiming-" C'EST LA MA PATRIE ! " While
upon this theme, let it be allowed me to pay a short but sincere tribute
of respect to the attainments ( perhaps to the memory) of ONE emigrant,
of the name of LE BARRIERE, who had the superintendence of a young
gentleman of great fortune and connexions, and who resided at
school with his pupil. Our personal intercourse was succeeded by an mylast
unintermitting correspondence during the whole time I was at college.
His letters (upon which I am unable, in a mass of forty years' correspondence, to lay my hand at this moment) were uniformly in the
English language, and I do not remember to have ever seen such specimens of it by the hand of a foreigner. They were, perhaps, not
exceeded by those of Walpole and Gibbon in the French language.
* Yet no man more anxious about all the histories bearing upon the
French revolution, than Dr. CYRIL JACKSON. But the work of all others
which, at that time, was supposed to be secretly doing most mischief,
and preparing the intellectual soil for the reception ofrevolutionary seed ,
was Godwin's Political Justice ; then just issued into the world in two
stately quarto volumes. Nor can it be denied that, in common with
many other enquiring spirits, some ofthe members of our proposed club
were a little imbued with the principles of Mr. Godwin's book. The
novelty, the hardihood, the generalising spirit of these principles, conH
98 COLLEGE LIFE.
There was, therefore, but one result to adoptone choice left : and that was, to carry the object, so
dear to our hearts, into effect within our private
apartments, in rotation. There we might discuss,
debate, and hear essays read, ad infinitum ; and,
accordingly, our first meeting took place in Queen's
College, at the rooms of our founder, afterwards so
long and so well known in the medical world as Dr.
MATON* . Our society was quickly enlarged ; and
the present BISHOP Of LLANDAFF, then a student of
Corpus College, and the Rev. JOHN HORSEMAN,
afterwards a tutor in the same college, were enrolled
members t. The two MONCRIEFFS of Balioľ were
veyed in language at once lucid and strong, struck the minds of many
with admiration of the author as well as of the work. It was attacked,
on its appearance, with combined vigour, adroitness, and success : and
who now reads or remembers the " Political Justice " of Mr. Godwin ?
Yet is its Author a mighty master in his way. Falkland and St. Leon
are among our most philosophical and spirit-moving novels.
* Dr. Maton (see page 95, ante) commenced his literary, before his
medical, career, by a topographical publication entitled Observations
upon the Western Counties ( Dorsetshire and Somersetshire) and by a
Life ofLinnæus. The former in 2 vols. 8vo. 1797, the latter in one
volume 4to. The latter was reviewed ( I think by the author's friend,
the editor), in the Edinburgh Review, vol viii . p. 422.
+ I heard the bishop recite both his prizes ; the one, in 1793, a Latin
poem, upon "Caius Marius Coriolanus midst the ruins of Carthage ;"
the other, in 1796, an English prose essay upon Agriculture. University distinction could not carry a young man beyond these honours.
I remember, in our society, that this distinguished prize-gainer once
made a most ingenious and eloquent speech upon CHIVALRY, which
was the theme of the evening's debate. Ofmy old and particular and kind
friend, the Rev. JOHN HORSEMAN, thus brought to my mind, " let me be
indulged in the remembrance." He is now, after a separation of some
twenty-five years, become a comparatively near neighbour, and rector
COLLEGE LIFE. 99
also among our earlier acquisitions ; and some gentleman commoner of Trinity College (whose name I
have forgotten) together with my oldest, and among
my most valued friends, Mr. BARWIS of Queen's,
Mr. Gibson (afterwards called Riddell) of Worcester,
of Heydon, near Royston in Cambridgeshire. His scholarship, ready
and various, was always admitted ; while few could turn over the leaves
of Plato with a more thorough knowledge of their contents. But the
sweetness of his temper, and the playfulness of his muse, were necessarily the more endearing and attractive objects with his college friends.
After the silence of a dozen years ( and when he had given up the tutorship of the college) his unsubdued fondness for familiar verse, spurred
him on to address me in the following lines.
Though *
*
*
* * *
And Horseman's be unknown to fame,
And years have past since last we met,
True friends can ne'er old friends forget.
How, then, at Cambridge could you be
So near, and yet not come to me?
Or, were your time not quite your own,
If summon'd, I to you had flown.
Often I muse on OXFORD DAYS,
And different friends gone different ways :
Some dead, some worse than dead, estranged
In principle, and heart, too, changed.
But could I judge from pictured look,
Or from that printed self, your book *
Though somewhat modified, you are,
In all essentials, what you were.
Such likewise I, though modified,
And such for ever may abide ;
Possibly not so great a prig,
,
But-bear with me, old friend—a wHIG.
About ten years after this effusion, and on taking up my residence at
Exning, within about eighteen miles of his own, he writes thus, in that
* The Tour.
OTHEQUE
DE
LA
LYON
7892
TILLE
H 2
100 COLLEGE LIFE.
and George F *** of Lincoln -all united to give
strength and respectability to our association. Our
meetings were frequent and full. The essays, after
having been read, were entered in a book ; and I
am not sure whether, at this very day, such book be
not in existence. The subjects of debate usually
were, as of old they ever have been, whether the
merits or demerits of such a character (Cæsar or
Queen Elizabeth, for instance) were the greater ?
Or whether the good or evil of such a measure, in
legislation or in politics, be the more predominant ?
Of our speakers, the elder Moncrieff, and George
F ** of Lincoln were doubtless the most fluent and
effective ; especially the latter, who had a fervency
of utterance which was at times surprising. But
the younger Moncrieff, in course of time, followed
his brother, "passibus æquis * ." Taking the art of
softened and pensive strain which the recurrence of a birth-day, at a
certain time, of life, will often induce.
Oct. 17, 1834.
This is my birth-day, and may be my last ;
What ought I to expect at fifty-nine ?
Thankful to God for many blessings past,
Without a sigh I could this life resign,
Were there not some, to me most justly dear,
For whom not for myself-for whom I fear.
Yet, though I lean on God as our best friend,
(A friend is HE, and Father, all in ONE) !
And Christian hope illume my latter end,
I feel as they will feel when I am gone :
But, with this truth, I calm my natural fear ;
Though dear to me, they are to GOD MORE DEar.
* Baliol College has reason to be proud of the name of MONCRIEFF.
COLLEGE LIFE. 101
speaking and the composition of an essay, together,
I think Mr. (now Sir John) STODDART of Christ
The two members of it here introduced, were sons of the late Rev. Sir
Henry Welwood Moncrieff, D.D. Bart. , an able, upright, and exemplary
character, " gathered to his fathers,” in 1827, in the fullness of years.
The eldest son, William, who, on going out to Malta and becoming his
majesty's attorney- general, was knighted, and who died there in 1813,
was one of our most distinguished debaters ; and, I think, the best
replier in the club. He never left a point untouched ; and was alike
remarkably happy in covering the weaker parts of his own case or argument, and taking advantage of those of his adversary. No man required such little preparation. He seemed to know the chief bearings
of his subject almost intuitively, and spoke with a surprising elasticity
of spirit and unhesitating promptitude of utterance. But his periods
were neither rounded nor ornate ; and he neither shook the soul nor
took the imagination captive. He was, however, altogether a very
powerful debater, and a fearful opponent. His brother James, who succeeded to the baronetcy, and is now LORD MONCRIEFF (one of the lords
of session in Scotland) , was not less distinguished for acuteness of perception and fluency of speech . He was, in my time, a junior member
of the society, but he became, in the end, one of its most distinguished
members. His abilities and reputation are now so duly acknowledged
in his own country, as to render further notice of them in this place a
mere matter of supererogation.
Of all the singular and original characters belonging to our society,
GEORGE F * *, of Lincoln College, was one of the most striking. His
ambition for public speaking and public distinction was without bounds.
Every thing bent to this one point in his ever-agitated mind. No authors but Demosthenes and Cicero, for him. On paying me a visit one
morning, and seeing me busied with my pencil and brushes, and Mitford, Burton, and Gibbon lying, as usual, open upon my table, he coolly shut up these volumes, and, pointing to my drawing, exclaimed, “ away
with such baubles, if you think of attaining solid fame." We then took
a turn together in the groves of St. John, and I listened, with amazement,
to the outpourings of his ardent spirit, and to his hurried and declamatory eloquence. He was a Northumbrian by birth, and the constant
object, at once of his admiration and envy, was Mr., now EARL GREY.
He used to say, " I could have answered Pitt last night with infinitely
more effect than did my countryman !" His countenance was sallow, his
eye protruding and wild, and his physiognomical expression tart and
102 COLLEGE LIFE.
Church beat us all. He was always upon his legs, a
fearless opponent ; and in the use of a pen, the most
unpremeditating and successful . There were other
repulsive. In debating, it was curious to observe how he made us forget
his bur in the blaze of his fancy and the splendour of his diction. All
language would sometimes seem too feeble for giving utterance to those
sentiments by which his very soul appeared to be shook. But this
could not last for ever. Finding that Mr. Grey would not quit his
prominent station in the House of Commons to make room for himself,
his spirit cooled : a reaction was observable—a pensive, benevolent expression succeeded to that of the more fiery passions by which he had
been agitated ; and one stormy night, when the heavens were torn
asunder by thunder and by lightning, he sallied from his home, and
plunging into a perturbed river, was brought back a CORPSE !
* With what mingled feelings of pleasure and regret do I call to
mind the varied talents of this excellent man, who is now adorning the
bench of supreme civil and admiralty judge at Malta : -pleasure, from a
knowledge of his worth and attainments ; regret, from an apprehension
that we are parted, in all human probability, never to meet again in
this world. SIR JOHN STODDART married the sister of Lord Moncrieff,
some twenty-five years ago, by whom he has a goodly race of representatives ; but, before his marriage, HE WAS THE MAN who wrote up
The Times newspaper to its admitted pitch of distinction and superiority
over every other contemporary journal. Mark, gentle reader, I speak
of the Times newspaper during the eventful and appalling crisis of
Bonaparte's invasion of Spain and destruction of Moscow. My friend
fought with his pen as Wellington fought with his sword; but nothing
like a tithe of the remuneration, which was justly meted out to the hero
of Waterloo, befel the editor of the Times. Of course, I speak of
remuneration in degree, and not in kind. The peace followed. Public
curiosity lulled, and all great and stirring events having subsided, it was
thought that a writer of less commanding talent (certainly not the present editor) , and therefore procurable at a less premium, would answer
the current purposes of the day ; and the retirement of Dr. Stoddart
(for he was at this time a civilian, and particularly noticed and patronised by Lord Stowell) from the old Times, and his establishment of
the New Times newspaper, followed in consequence. But the latter,
from the causes above specified, had only a short-lived existence. Sir
John Stoddart had been his majesty's advocate, or attorney-general, at
COLLEGE LIFE. 103
members, of varying shades of merit, but I have forgotten their names. It is well to be able to particularise so much upon a subject brought to recollection after the lapse of upwards of forty years.
of
Meanwhile, the fame of our club, or society, began
to be noised abroad ; and those who felt no inclination to write essays *, or to impose upon themselves
the toil of reading and research for the purpose
making a speech, were pretty free in using sneering
epithets, and in stigmatising by nick-names. There
was, however, ONE nick-name which we instantly
and courageously took to ourselves and adopted-and
that was, the LUNATICSt. Mad, indeed, we were,
and desired so to be called-if an occasional deviaMalta, before he retired thither, a second time, to assume the office of
Judge. He has lately published a speech upon the advantages of the
introduction of trial by jury into the Maltese courts. As there could be
nothing relating to my friend's career, connected with our club, so interesting as these particulars, the reader will dispense with the introduction of other topics.
* Of these essays, one, on the comparative merits of Dryden's Ode
on St. Cecilia's Day with Collins' Ode on the Passions, and another
on Thomson's Seasons, of both which I was the humble manufacturer,
appeared in the European Magazine of 1795 or 1797, I forget which,
nor is it worth while to ascertain.
† A very remnant of us, under this name, yet meet at each other's
houses, once a month, during the London season : but the recent death
of our FOUNDER has not only thinned but saddened our circle . . . .
"As those we love decay, we die in part ;
String after string is severed from the heart.
Till loosen'd life, no more than breathing clay,
Without one pang is glad to fall away.
Unhappy he, who latest feels the blow!
Whose eyes have wept o'er every friend laid low,
104 COLLEGE LIFE.
tion from dull and hard drinking, frivolous gossip,
and Boeotian uproar, could justify that appellation.
But let us hold the scales with an even hand, and
ask what weight is Now attachable to the names of
our opponents and our deriders ? Aseed was sown—
small, indeed, in itself, and perhaps slightly covered
with earth-which has since grown up and expanded
into a goodly tree, bearing perennial fruit ; and when
the fame of the ACADEMICS is known and admitted
in London, let it not be forgotten that it is a graft
upon this LUNATIC Society of Oxford * . Nor must
we conceal the truth, that, remotely and indirectly,
Still lingering on from partial death to death,
Till, dying, all he can resign is BREATH.”
These are sweet and touching lines, from Thomson ; but they are too
lugubrous and despondent for a CHRISTIAN POET. Even Horace, in the
fourteenth and eighteenth odes of his second book, while equally moving,
is scarcely less melancholy: but Virgil, in his apotheosis of Daphnis, has
a verse which may be put alongside of any among the Poetæ Christiani,
first published from the Aldine press, in volumes rare and tempting on
every score, and which my friend the Archdeacon of ***¸ presses
to his bosom at least once in the week. The beautiful line in question
is this :
"Sub pedibusque videt nubes et sidera Daphnis,"
9
Dr. Maton's death has made a gap in our society which neither surviving nor increasing members can adequately fill up.
* I forget in what year this " graft" took place, but somewhere
about thirty years ago. And when the reader learns, that with this
graft were incorporated the names of HORNER, Gifford, BROUGHAM,
and the two GRANTS, he will not be much disposed to undervalue a
society to which SUCH MEMBERS were attached-or to overpraise that
wisdom which, in the first instance, was opposed to its formation. Dr.
Maton continued to sit as president of the Academics till the year 1814,
when, his professional business greatly increasing, he found it necessary
to resign.
COLLEGE LIFE. 105
the university itself was eventually benefited by the
spirit engendered by such a society. I seem to trace
the correction, and reconcoction, of those STATUtes,
which were almost an insult to common sense, and a
bar to progressive improvement a very compound
of monkish absurdity and puerile discipline-to the
spirit awakened by the CONCLAVE OF LUNATICS.
The same hand, “ which adorned everything that it
touched," both in that society and in either rostrum
of the theatre * , became busied, some dozen years
afterwards, in the remodelling of the statutes in
question ; and, yet later, in throwing a seven-bullhided shield over the University, against missile
weapons of attack of no common manufactory t.
* See page 98, ante.
↑ This literary contest, to which I can do little more here than allude,
is a subject worthy of treatment by the masterly hand of the writer of
the " Quarrels of Authors." The university of Oxford had published
an edition of Strabo, upon which a most severe and unsparing critique
appeared in the Edinburgh Review : see vol. xiv. p. 429. The author
of that criticism took an opportunity of more than indirectly attacking
the whole system of studies pursued in the same university ; and the late
Richard Payne Knight was its reputed author. An anonymous reply
to the " Calumnies" of this review, of which the then provost of Oriel,
Dr. Copleston, was the presumed author, quickly made its appearance.
This reply was in turn reviewed in the Edinburgh, by, it is said, the
joint hands of a reverend divine and the late Professor Playfair. It was
a very hail-storm of a rejoinder-sarcasm and invective rattling through
every page of it. The spirit of the Provost of Oriel was naturally up
"in arms." He took down his choicest yew-bow, and drew forth his
longest and sharpest-pointed arrow to its head :
Δεινὴ δε κλαγγὴ γένετ' ἀργυρέοιο βιοιο.
And although I will not pretend to say that
"The grey goose wing that was thereon,
In their heart's blood was wet,"
106 COLLEGE LIFE.
Oxford would be the most ungrateful of mothers if
she did not bestow marks of peculiar favouritism
upon this, her distinguished child. But may it be
gently asked, and the question forgiven in asking,
66 Why did he QUIT the studious cloisters pale ? "
Two public events, of a very different but equally
stirring nature, occurred during my undergraduateship at Oxford, which it may not be irrelevant to
notice. The one was, the Enconia of the Duke of
Portland (on the death of Lord North or the Earl
of Guildford) as Chancellor of the University ; the
other, the illumination of the whole town and the
colleges, on the victory obtained by Earl Howe over
the French, at sea, on the 1st of June, 1794. The
first of these events, to a freshman, was likely to be
of a most attractive description, and will never be
wholly forgotten ; although its splendor has well
nigh faded away in the remembrance of the recent
and more magnificent Enconia of the Duke of Wellington * . London, in both instances, should seem
yet that arrow went straight towards its mark, and penetrated a good
deal beyond the cuticle of the assailants. In this second and greatly
enlarged reply, the author had to prove himself not only an able scholar
but a good mathematician and an acute metaphysician. He did so,
and here the contest dropt. But the spirit thus awakened could not
sleep till it had manifested itself in some most luminous and masterly
reviews (in the Quarterly) upon the splendid metaphysical talents of the late DUGALD STEWART.
* The history of the election, or selection (for there was no contest)
of this illustrious chieftain for chancellor, is perhaps unprecedented of
its kind. Some five years before, Sir Robert Peel, the member for the
COLLEGE LIFE . 107
to have emptied itself of its beauty and fashion.
The brow of the tutor relaxed ; the imposition no
university, on introducing the bill for Roman catholic emancipation, in
the House of Commons, vacated his seat before that measure was finally
carried in both houses of parliament. Having, as he affirmed, come in
as member for the university on a most distinct pledge given against
the adoption of that measure, he conceived that he could not, consistently with that pledge, retain the same situation when a totally
opposite line of conduct was about to be adopted by him in regard to
this same question, unless his constituents were pleased to place him in
statu quo. Accordingly he resigned ; and Sir Robert Harry Inglis, bart. ,
after a smart and keen contest, was elected in his room. The ground
for the opposition to Sir Robert Peel was, that the measure which he
was now about to advocate and carry through the house, in direct opposition to his former view of it, was SUBVERSIVE of the BEST INTERESTS
of the church, if not of the CHURCH ITSELF. Upon this ground, his
opponents, the high church party, (naturally enough) strove, " manibus
pedibusque," to displace their old member, and to bring in the very
amiable and highly respectable Candidate, who eventually succeeded by
a large majority.
All this was, and is, intelligible enough. Sir Robert Peel was and is
the best judge of his own case, and the best appreciator of his own
feelings ; but I am not single in the avowal, not only that he allowed
the matter to assume too chivalrous and fine-spun a form in his own
mind, but that, had he waited the issue of the measure in question, a
very different result had ensued ; and, especially, had he waited till the
dissolution of parliament upon the reform bill. Let us note well what
has followed. Because Sir Robert Peel was instrumental to the passing
of the act for the emancipation of the Roman catholics, he was REJECTED. Because his colleague, and the prime minister, the Duke of
Wellington, carried that act triumphantly through the upper house, he
was ELECTED CHANCELLOR. "No," say his abettors, " not precisely
because he did so, but because he was a resolute and uncompromising
Tory." Very well : but then what becomes of the great cardinal question of the SUBVERSION OF THE CHURCH, now the measure is carried ?
You must, to be consistent-to be honest-use the same measure of
justice with one man as with another ; and that which, per se, was
objectionable with the Baronet, cannot be praiseworthy in the Duke,
unless, indeed, the question of the subversion of the church be tacitly
smothered, or allowed to die away ! There are riddles in bodies cor-
108 COLLEGE LIFE.
longer issued from head-quarters; logic and lectures
were non-entities ; Dun Scotus and Ockham were
porate, as well as in individual characters, which may not sometimes
admit of an intelligible solution.
As to the conduct of the Duke, on the acceptance of the offer to become
chancellor, it was entirely worthy of himself. It was manly, straightforward, and quite intelligible. Like another great warrior of antiquity,
he seems at first to have "thrice refused " the diadem of distinction
with which he was pressed to encircle his brows. He alledged his
scholar-like unfitness, and that "arms should yield to the gown : ”—in
vain. A negative was not to be thought of, nor listened to : and if not
borne upon the caps of those who encircled him, to subscribe his assent,
that assent, though with renewed hesitation, was received with acclamation ! and, in due course, he was enthroned Chancellor of the University in the Sheldonian Theatre. The days of that enthronisation
will never be forgotten. Although the shouts of applause with which
the admission to the usual honorary degree of Doctor of Civil Laws, by
Burke and Windham, at the Duke of Portland's installation, in 1793,
might be said to be still faintly ringing in my ears—yet No applause
which I ever heard, or witnessed, from a refined and splendid audience,
ever equalled that which rang round the theatre, and made every spectator rise from his seat, when, in the English prize poem, an allusion
was made to the military fame of THAT MAN—-who had eclipsed the
splendour of Hannibal and dimmed the glory of Cæsar !
The allusion, or rather direct mention, was in the following couplet ;
"And the DARK SOUL a world could scarce subdue,
Bent to thy genius-PRINCE of WATERLOO ! "
The " dark soul" was, of course, Bonaparte. It happened to be my good
fortune, by the courtesy and kindness of the Rev. Dr. Rowley, Master of
University College, and Vice-chancellor, to be allowed to take my place
between himself and the Chancellor, a little behind. The rostrum from
which the young man delivered the verses, was to the left of the duke,
and unfortunately on his deaf side. He did not hear the couplet, but the
effect was so marked and so marvellous, that he could not fail to be
quickly acquainted with its import. Such spontaneous and electrifying
shouting, with all the other accompaniments specified in the text, was
really a thing to abide by one to one's grave. I shall conclude this unconscionable note by a very humble, yet, to me, very gratifying anecdote. On the day following the event just related, it was arranged, in
COLLEGE LIFE. 109
beaten with stripes, and Eschylus and Thucydides
interdicted from opening their lips. It was all joy,
the program of the morning, that the duke should visit the University
Press; when, imbued with the feeling of the " olden time," I was
anxious to know whether that press would be previously occupied in
the impression of some complimentary verses to receive him ? On learning that it would not, there was no repressing the ardent desire I felt to
whip and spur a jaded Muse to afford evidence of a feeling which could
not be mistaken, and which was wholly remote from the slightest tincture of party feeling. I obtained permission that the efforts of my poor
Muse should be printed at that press, but a veto was placed on the proposition that they should be presented to the illustrious visitor. They
were never presented, but they are as follow : premising, that the interior
ofthe building is very plain, and that the press was at that time occupied,
as in fact it always is, with large impressions of the bible, and with a
projected edition of Wicliffe's version of it, from two very valuable
manuscripts.
To Arthur Duke of Wellington, Chancellor of the University of Oxford ;
on his Visit to the University Press, June 12, 1834.
Thou com'st, ILLUSTRIOUS CHIEFTAIN, to behold
Nor pictured walls, nor marble's breathing forms,
Nor " ivory, nor golden roofs," nor sights
Such as may take the fancy captive, and induce
The deafening shouts of YESTERDAY to be
Forgotten. No: simplicity is here,
And implements minute, and void of form
Attractive-but in power and solid worth
Beyond the price of rubies and of gold.
These, had they the gift of sound, should tell
How, e'en THY victories, without their aid,
Would in the lapse of ages be forgotten.
'Tis these, by which Rome's Warrior yet instructs
In form resplendent * : these, by which the fire
Ofpure religion warms the Christian's heart,
And points his hopes to heaven. The " storied urn29
* A magnificent edition of CÆSAR'S Commentaries, adorned with
plates, was edited by the Rev. Dr. Clarke, and dedicated to John, Duke
of Marlborough, in 1712, folio. Will a similar work ever adorn the
Oxford press, and be dedicated to its present chancellor ?
110 COLLEGE LIFE.
The heart as well as all festivity, all delirium.
the body seemed to be abroad. The graceful drapery
of damsels was seen to be gliding in those cloisters,
or along those lawns, where, heretofore, the sable
academic gown was trailing ; while, through the
gothic-arched windows, the radiant light of youth
and beauty gleamed upon the gownsman and made
him doubt the reality of the view. Meanwhile, the
theatre is heavily besieged by the motley press of
the young and the old—the countryman and the academic. Woe be to those with encumbered draperies !
There is no deference-no distinction. The doors
slowly open-the rush commences ; screams, shrieks,
laughter, shouts, intermingle their stunning sounds ;
and it is well if, on entrance, the visitor regain his
recollection, and preserve his habiliments entire.
Speeches, recitals, melodies, and choruses ensue.
Degrees are conferred : -handkerchiefs wave, trencher-caps are beaten and split, and huzzas rend the
roof ! -as a popular candidate for these honours ascends to take his station among the " Patres Conscripti" of the assemblage.
The theatre ejects its suffocated occupants, but
Shall crumble to decay : the pillar'd domeThe Mausoleum, vast as Egypt's pileShall sink beneath the withering touch of Time.
But these shall never die. The PRESS, to Thee,
Within these classic precincts, pays her due
And fitting homage : for thy name and deeds
Bespeak her occupation....
OXONIENSIS.
COLLEGE LIFE. 111
there is no exhaustion ; no diminution of excitation.
In due course, a concert follows-and who would
not be present to catch the spirit-stirring note of
Braham, when he pours forth the sublime melody
of Scots wha hae wi' Wallace bled? Evening approaches ; and without knowing whether they have
breakfasted and dined, or not breakfasted and dined,
a sally is made for the ball- room-where anything
but room rewards the aspirant's toil. Dense is the
crowd. The thermometer rushes up to ninety : no
matter, the mercury continues to advance, and the
crowd to increase. Rents, fractures, loss of ornaments-mimic anger and determined struggle ensue.
Everybody bewails the pressure, and everybody is
determined to add to it. The chords of Weipart's
harp are hardly heard to respond to their master's
touch. An attempt is made to astonish by the waltz
or the gallopade. Vain effort ! As well strive to
beat back the roaring sea ere the last surge is discharged upon the beach. Yet they are all joyous,
all satisfied-deprecating the very pressure in which
they seem to take delight. Enconias are luckily
not annual ; or no physical stamina could encounter
them *.
* I was not present at Lord Grenville's installation in 1809 ; but comparatively with that of the Duke of Portland's in 1793, matters were
infinitely better arranged on the installation of last year. It may, however, be said on all these occasions, that both the university and the
town are drunk with delight.
112 COLLEGE LIFE.
Of a very different cast of character from the foregoing, was the Illumination, of which I have made
mention, in consequence of the victory of Earl Howe,
on the first of June. The country had been in
breathless expectation and anxiety about the probable result of that great approaching conflict. Reports of the most idle as well as contradictory nature
had gone abroad. At one time, our gallant commander had been defeated ; at another, he had
twenty captured vessels in his wake. At length came
the truth, and with it the most unbounded acclamation of a grateful country. The night of the illumination happened to be moonlight, but soft, calm,
and unclouded ; and the very paleness of " Cynthia's
brow," in high summer, gave even additional picturesque effect to the grey battlements and minarets
of the colleges. The candles were thickly placed
outside, in fanciful groups, and unmolested by the
slightest breeze ; and those who remember the effect
in the High-street, with its undulating sweep and
gentle descent-of All Souls, University, and Queen's
colleges with the churches of All Saints and St.
Mary's (which, after the Italian fashion, were also,
I believe, illuminated on the outside) must admit
that such a spectacle seemed to be altogether hardly
terrestrial.
Meantime, a stir, of a very varying nature, soon
began to betray itself. Many had sallied forth from
foaming bowls (the expression is Virgil's ) and shouted
COLLEGE LIFE. 113
aloud the names of HowE and SPENCER* ! Others
sung well-known national airs, as they passed along in
hurrying groups. A rocket mounted here, a romancandle blazed there. The roofs and parapet- walls
were crowded by females of every description, who
gazed with mixed wonder and delight upon the agitated scene below. The mails and the night coaches
appeared at their usual hour. The " roaring boys
of Elysium," for they were anything but disciples
of Heraclitus-insisted upon taking on the carriages
another stage with, their own hands. Ribands
(England's " true blue") were brought forth in immeasurable quantities, wherewith to decorate the
horses. Some genuine sons of Comus and Bacchus
leapt within, and others upon the roofs of, the mails,
determined upon taking charge ofthe letters ! There
was alternate scuffle, and laughter, and delay ; and
more than one, or one dozen, of patriotic academicians were not exactly aware of the status in quo
till they reached the barriers of the metropolis.
But in the midst of this maddening uproar, there
were hearts bleeding, and hearts cut in twain. A
brother, a father, a friend, or ONE, combining all
these endearing qualities, had fallen in the victory.
Then it was that silence and sadness induced a different movement and yet, SUCH was the VICTORY, and
* EARL SPENCER, K. G., was at this time the first Lord of the Admiralty ; and perhaps he was the very first, in another sense, who ever
held that most important situation : the English fleet seeming to rise, “ like
a giant refreshed," under his vigorous and successful administration.
I
114 COLLEGE LIFE.
such the irrepressible exultation of all classes of society, that
66 Sorrow, smiling through her tears,"
could not wholly turn away from some participation
of so unprecedented a spectacle * .
But it is time to bid adieu to " the groves of Academus ;" and to wish my beloved " ALMA MATER"
farewell. Yet a gentle word at parting. I have
generalised rather than particularised. I have not
even alluded to many acquaintances, rather friends,
of whom death hath cut off the career when every
bud of promise was about to be opened ; or, acting
a more friendly part, when the next step about to be
taken would have involved the individual in misery
and ruint. Others again, to one's utter amazement,
* It was my lot, during that memorable evening of cloudless tranquillity in the heavens, and promiscuous hilarity upon the earth, to steal
away, with some few friends, towards the water's side, for a few minutes'
perambulation round Christ Church meadow. The scene I witnessed
there, confirmative of what is said in the text, cannot easily be forgotten.
+ A more horrible destiny has awaited others. My friend PHORMIO
lost, in one evening, his ALL at a gaming table, in London. It was then
a sort of fashion among the desperate, to play the part of highwaymen
on Finchley and Wimbledon Commons, or on Hounslow Heath. Phormio betook himself to this occupation at the hazard of life or death.
He had a father who still loved him, in spite of his unceasing efforts to
break his heart : for, indeed, bating the diabolical habits of gambling,
Phormio was among those who had the sweetest of tempers, the most
cultivated of understandings, the most winning of manners, and most
generous of hearts ! On one dark and tempestuous evening of winter,
Phormio was on horseback with two loaded pistols in his holsters ;-the
noise of a post-chaise was getting nearer and nearer ; -on its approach,
the travellers were roughly told to " stop and to deliver their monies."
COLLEGE LIFE. 115
have figured away in parts for which it was hardly
possible to have conceived them to have been qualified ; and now, that they bear themselves stiffly and
proudly, will scarcely vouchsafe to recognise those to
whom professions of indelible obligation were once
profusely tendered. But this is LIFE; and its drama
may be said to have begun when the unsuspecting
confidence of undergraduateship has worn away.
Farewell, then, to the plans, and schemes, and associations of early manhood ! —when every morning's
dawn was bright, and the most lengthened day
seemed to put on its wings of gold, and to fly too
swiftly away! Of all the heads of colleges living,
when I entered at Oxford, ONE only survives. " SERUS REDEAT IN CŒLUM *."
There is, however, or there was, a place, or street,
in this university, " hight" Paradise ; and when I
add that my future destinies were in some measure
But the travellers were also armed, a very common practice in those
days-and one of them, discharging his pistol, shot. Phormio through the
heart. It was the hand of the FATHER which drew the trigger of that
pistol !
* It will perhaps be immediately understood that Dr. ROUTH, the
president of Magdalen College, is here alluded to. That venerable and
excellent man, and most profound and pious scholar, yet lives in the full
enjoyment of his extensive and well furnished library, and of the high
reputation which his classical and theological works have secured him
abroad and at home. If, in pensive anticipation of the future, he be
sometimes induced to say, with the most finished lyrist of antiquity,
he
"Linquenda tellus, et domus, et placens Uxor !"
may also, in the confident strains of Rome's banished bard, equally exclaim :
66 Jamque opus exegi : quod nec Jovis ira, nec ignes,
Nec poterit ferrum, nec edax abolere vetustas."
1 2
116 COLLEGE LIFE.
regulated or fixed in this spot, the reader will be
naturally prepared to felicitate me thereon. Sunshine and shade are alternately upon all the sons of
men. I have felt the former with a grateful heart,
but I have tarried longer in the latter ; and yet, if
I now trod a palace of marble I could scarcely feel
such pure and bounding delight as when, in the time
of life recorded, I saw those portals open to which
my approach was announced by raising the knocker
annexed .
COLLEGE LIFE. 117
Upon the whole, on a dispassionate and honest
review of this tender, and, in many instances, trying
period of human life, my conscience does not reproach me with the commission of the slightest act
whereby, directly or indirectly, the character, comfort, or peace of mind, of any one individual acquaintance was injured or impaired. That I quitted
college at a period of life when perhaps I ought to
have entered it, may probably be admitted by many ;
but the die was cast, and the time is now gone by
never to be recalled. Yet THAT TIME leaves no
leaden weight upon the conscience for its abuse.
With a limited income, and rather a large and miscellaneous acquaintance, I contrived not only to buy
books, but to devote leisure to their perusal. I joined
in the more manly and cheap exercises of the day,
but studiously avoided those amusements which entailed a heavy expense, or tore up the constitution
by the roots. If I could sometimes rise with the
lark for a day's disporting upon the glassy surface of
Isis, I could at others shut myself up in " my den"
for a week's consecutive hard reading, diversified by
drawing, and an evening's ramble to Headington.
If, since I have taken my part upon this great
THEATRE OF LIFE I have not been distinguished as
filling a prominent character, I cannot yet allow
myself to be classed amongst those who have had a
merely mechanical part to perform, or who have exhibited the ingratitude and wrong-headednesses of
such sons of " Alma Mater" as are recorded in the
118 COLLEGE LIFE.
quaint verses of honest James Howell, the author of
Londinopolis *. As to the present scholastic dis-
* These appear, in a cluster of similar quaint verses, in a volume
of CARTWRIGHT'S COMEDIES and POEMS, printed in 1651, 8vo. Cartwright was a student of Christ Church, and afterwards a proctor of
the university. Among the authors of these complimentary strains are
Ben Jonson, the Duke of Monmouth, Sir Edw. Dering, Sir Robert
Staypleton, Bishop Fell ( then a layman), Mayne, Lerigh, and Isaac
Walton. Never did the stream of adulation set in more uniformly
strong and resistless . Jasper Mayne speaks thus of " Master Cartwright : "
" For thou to nature hadst joined art and skill ;
In THEE Ben Jonson still held Shakspeare's quill.”
Yet, who now records Cartwright ? I guess Bishop Fell to have been
a layman at this time, for he thus versifies :
" But I forbear this theme, denied to men
Of common souls, of lay and secular pen ;
It is enough if our unhallowed laies
Stand at the gate and threshhold of his praise."
A little before, he thus speaks of Cartwright in no very cold or unimpassioned strain :
"When that his voice did charm the attentive throng,
And every ear was link'd unto his tongue,
The numerous press, closing their souls in one,
Stood all transform'd into his passion. "
The reader was probably not prepared for such verses from a character so well afterwards known as Dean of Christ Church and Bishop
of Oxford. But it is time to introduce " honest JAMES HOWELL," with
his very peculiar and characteristic lines-pregnant with all the conceit
and antithetical disporting of the age. They are addressed to his " dear
Mother, the University of Oxford."
"Many do suck thy breasts, but now in som
Thy milk turns into froth and spumy scum;
In others it converts to rheum and fleam ,
Or some poor wheyish stuff instead of cream ;
In som it doth malignant humors heed,
And make the head turn round as that side Tweed ;
COLLEGE LIFE. 119
cipline of the university, I pretend not to say one
word upon it ; although, that it is capable of still
greater extension and improvement, can scarcely be
denied. The lectures of Dr. Buckland form an æra
in that discipline ; and those of Mr. Senior are not
less entitled to notice and commendation. In the
time of the " Lunatics," had such men sprung up to
enlighten their brethren, the doors of all public
buildings would have been shut upon their admission
for so praiseworthy an object ·
These humors vapor up unto the brains,
And so break forth to odd fanatic strains.
It makes them dote and rave, fret, fume, and foam,
And strangely from their texts in pulpits roam.
When they should speak of Rheims, they prate of Rome;
Their theam is birch, their preachment is of broom.
Nor ' mong theforders only such are found,
But they who pass the bridge are quite as round.
Som of thy sons prove bastards, sordid, base,
Who, having suck'd thee, throw dirt in thy face ;
When they have squeezed thy nipples, and chast papps,
They dash thee on the nose with frumps and rapps ;
They grumble at thy commons, buildings, rents,
And would thee bring to farthing decrements.
Few by thy milk sound nutriment now gain,
For want of good concoction of the brain ;
But this choice son of thine is no such brat,
Thy milk in him did so coagulat
That it became elixar ; as we see
In these mellifluous streams of poesie."
This extract is made from a copy in the Althorp library, enriched by
some transcripts of poems of Cartwright in other editions not to be
found in the present. These transcripts are by the hand of the Rev.
Dr. Bliss.
* I yet adhere to all that is so warmly and unpremeditatedly expressed in the pages of the Bibliophobia (pp. 84-88) respecting what
may yet be successfully adopted in the course of a college education.
120 COLLEGE LIFE.
It remains only to say, although I had passed my
examination (taking up Callimachus, Tacitus, and
Juvenal) I left the university without taking my
degree of B. A. till four years after I had quitted ;
and in 1825 took my present degree of D. D. per
saltum.
The great object is, to give wealth and leisure a right and profitable
direction. Why are the Arundel marbles even unknown, because unvisited by half of the under graduates ? What a platform would that
room afford for lectures upon SCULPTURE and ARCHITECTURE ! Above
all things, may be desiderated lectures upon modern LITERATURE,
chiefly British, from Chaucer to Cowper. What a volume of curious
philology is that which embraces all the English works of Sir Thomas
More, 1557, folio. I look back with pleasure, because with profit, to
that period of my life when I sat down doggedly to its thorough perusal.
See the affecting description of JANE SHORE, taken from it, in the
edition of More's Utopia, vol. i . p. lxxxiii. 1808, 12mo. The unfortunate object described was living at the time of the description.
121
CHAPTER IV.
CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.
"O MORTAL man, that livest here by toil,
Do not complain of this thy hard estate :
That like an emmet thou must ever moil,
Is a sad sentence of an ancient date ;
And, certes, there is for it reason great :
For though sometimes it makes thee weep and wail,
And curse thy star, and early drudge and lateWithouten that would come on heavier bale,
Loose life, unruly passions, and diseases pale."
THOMSON : Castle ofIndolence.
SUCH is the opening of one of the most enchanting
and instructive poems in our language ; a poem .
which, perhaps, in the end, will survive the remembrance of the Seasons, although the circle of its
present reputation may not be so widely extended.
The " CHOICE OF A PROFESSION " is probably, after
all, generally speaking, rather the result of the arguments and admonitions of relations and friends, than
of any extraordinary impulse or predilections of one's
own. There are doubtless numerous instances to the
contrary ; in which a ruling passion has so strongly
developed itself in earlier years, that no subsequent
reflection or experience can obliterate its traces or divert its tendency. Had my first feelings and earliest
studies been vigorously followed up, I had probably
122 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.
been at the Bar : although, even then, the passion
of my earliest boyhood for Arms was by no means
extinguished. The pages of Plutarch had filled my
fancy with a galaxy of heroes and statesmen, such
as Miltiades, Themistocles, Pericles, Scipio, and
Cæsar.
During the vacations at school, including those of
the first year of being at college, the residence of my
uncle, in the city, afforded me every opportunity of
attending the sittings after term, in Guildhall. Lord
Kenyon was then chief-justice of the court of King's
Bench ; and beneath him was marshalled the flower
of the English bar -Bearcroft, Erskine, Mingay,
Law, Dallas, and oftentimes Garrow. These were
all king's counsel, with silk gowns. Bearcroft, as
the senior, occupied the centre ; Erskine was at his
right hand, and Mingay at his left. At this moment I have them all before me. The first was frequently crabbed and dictatorial ; the second witty
and eloquent ; the third, playful and jocose. The
chief business, then, lay with them : but I remember
that Mr. Law, afterwards Lord Ellenborough (and
the successor of Lord Kenyon) would frequently
come down with a powerful speech or address, sustained in a steady and manly tone of eloquence.
Yet, on many occasions, no one, in my humble opinion, combined elegance and eloquence more felicitously than Mr. Dallas afterwards chief-justice of
the court of Common Pleas. Of all these illustrious
chieftains of the law, ONE only ( Baron Garrow)
SURVIVES.
CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 123
I never heard Erskine make any of his grand,
set speeches *-unless, in after-life, it be that in the
prosecution of Paine's Age of Reason, at Westminster Hall. This was a fine display of real feeling and impassioned eloquence, and seemed to carry
away the verdict of the jury as if by assault or
storm ; but in the ordinary cases at Guildhall, I
was, from my earliest attendance, usually struck
and delighted by his liveliness of expression and
readiness and dexterity of reply. He had always,
in a marked and especial manner, the ear of the
court not less than of the bar ; and when he knew
his case to be dispossessed of all legal doubts and
niceties, nothing could surpass the triumphant manner in which he pressed it home to the jury, and
seemed to get at their hearts, as well as to convince
their understandings. His voice was melody itselft,
* Of these, perhaps the very finest are the speeches in defence of
Stockdale for a libel in 1789 ; in arrest ofjudgement in the case of the
Dean of St. Asaph, upon the question of the jury being judges both of
law and of fact ; and in defence of Hardy for high treason. These
speeches are very fine, as blending matter of law with splendour of
declamation. In nisi prius cases, where, from the operation of parole
evidence alone, conclusions were to be drawn, and appeals to be made,
the cases of Parslow and Sykes, and Howard and Bingham have left
nothing after them of their kind which approach the resistless eloquence
of ERSKINE. I am now speaking only of the English bar ; but there
are those who think CURRAN to have been, in similar cases, more than
the Erskine of the Irish bar.
+ I may not, perhaps, be singular in the opinion that, in many respects, and on particular forensic occasions, I have thought the voice
of Lord Brougham to be not much unlike that of Lord Erskine. In
forensic eloquence a comparison may be more correctly instituted. Both
possessed POWER, the main engine of persuasion ; both had a rapid, un-
124 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.
and his bright blue, penetrating eye, charmed with
the power of the basilisk. Lord Eldon, then Mr.
Scott, and attorney-general, came occasionally into
court ; and it was amusing to observe how his great
antagonist (afterwards lord chancellor himself) seized
every tempting opportunity to ridicule the courts of
equity, in which Mr. Scott was confessedly the prime
ornament. Although, necessarily, a very imperfect
judge, I was in a particular manner struck with the
terse, vigorous, and perspicuous charges of Lord
Kenyon to the jury. They seem to me to have been
just what such charges ought to be ; and based, as
they indisputably always were, upon the most inflexible integrity, they could not fail to produce a
proper and beneficial result * . Towards the evenhesitating utterance, and a fervid and beautiful fancy ; but the latter
was more terrible and unsparing. The first won, the second commanded, the verdict. The former was the " Jupiter Placens ” (but still
Jupiter), the latter the " Jupiter Tonans." This, within the courts of
law ; out of them, all comparison ceases. As senatorial debaters and
orators, the voice of all parties by acclamation would unite in favour of
the living ex-chancellor.
66
* It was usually my good fortune (being very regular in my attendance) to obtain a standing- place just above Erskine and Mingay, who
after a short time seemed to recognize and to nod to me. The chiefjustice sat close by ; one day, on retiring, he accosted me, and said,
"Well, young gentleman, do you intend to become one of us?" I
replied, unhesitatingly but respectfully, " I should like it very much."
' TRY, THEN," was his immediate rejoinder. These words, which were
always uppermost in my mind, directed me, in the first instance, to the
choice of the Bar. I remember a great many odd but interesting causes
which I used to hear determined before that sound and most unaffected
judge. Once, in the case of an action brought for the non-fulfilment
of a contract, upon a large scale, for shoes, the question mainly was,
"whether the shoes were well and soundly made, and with the best
CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 125
ing, it was the fashion for the leading counsel to
promenade, during the summer, in the Temple Gardens, and I usually formed one in the thronging
mall of loungers and spectators *.
In due course, I became admitted a student at
Lincoln's Inn, and kept my terms by eating commons, or “ messing, " with sufficient regularity. It
seemed to be for a time, and as far as this object
was concerned, " College Life " revived. The students had on commoners gowns. At the high table
sat the dons or benchers, with Erskine frequently
amongst them. The seneschal was called up to
knock the table thrice with a mallet, when grace
ensued said invariably by the chaplain, at that
time, and very many years afterwards, the Rev.
Thomas Walkert-among the most amiable and rematerials ?" A number of witnesses was called up. One of them, admitted to be a first-rate character, and of great notoriety in " the gentle
craft," upon being closely questioned, returned contradictory answers ;
when the chief-justice observed, pointing to his own shoes, which were
regularly bestridden by the broad silver buckle of the day-" were
the shoes anything like these ?" " No my lord (replied the evidence),
they were a good deal better and more genteeler." The court was convulsed with laughter, in which the chief-justice heartily joined.
* Cocked hats and ruffles, with satin small-clothes and silk stockings, at this time constituted the usual evening dress. Lord Erskine,
though a good deal shorter than his brethren, somehow always seemed
to take the lead both in pace and in discourse, and shouts of laughter
would frequently follow his dicta. Among the surrounding promenaders,
he and the one-armed Mingay seemed to be the main objects of attraction.
+ This amiable and exemplary man was long, but slightly, known
to me. Not Cowper and Mrs. Unwin appeared more faithfully and
constantly together than did he and his better half-upon all occasions
126 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.
spected of the profession to which he was an ornament. Grace ended, the din and clatter of knives,
forks, and plates, put into pretty brisk requisition,
together with the hum of the guests and vociferations of the waiters, ensued for usually some twenty
or thirty minutes-when the hall became empty and
silent. The " mess" consisted of four students,
whose meeting together was purely accidental ; and
it was rarely, unless by previous agreement, that
the same individuals found themselves a second time
messmates * . Mine, however, frequently were the
Rev. William Powell, the present vicar of Abergavenny, Henry Hobhouse, Esq. , afterwards under
and every where—but especially when, in term time, it was essential the
husband should personally attend to his chaplaincy duties. She would
accompany him from their residence at Brompton as far as Lincoln's
Inn Fields. He was also the reader or under preacher of Lincoln's
Inn ; and what is rather curious, he never obtained preferment of any
kind during the whole chancellorship of Lord Eldon-although the
benchers are said to have united, more than once, in an application
for that object.
It happened to be my painful duty to supply his place, in the administration of the sacrament, within the chapel, on the second or third
occasion of Bishop Heber's doing duty there. Mr. Walker sunk down
from faintness and weakness during the reading of the prayers, and the
bishop (not then advanced to the prelacy of Calcutta) took his place in
the desk. It was Sacrament Sunday, and I afterwards assisted with
the cup. Poor Mr Walker did not long survive this attack. He had a
sweet, social temper ; deserting no friend in adversity, and scorning all
assumed airs from the acquisition of fortune alone. The benchers
loved, and the students respected him. Peace to his GENTLE SPIRIT !
* I remember, in later youth, to have heard, that it was the custom
at this inn for one of the servants, attired in his usual robes, to go to
the threshold of the outer door about 12 or 1 o'clock, and exclaim three
times, VENEZ MANGER ! "—when neither bread nor salt was upon the
table.
،،
CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 127
secretary of state to Lord Sidmouth and Sir Robert
Peel, and a Mr. Raithby, who afterwards became an
editor of chancery reports.
These, however, were little better than mere
technical formalities for the assumption of the wig
and gown. It behoved a thoroughbred aspirant to
" submit himself to the yoke ”—to hard study-to
grapple with Coke upon Littleton-to have Blackstone at his fingers' ends-to know Buller and Tidd
by heart to make Viner, and Bacon, and Comyns
his very pillow, mattress, and coverlid. NICASSUS
was a young man (and my especial good friend) of
this very precise complexion. He was an only son.
Nature had cast him in her choicest mould : fortune
had showered down upon him her brightest favours.
The carriage of his father, with a stud of horses of
which the Osbaldiston of the day might not have
been ashamed, were at his entire disposal. A country
mansion upon the heights of Clapham Common,
overlooking Wimbledon, Richmond, and a landscape
of glorious richness beyond, might have tempted
any young man, but Nicassus, to have visited such a
spot twice or thrice in the week. To all this was
added a garden, spacious, rich, and varied in exotics :
" Flowers of all hue, and without the thorn the rose."
The air was perfumed afar with their united odour ;
and the sense would sometimes sicken, even to languishment, with its intensity. There were also trickling fountains and " tinkling rills." To this was
128 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.
added the society of " three sisters "-anything but
"the weird"-who were always too happy to invite
and to accompany him to the dance, the song, and
the roundelay ; loving, next to their parents, the
society and sympathies of an only brother. But
HE, that " only brother, " rarely indulged them in
such sympathies. Ambition sat deeply at his heart
-the ambition to be such as MANSFIELD and DUNNING had been. Accordingly, for quiet's sake, his
chambers were on the third floor in the Old Square
of Lincoln's Inn ; for he had a vague, traditionary
notion that the great Mansfield commenced his career
by such a choice of rooms. There he dwelt, read,
studied, composed. His idol of past times was LITTLETON ; of present times, FEARNE. He used to
think Coke sometimes tiresome, and Croke gossipping * . He loved condensity, compression, perspi-
* This conclusion is at once crude and untenable. The text of
Littleton and the commentary of Coke just mark the difference between
a comparatively incipient and advanced state of society. Two centuries had intervened between the former and the latter. It is in his
REPORTS that the marvellous, and as it were oracular, talents of Sir
Edward Coke must be sought and admitted. They evince a mind
which had travelled over, and recorded, every thing which, both in the
law of personal and of landed property, was worthy of cognizance.
They are as a vast mine, richly stored with all the varieties of lawstrata. But who can now grapple with them ? or rather, how few? The
very quaintness of expression, the perpetually recurring brevities, the
interminable authorities, the subsequent alterations both of common
and statute law, are alone a grievous drawback to their perusal and
digestion. And yet, see how the grave, solemn, if not crabbed mind of
this Chief-Justice could relax and divest itself ! -as in his 4th Institute,
among other proofs, doth manifestly appear. Who, like him, would
talk about Queen Dido and a wounded stag, in a proheme to the
CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 129
cuity. Ofeminent, and then living characters (his
turn of study leading wholly that way), he gave the
preference to the late MR. CHARLES BUTLER, always
quietly capping him as he passed, and roundly declaring "that Mr. Hargrave, although the king's
ancient serjeant, was not fit to hold a candle to
him *.
99
"Jurisdiction of the Courts of the Forest ?" See the Bibliomania,
p. 138.
Great as were the talents, and lofty and undoubted as was the reputation of this extraordinary lawyer, yet he desiderated that ONE THING,
without which talents are secondary and reputation is unenviable. Sir
Edward Coke wanted A HEART. In the time of Charles and James II.
he would have been a Jeffreys. His fierceness of demeanour and arrogance of speech towards Raleigh (who had been his patron and friend )
are horrible evidences of the worst part of our species. I remember
both possessing and reading much of the Reports of CROKE, one ofthe
judges of Common Pleas in the reigns of Elizabeth, James and Charles.
* For about twenty or twenty-five years, I had the gratification of
the acquaintance of this elegantly-minded man and profound lawyer,
who lived to the advanced age of fourscore. It is, perhaps, unknown
where such diversity of philological pursuit was blended with such consummate skill in his profession, as was evinced in the case of Mr.
CHARLES BUTLER. For many years he was in the full swing of practice, and quite at the head of his profession, as a landed property lawyer
and a conveyancer. He had pupils without end, and amongst these,
ONE who was worthy of his master, and is now an ornament to his profession-and whom I choose here to set apart as PETER BELLENGER
BRODIE, Esq. , and my kind, good friend, of somewhere about thirty
years' standing. The force of vigorous and almost exclusive application to one essential object, was never more strongly verified than in the
instance of Mr. Butler. While he was drawing deeds, writing opinions,
and delivering dicta to his pupils, he was editing (in conjunction with
Mr. Hargrave) Coke upon Littleton ; but then he would steal from his
home, even in mid-winter, at four in the morning, bringing his lantern ,
lighting his fire, and setting doggedly to work till breakfast-time. The
whole ofthe day afterwards was given to the ordinary routine ofbusiness.
Mr. Butler had a natural and a strong love of general literature, but
K
130 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.
The reader will naturally ask, “ And what has
become of Nicassus ?" He was as a bright and
he had necessarily little leisure to produce anything much beyond a
sketch. His Hora Biblica led the way in these matters. I spoke of
it as I thought and felt, in the second edition of my Classics, in 1804,
and I seemed to gain his heart by the trifling eulogy I bestowed. We
were ever after on the most amicable footing. Although exceedingly
sensitive on the score of public praise, he was courteous, candid, and
liberal in his bearings towards all sorts and conditions of men : a
rigid Roman Catholic ; an urbane and most cheerful member of society.
His writings are rather numerous than elaborate ; of these, all his tracts
connected with French Memoirs and French literature are at once
elegant and instructive. His Lives of Erasmus and Grotius are meagre
and unworthy of him. His Reminiscences want variety and vitality. I
reviewed them in a weekly paper called The Museum, of which hereafter. His works connected with Catholicism, including his " Book of
the Roman Catholic Church," do honour, I think, to his head and
heart. Widely different as are my own views and feelings on most of
the essential points involved in these publications, I yet can respect and
venerate an author like Mr. Butler, who is not only neither afraid nor
ashamed to express his opinions, but who can clothe them in the language of courtesy, and differ from his opponent with the good-breeding
of a gentleman.
I shall conclude this brief notice, or tribute of respect to the memory,
of Mr. Butler, “ тov µaxaρirns,” by the insertion of two letters from
him to myself-of no great importance, except to shew the varied turn
of his studies and his anxiety about public praise.
66 DEAR SIR,
" Lincoln's Inn, 2d Feb., 1809.
"WHEN I had the pleasure of seeing you, I mentioned to you my
surprise that, with the exception of the first vol. of the Hora Biblicæ,
none of my publications had ever been noticed by the British Critic.
As they have all been favourably received, and, except the last (which
begins to be scarce) , are in the second impression, this appears to me
singular ; and connecting it with another circumstance, with which it is
needless to trouble you, makes me wish to know to what it has been
owing. I shall be obliged to you, if it should come in your way, to sound this matter for me.
" By the way, I have made an important discovery respecting Walton's Polyglott. I noticed in my last edition, that foreign writers as-
CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 131
beautiful blossom, which, the petals falling away,
shewed abundance of good and fixed fruit in the
At thirty he was, as a lawyer, equal to
Lord Gifford at that age, but beyond him in varied
research and sound scholarship * . His diffidence
stamen.
serted, and our own writers denied, the existence of a dedication, independently of the preface. Dr. Clarke has denied it with a good deal of
ill-humour. But the existence of the preface is now ascertained : it is
in the Bodleian copy-in one of the copies of the Museum—in two or
three other copies. I have procured a written copy of it, which is very
much at your service. This, and other circumstances, have convinced
me that much still remains to be written concerning this important
publication. I wish you would take it in hand.
“ I am, dear sir, your obedient, humble servant,
66 DEAR SIR ,
Cha : Butler
" Lin. Inn, 14th Feb., 1809.
"THE pasted paper in Walton's Polyglott is noticed in the last edition
of the Horse Biblica. I intend to think of an account of the Polyglott ;
but, alas ! we must first have peace, for there are several works upon it
of great consequence, common in France, but almost unknown in this
country.
" I am, with great respect,
" Your obliged, humble servant,
" CHAS. BUTLER."
* LORD GIFFORD " should have died hereafter." He was, in former
times, I believe, a member of the Academics, a ready, acute, and closelygrappling speaker. Although conscious of the want of a classical education, he well knew that this alone was no bar to complete success as a
lawyer; and to his PROFESSION he gave the whole bent and vigour of his
understanding. In consequence, and with what is called a " natural
genius" for the law, he was, at the age of thirty-five, fit for any situation
K 2
132 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.
even made him shrink from himself. Cowper the
poet had not a more thrilling sensibility and startupon the bench. In a masterly argument before the judges with the
late lamented Mr. Horner, upon the law of marine insurance, and in a
subsequent one with Mr. Preston, upon a purely landed-property question, wherein he had the better of both his distinguished antagonists,
he not only surprised the bench, but astonished his friends. Public
honours quickly awaited him. Sir Vicary Gibbs was his fellow-countryman (a Devonshire man) , and his earliest and best friend ; but Lord
Ellenborough was the sole channel of his being recommended to the
Earl of Liverpool for the office of Solicitor-general.
On his acceptance of this office, he had very speedily to encounter a
giant of an adversary, in the late Sir Samuel Romilly. The night before
he was to meet him in the House of Commons, upon a very important
debate, he told me that he had not slept one wink. There have
been sleepless nights amongst senators from causes less weighty and
honourable. Mr. Canning sat close to him as he rose, and cheered
him as he went on ; but at first he was scarcely conscious of being
upon his legs, and did not know whether the Speaker was in the chair,
or his opponent in the house-though he sat immediately opposite
to him ; but he shook up his intellectual energies, became warm, fluent,
courageous, and convincing. Grant him a particular arena of debate,
connected with his profession, and it were difficult indeed to drive him
beyond its barriers.
Lord Gifford became Attorney-general, Chief-justice of the Court of
Common Pleas, and Master of the Rolls : he was also a peer, and very
expert in matters of Scotch Appeals. At each step, honours, like flowers,
seemed to spring up from his foot's pressure. But he was worthy of
ALL that thickened and blossomed upon him; and although envy was
worming its way in minds which ought never for an instant to have
given it admission, much less to have allowed it to vent itself in bitter
invective and groundless accusation, he allowed the whole to pass unheeded by as the idle wind. He had, when Attorney-general, the most
arduous, if not awful charge ever confided to the hands of a public
officer to execute that of conducting a prosecution against the Queen
of England within the walls of the House of Lords. If he failed in his
opening speech, he was most triumphantly successful in his Reply upon
the general bearing of the whole evidence of the case. It was that sort
of acute, discerning, and cogent argument which tripped up every fallacy
CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 133
ling bashfulness. But nerve, which is the great
stimulant to success with a lawyer-with one, too,
who shapes his course, as Nicassus proposed to do,
upon the models of Mansfield and Dunning-was
wanting to Nicassus. His father died before the
"redolence" of early manhood may be said to have
quite left him ; and, listening to the voices of those
who survived-and just in time to save an irreparable break-up of constitution-he retreated, and
settled down into the plain country gentleman, still
keeping his law- books. He cultivated his two
thousand acres of matchless Burwell wheat-found
one day a Lavinia gleaning in his fields-proposed
by the heels, and swept away the webs of sophistry in which it was
attempted to shroud them. John Hunter never anatomised a human
being with more delicacy and skill than did the Attorney-general the
enormous mass of conflicting evidence by which this extraordinary case
was distiguished. His speech was a PERFECT display-of its kind. And
all this while he was opposed, day by day, and hour by hour, to talents
of the most gigantic description, rendered yet more formidable by the
tide of popular opinion (" Vox populi vox dei ") which ran so strongly
with his opponents ! But this scene of thunder and lightning has long
passed away-and Lord Gifford is in his GRAVE, dying at the premature
age of forty-seven. I tear myself from a recollection of such an intellectual tempest, and love to consider the deceased as an early, a kind,
and a generous friend. Till he shot up into such public distinction
(whereby his whole time was engrossed by public duties) , Lord Gifford
was my frequent and joyous guest : a lover of music ; of simple pleasures ; of friendly fellowship. He was in fact, at heart, a NATURAL
CHARACTER ; and it would have taken a pretty large share of " the
pomps and vanities of this wicked world" to have made him an artificial
Not so with many other associates in common of that day—who
will not leave the hundredth part of the shadow even of Lord Gifford's
fame behind them.
one.
134 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.
-was accepted -married, and, like their prototypes,
“ flourish'd long in tender bliss, and rear'd
Anumerous offspring, lovely like themselves,
And good ; the grace of all the country round. ”
It now began to be time that my views should be
fixed, and my position rendered intelligible. Accordingly, my guardian consulted a Mr. Thomson,
a chancery barrister of eminence, and afterwards
a king's counsel, respecting the placing me with a
pleader, or conveyancer, or equity draftsman ; but
the Court of King's Bench and Lord Kenyon's
reply * would not allow me to think of anything but
the first of these channels of introduction to the profession. Accordingly, through the instrumentality
of a Mr. Spearing, I was placed with Mr. Basil
Montagu, of Lincoln's Inn, who had been a pupil
of Judge Bailey, and with whom my friend Mr.
Stoddart was also intimate. Mr. Montagu has of
late not only attained the distinction of being considered as the facile princeps of bankrupt lawyers,
but has added the honours of editorial toil, in the
great field of literature, by his elaborate and beautiful edition of the works of Lord Bacon. Indeed, I
am not sure whether the philosopher has not well
nigh superseded the lawyer ; but, be this as it may,
the pupil shall at least divide the quantity of ad-
* See page 124, ante.
CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 135
miration with his ancient master, of the talents of
that most marvellous man. I learn that Mr. Montagu pays an annual pilgrimage to the shrine of his
beloved Lord Bacon, in the church of St. Michael,
in the suburbs of St. Albans * .
My law- master was abundantly kind to me, and
* In the summer of 1833, while inhabiting a temporary residence at
Elstree, in the neighbourhood of St. Albans, I just missed my legal master
in the performance of one of these acts of shrine-homage before the statue
of his BELOVED, within the church of St. Michael. Of this statue, which
seems to have been done to the very life and soul of the original, and was
executed at Florence, there is a beautiful engraving in Mr. Clutterbuck's History of Hertfordshire, after a drawing by my late friend,
Mr. Alexander. It is a pity that this statue is not brought down more
to the level of the eye, by being placed upon the surface of the further
end of the tomb, instead of being, as it now is, raised more than a foot
above it, the tomb itself being five feet high. In consequence, you have
a foreshortened view of the face, and look up the chancellor's nostrils.
The inscription upon the slab denotes that the original used to sit and
meditate just as the spectator views the statue to be seated, in the act
of meditation.
To me, however, of equal attraction are the ruins of Lord Bacon's
HOUSE-in the immediate vicinity of Gorhambury, the residence of the
Earl of Verulam. If possible, I would not have a brick or tile of these
ruins removed, nor suffer one branch of ivy to entwine its serpent- like
arms around them. If the echo of the master's footstep along these
corridors has ceased for ever to be heard, let us respect every mouldering mullion and every morsel of tesselated pavement. The name of Bacon is a MIGHTY one.
" clarum et venerabile nomen
Gentibus, et multum nostræ quod proderat urbi.”
In intellect it is, altogether, scarcely approached ; in virtue, it has been
frequently surpassed. Pope has designated both with a sort of terrible
curiosafelicitas. Mr. Coleridge (Table Talk, vol. ii . p. 216) thought
"it would take many Newtons to make one Milton . " How many to
make one Bacon ?
136 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.
within a few months we were as college companions.
There was no other pupil. And here it was that
the passion for analysing possessed me-a passion
communicated to, or rather taught, me by my master.
We were always at work with Blackstone, whose
first three volumes were dissected and drawn out in
such attenuated fibres, that, at this day, possessing
as I do the original drafts, the words cannot be
made out without the help of a glass *. I took
lodgings in the neighbourhood of Queen's-square ;
and, though with a slender establishment, began to
look about me, and to consider myself an independent
member of society, in the free choice of friends or
foes. A few old school and college acquaintance
rallied around me, and we made a little coterie, of
which no one of us need have been ashamed. My
love of art was, to say the truth, a good deal in the
way of improvement in the law ; and I used frequently to play truant at the Exhibition †, instead
* The plan was, to make the first ramifications with a pencil, that,
in case of interference, they might be rubbed out. When perfected,
the whole was written in with a crow-pen. This plan of study was
peculiar to Mr. Montagu, who has pursued it, in kind, to this very day.
The versos of the leaves of his briefs sometimes_exhibit a curious exemplification of it.
† I possess, almost by chance, a fragment of a critique penned by
me, from memoranda taken at the Exhibition in the year 1798, when
the Coriolanus of Kemble, painted by Lawrence, and the Seven Ages
of Shakspeare, by Smirke, were the great stars of that year's attraction ;
and when Kearsley's portrait of Miss Philipson gave promise of a luminary of no ordinary lustre. Why was it voluntarily withdrawn ? Mr.
Turner, now R. A., will have no reason to find fault with what was then
L
CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 137
of attending the usual hours at chambers. However, " whipping days " were past ; and my master
said of him, nor will he deny me the credit of a true prophet, on reading
its conclusion. " Mr. Turner has this year some delightful drawings.
He is an artist of distinguished eminence ; his genius is grand and
original. I hope he will confine himself, by and by, almost solely to
oil-painting. His conception is too sublime, and his touch too broad
and bold for paper. Canvas must immortalise his fame." This in the
year 1798.
" As
I also possess something, which the reader may think with me to be
ofmore importance, in the catalogue ofthe first " Exhibition ofthe Royal
Academy," in 1769, 4to.; motto " Major rerum mihi nascitur ordo."
Virgil.-Printed by William Bunce, printer to the Royal Academy.
The " Avant-propos," or " Advertisement," is worth quoting.
the present Exhibition is a part of the Institution of an Academy supported by royal munificence, the public may naturally expect the liberty
of being admitted without any expense. The Academicians, therefore,
think it necessary to declare, that this was very much their desire, but
they have not been able to suggest any other means than that of receiving money for admittance, to prevent the room from being filled
with improper persons, to the entire exclusion of those for whom the
exhibition is apparently intended." This must have been a primitive
epoch, when the payment of one shilling (as I presume it to have been)
was presumed to be able to prevent the intrusion of " improper persons ! " Of the number of pictures or articles sent, there was only one
hundred and thirty-six. In these days, we may add a thousand. Of
the NAMES, how few have survived remembrance-how many have
passed into oblivion !
"illacrymabiles
Urgentur, ignotique longâ
Nocte."
Not because they " wanted a poet" to make their works " live in description, and look green in song," but because their works defied the
art of poetry to do so.
In this first year's exhibition, the president, Sir Joshua Reynolds,
had portraits of a " lady and her son, whole-lengths, in the character of
Diana disarming Love ; a lady in the character of Juno, receiving the
cestus from Venus ; two ladies, half-lengths, ' et in Arcadio ego ; ' and
Hope nursing Love. " West here first exhibited his immortal picture
(for the burin of Valentine Green has given it a more ready and general
138 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.
seemed to be as glad to hear my account of the pictures, as I was to give it. Yet I would sometimes
passport to that distinction) of the Departure of Regulus from Rome,
and Venus lamenting the death of Adonis. Wilson had two landscapes.
Dance, two whole-lengths of the King and Queen, with three other portraits ; and Gainsborough two whole-length portraits, a boy's head, and
a large landscape. Here were also two grave, historical subjects of Samuel
Wale, also an R. A., and the artist who made the charming designs for
Sir John Hawkins' edition of Walton's Angler, in 1760. In this, and
in similar undertakings, he greatly exceeded his immediate predecessor,
Hayman.
In this first exhibition, the celebrated Sir W. Chalmers, " Comptrollergeneral ofthe Works to the King, Architect to the Queen and to H.R. H.
the Princess Dowager of Wales, and Treasurer of the Royal Academy,
Berners-street" -for here the first meetings took place -did not disdain
to exhibit the " ceiling of her grace the Duchess of Buccleugh's dressing- room in Grosvenor-square," and the " ceiling of the Right Hon.
the Countess of Gower's dressing- room at Whitehall." In this first
exhibition, too, Edward Penny, R.A., the rival of West in the subject
of the " Death of General Wolfe" (Penny's wretched original may be
seen in the picture- gallery at Oxford), came forth with a picture, which,
by the help of a good mezzotint, may possibly transmit his name to
posterity. The subject is chosen from Shakspeare's King John, beginning " I saw a smith stand with his iron thus. " The pictures are all
placed under the names, alphabetically, and asterisks are subjoined to
such as bespeak a purchaser. Of the one hundred and thirty-six pictures exhibited, only three have such a distinction.`
It is, perhaps, not generally known that a " Society of Artists of
Great Britain," which held their meetings , and exhibited their pictures
"at the Great Room in Spring-gardens, Charing-cross, " was the basis
or germ of the establishment of the ROYAL ACADEMY. I possess the
catalogue of the second exhibition there in 1761 , which is graced, at
head and tail, with an engraving by Grignion, from the pencil of Hogarth, each subject being allegorical and of common-place merit. In
this second exhibition, Reynolds, not then knighted, produced his famous head of Sterne, with four other portraits, of which one was a
"General on horseback." Here, too, Hogarth first exhibited his celebrated " Sigismunda mourning over the heart of Guiscardo, her murthered husband ; " which elicited the well-known terrible tirade of un- sparing criticism from Horace Walpole, who compares, but most
CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 139
revenge myself, as it were, and redeem the time
thus mal à propos devoted, by fagging nine hours
a-day for a fortnight together. A severe fit of illness once followed, which taught me that extremes
were both dangerous and absurd.
It was at the chambers of Mr. Montagu that I
was first introduced to the Rev. Francis, now Archdeacon Wrangham * ; these gentlemen being, and
saucily and unjustly compares, the expression of the face and figure of
Sigismunda to that of a maudlin prostitute. With this picture there
appeared his Gate of Calais ; Picquet, or Virtue in danger ; An Election
Entertainment ; and three Portraits.
* Archdeacon Wrangham was, at this period of his life, flushed with
academic honours from Cambridge : a wrangler, a medallist, and a poet,
full of ardour and ambition-his figure tall, his countenance expressive,
his general bearing animated and interesting. He was among the
66 crack young men" of the day, and his university and his friends had
reason to be proud of him. At three strides and a half he would reach
the chambers of his friend upon the second floor. His fancy had wings,
as his body appeared to possess them. In the year 1795 he was " out "
with a small volume of poems ; and he is " YET" a poet. But he is apt
at everything. Hendecasyllabics, Iambics, Alchaics, Sapphics, and all
the other " ics" seem to start up "at his bid. " In prose composition
he is facile and eloquent ; being an historian, a sermonist, a chargist, and
a controversialist of vigour and ability. Why will he not concentrate
his "scattered forces," and give us, even now, in this the " sere and
yellow leaf" period of his being, a A LIFE OF ERASMUS, with notices of
the REFORMATION running at the foot ofthe text ? " Ille si quis alius ;"
and can the " otium cum dignitate" of life be better devoted ? My
friend the archdeacon at once solaces and diversifies the hours of clerical
dignity and retirement by the composition of little fugitive pieces, few
in number, but piquant in spirit, and of which, like a worthy Roxburgher, he is choice in the distribution. The reader may not be displeased to see this rough and rapid outline of the " Archdeacon of the
East Riding of Yorkshire," filled up by something like undeniable proofs
of the classical elegance of his intellectual attainments.
It is now thirty-five years ago since he published " The Holy Land,”
when he was a master of arts of Trinity College, Cambridge. I select
140 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.
YET being, the closest of friends. What a period
for friendship's trial ! What a period for its cona beautiful specimen towards its commencement, descriptive of the
"Star in the East."
"Whence was that STAR, which through the blue profound
From eastern climes advancing, hung its lamp
O'er royal Bethlehem; not with comet-glare
Portending war to nations, but of ray
Pacific ? 'Twas the harbinger of morn :
That Sun's glad herald, from whose living spring
Natures, scarce finite, in perennial stream
Draw floods of intellect, and bathe in light
Strong beyond human ken. In thickest cloud
Shrouding his native glories, lest the blaze
Of orient DEITY with mortal flash
Should blast the gazer's vision. He aroseSo darken'd, yet refulgent. Through the cell
Of maniac Guilt, exulting in his chain,
Darted the sudden dawn. Their rigid clasp
Instant his bonds remit : with night's foul train
His cherish'd frenzy flies : and freed he springs
On faith's firm wing, to liberty and heaven."
Mr. Wrangham was the intimate friend as well as college- companion
of the learned and lamented TWEDDELL, a young man whose " Prolusionses Juveniles" not only gave promise of an intellectual harvest as
rich as abundant, but whose Travels in the East were the theme of
general admiration and praise. The introduction of the name and
merits of this extraordinary young man is thus dextrously managed
by the author of " The Holy Land :"
" There in his early bloom, ' mid classic dust
Once warm with grace and genius like his own,
Her favourite sleeps ; whom far from Granta's bowers
To Attic fields the thirst of learning drew,
Studious to cull the wise, and fair, and good.
He could have taught the echoes of old Greece
(Silent, since Freedom fled) their ancient strains
Ofliberty and virtue, to his soul
Strains most congenial ! But high heaven forbade.
CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 141
solidation and invulnerability against the efforts of
petty artifice, base suspicion, and disgraceful maRest, youth beloved ! most blest, if to thy shade
'Tis given to know, what mighty forms of chiefs,
Whose deathless deeds oft dwelt upon thy tongue ;
Of patriots, bold like thee, with ardent tone
T'assert their country's cause ; of bards, whose verse
Thy Lesbian lyre could emulate so well,
Repose in tombs contiguous ! Rest, loved youth,
In thine own Athens laid ! secure of fame,
While worth and science win the world's applause."
A note is here subjoined, containing some hendecasyllables, “ whose
exquisite beauty (says Mr. W.) will easily interpret the initials of their
author." I present the reader with the beginning and end of these
hendecasyllables :-
“ Ulla si probitas vel ingenî vis,
Si frons ingenua aut rubens juventus
Morbum flecteret improbosque manes ;
Non me carmina mæsta postularet,
Qui nunc ante diem domos ad atras
It TWEDDELLIUS omnibus videndas.
Frustrà Fama tuo sonat sepulchro ;
Heu ! frustrà, Juvenis, mea ac tuorum
Manat lacryma ! Tu nequis redire ;
Nec spes ulla dolorve tangit ultrà.
Felix, si tibi forsan inter umbras
Persentiscere fas sit, ossa tecum
Illo cespite quanta conquiescant ;
Tuæ te quoque quòd tegant Athenæ !" -A. M., Temple.
I never saw Mr. Tweddell but once. “ Virgilium tantum vidi.”
He was intimate with Mr. Montagu ; and his younger brother, whom
I knew well, had lodgings in his chambers. I was at the marriage of
this younger brother ( " is he yet alive ?") and gave away his bride at
the church of St. Clement Danes, in the Strand.
Once more, and for the last time. I shall conclude these extracts
with the conclusion of the poem itself, which was a Seatonian prize-
142 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.
chinations ! Within such a period, how often have
I seen, in others, the operation of all those bad
poem. The compliment to Paley at its close is at once elegant and
just.
"Yes ! rise it will , Judæa, that blest morn
In time's full lapse ( so rapt Isaiah sung)
Which to thy renovated plains shall give
Their ancient lords. Imperial fortune still,
If right the bard peruse the mystic strain,
Waits thee, and thousand years of sceptred joy.
With furtive step the fated hour steals on,
Like midnight thief, when from thy holy mount
Sorrow's shrill cry, and labour's needless toil,
And servitude, shall cease ; when from above,
On living sapphire seated, and begirt
With clustering cherubim, whose blaze outvies
Meridian suns, through heaven's disparting arch
Thy rocognized MESSIAH shall descend ;
In royal Salem fix his central throne,
And rule with golden sway the circling world.
Oh! come that day of glory, that bright speck Far in the dim horizon's utmost verge
By prophecy's unerring finger mark'd
To faith's strong eye-when, with th' innumerous good
Ofevery age, the white-robed saint shall stray
Through groves of Paradise, and drink unquench'd
Th' exhaustless stream of science ! SEATON there,
Who bade to God the annual hymn ascend;
There NEWTON, whose quick glance, through farthest space
Darting, in every page of nature's code
Saw DEITY inscribed ; and PALEY there
(For why should praise, still lingering round the tomb,
Her torch sepulchral light but for the dead?)
From whose keen spear the atheist crew appall'd
Shrunk to their native night ; with all, whose voice
And harmonizing life in virtue's cause
Their blended rhetoric pour'd, shall shine as stars ;
Glowing in heaven's eternal firmament
With beam unchanged, while suns and worlds decay."
CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 143
qualities which render human beings but as savage
brutes, ready to spring upon, and to rip up, with the
tusks of malice and detraction, all that is honourable and delightful between man and man !
But a
truce to such melancholy imagery .
•
"Sunt lacrymæ rerum, et mentem mortalia tangunt !"
My own fireside comforts were much enhanced and
benefited, about this time, by the society of two
friends, among others, with one of whom I had been
in habits of intimacy. Mr. Masquerier was the
first, Mr., now Sir Robert Kerr Porter was the
second, of these friends. They had each won their
way, as students in the Royal Academy, to no common honours ; but they were artists of very opposite
qualities. There was in each a precociousness somewhat remarkable ; especially with the latter, who, at
the age of nineteen, produced a performance at once
inconceivable and unparalleled. It will be readily
supposed that I allude to the Panorama of the
Storming and Capture of Seringapatam * . It was
* In order that nothing may be wanting, on the score of accuracy,
to make a proper impression upon the mind of the reader touching this
most stupendous production, I have had recourse to the kind and ready
aid of the accomplished sister of the artist, JANE PORTER (for she shall
not have the common adjunct of " Miss" to her name), who, from contemporaneous and subsequent memoranda, and from her long and
affectionate union with her brother, is, of all others, the best qualified
for the task in question. And yet, a word before we come to the picture
itself. When I first knew this amiable and united family, they resided
in Great Newport-street, in the very house once occupied by Sir Joshua
Reynolds. It therefore continued to be the haunt of GENIUS. Sir
144 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.
not the very first thing of its kind, because there
had been a panorama of London exhibited in LeiRobert, then a lad of seventeen, was busied on a picture of the Death
ofVirginia; the figures about one-third of the size of life, and painted,
as I understood, for the late Earl of Bristol, the Bishop of Derry. It
appeared to possess real merit. Captain Caulfield of the Guards, then
in the bloom of early manhood, often sat for some of the younger
figures. This canvas was subsequently painted over, as, indeed, were
two portrait she executed of myself-one, a small whole- length, in the
Oxford commoner's gown ; the other, a half-length, as large as life. The
painter hated portraits, and he had a right to hate mine as well as
others. Let us now hasten tothe siege of Seringapatam, and own that the
description of the picture, representing that siege, by the pencil of the
only surviving sister, is worthy both ofthe subject and its delineator ; and
I bespeak the reader's very especial attention to the anecdote with which
it ends, touching Sir Robert's picture of the Battle ofAgincourt.
"The historical picture of the Taking ofSeringapatam was painted
by my dear brother Robert, at the age of nineteen. It was two hundred
and odd feet long ; the proportioned height I have now forgotten. But
I remember, when I first saw the vast expanse of vacant canvas stretched
along, or rather in a semicircle, against the wall of the great room in
the Lyceum, where he painted it, I was terrified at the daring of his
undertaking. I could not conceive that he could cover that immense
space with the subject he intended, under a year's time at least, but—
and it is indeed marvellous !-he did it in SIX WEEKS ! But he worked
on it every day (except Sundays) during those weeks, from sunrise
until dark. It was finished during the time the committees of the
Royal Academy were sitting at Somerset-house, respecting the hanging
ofthe pictures there for that year's exhibition ; therefore, it must have
been towards the latter end of April. No artist had seen the painting
of Seringapatam during its progress ; but when it was completed, my
brother invited his revered old friend Mr. West (the then President of
the Royal Academy) to come and look at the picture, and give him his
opinion of it, ere it should be opened to the public view. A gentleman, who well understood the peculiar value of the first fruits of genius,
had persuaded my brother, young and enthusiastic as he was, to make
this experiment. With his ardour for " the pencil and the sword," and
for the " good-will " of this advice (and with no other risk on his part
than standing at half the rent of the necessary premises where the picture was to be exhibited), this person was to share equally the profits
1
CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 145
cester- fields, by Mr. Barker-but it was the very first
thing of its kind, if artist-like attainments be conwhich might arise from the exhibition of the work. This gentleman
was no artist himself, either professionally or as an amateur, but his
taste was good ; and the judgment that Mr. West passed on the picture
when he saw it, proved it. He went over from the Lyceum, on the
morning on which he had called to see my brother and his finished
painting, to Somerset-house, where the Committee had been awaiting
his presence above an hour. What has detained our President so
long?' enquired Sir Thomas Lawrence of him, on his entrance. ‘ A
WONDER ! ' returned he, ' a WONDER OF THE WORLD ! -I never saw anything like it ! —a picture of two hundred feet dimensions, painted by
that boy KER PORTER, in six weeks ! and as admirably done as it could
have been by the best historical painter amongst us in as many months !”
You, my dear sir, need no description of this picture, you saw it ; and
at the time of its exhibition you also must have heard of, and probably
also saw, some of the affecting effects the truth of its pictorial war-tale
had on many of the female spectators.
6
"After its exhibition closed , it was deposited, rolled upon a roller, in
a friend's warehouse. Thence, some circumstances caused it to be removed successively to other places of supposed similar security, but in
one of which I believe it finally perished by the accidental burning
down of the premises. The original sketches of this noble and stupendous effort of art,' as you so truly call it, are now in my own possession ; and you may believe I value them as the apple of my eye. I
must not forget to mention, with regard to Seringapatam, that had our
British government, at the time of my brother's ardour for these paintings, possessed a building large enough for the purpose, he would have
presented his country with that picture, and three others on British
historical subjects, to form a perpetual exhibition for the benefit of its
military and naval hospitals. Mr. Pitt lamented to him the impossibility
then, of commanding such a building ; so the project fell to the ground.
The last of these intended four pictures was that of The Battle of
Agincourt,' which my brother afterwards presented to the city of
London, where it was hung up in the Egyptian-hall of the Mansionhouse. Some alterations in the room occasioned its being taken down
for a temporary purpose ; but it never saw the light again until last
year, when (after above a dozen years' oblivion in-nobody knewwhere),
it was accidentally found in one of the vaulted chambers under Guildhall. When disentombed, it was hastily spread out against one of the
6
L
146 CHOICE OF PROFESSION.
sidered. The learned were amazed, and the unlearned were enraptured. I can never forget its
first impression upon my own mind. It was as a
thing dropt down from the clouds-all fire, energy,
intelligence, and animation. You looked a second
time, the figures moved, and were commingled in
hot and bloody fight. You saw the flash of the
cannon, the glitter of the bayonet, the gleam of the
falchion. You longed to be leaping from crag to
crag with Sir David Baird, who is hallooing his
men on to victory ! Then, again, you seemed to be
listening to the groans of the wounded and the dying
-and more than one female was carried out swooning. The oriental dress, the jewelled turban, the
walls of the great hall itself, and announced, in the newspapers, as a
picture of unknown antiquity, of some also unknown but evidently
distinguished artist ; and most probably it had been deposited in those
vaults for security, at the great fire ofLondon, and had remained there,
unsuspected, ever since ! The hall was thronged, day after day, to see
it ; and Sir Martin Shee told me, that so great was the mysterious
valuation the discovery had put on it, that he heard he had been quoted
as having passed his opinion on it, that it was a picture worth 15,000%. !'
Without proper safeguards behind the canvas, a long exposure on the
wall would have injured the picture ; and it was taken down again before I came to London, after having heard of the discovery of ' The
Agincourt for I immediately recognised what, and whose, the picture
was-and hastened to inform the present gentlemen of the city corporation accordingly. Owing to its long entombment, I understood it
had sustained some injury from damp ; and, as I also understood from
one of the gentlemen of the corporation, that it was the intention of the
corporation to give the picture a due place in the city, when it can be
discussed and decided upon, I am anxious that it shall meet the sanction
of my brother (I hope next year) when he might be present at the
arrangement, and with his own master-pencil repair the damages in the
picture himself." Such is the interesting narrative from the pencil of the sister.
CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 147
*
curved and ponderous scymitar-these were among
the prime objects of favouritism with Sir Robert's
pencil and he touched and treated them to the
very spirit and letter of the truth. The colouring,
too, was good and sound throughout. The accessories were strikingly characteristic-rock, earth,
and water, had its peculiar and happy touch ; and
the accompaniments about the sally-port, half choked
up with the bodies of the dead, made you look on
with a shuddering awe, and retreat as you shuddered.
The public poured in by hundreds and by thousands
for even a transient gaze-for such a sight was altogether as marvellous as it was novel. You carried
* Sir Robert not only " well and truly" exercised his pencil upon
these objects, but he introduced them upon figures and in situations
where they could not fail to tell well. His imagination “ ran riot ”
upon "desarts vast and antres idle, " peopled by misanthropes and ban- ditti : "helm and hawberk's twisted mail," "the whiskered pandoor
and the fierce hussar—” these, and such like characters, he hit off as if
by magic. The dark, rocky recess, where the coiled serpent might occupy
its extremity and of which the entrance was half overgrown with ivy
and broom-where the Corsair of Byron and the Pirate of Scott might
alike resort for meditation of more mischief-here, in such recesses, the
freebooters of Sir Robert, armed cap-à-pie, were always sure to be
found. Salvator Rosa himself could not exhibit countenances and attitudes denoting fiercer desperation of purpose : and had the former continued in " this line," he might perhaps have equalled the great master
of his adoration in the depths of his shadows, and the mysterious
sublimity of his landscape. But having in a manner " touched the
stars" with his pencil, he threw up, of a sudden, the professional pursuit of his art. He became a soldier—a traveller—a diplomatist-occupations
in which his heart always palpitated with delight. He is also an author :
his most important publication being Travels in Georgia, Persia, Armenia, and Ancient Babylon, &c. 1821-2, 4to. 2 vols., an excellent
work, of which the embellishments, from his own pencil, are equalled
by the interest of the materials. His sister tells me that his pencil is by
no means allowed to grow rusty, or unruly, from habitual neglect.
L 2
148 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.
it home, and did nothing but think of it, talk of it,
and dream of it. And all this by a young man of
NINETEEN !
But the merits of my other artist- friend, Mr.
Masquerier, must not be forgotten in the record of
the blaze of public admiration which followed the
exhibition of the storming of Seringapatam, by Sir
R. K. Porter. Having won the silver medal over
and over again in the drawing of the Academic
figure, myfriend was naturally emulous of encountering the living figure, in a different attitude, and with
a more intelligible and satisfactory result. As the
groundwork of what might be his future fame as a
painter of portraits, he chose his own portrait ; and
with such singular felicity, that the President of the
Royal Academy put him to an unusual test as to its
authenticity * . In the year 1800, Mr. Masquerier
had occasion to go to Paris on family affairs. His
* The test was, to lay his hand upon his heart and say that it was
"all painted by himself." Had my friend Mr. Masquerier gone on
according to this beginning, we need not have bewailed the losses which
the country has recently sustained in this department of art. But this
was not to be. Increased business would not allow even of the leisure
requisite for its execution. A large acquaintance, interesting manners
and conversation, a uniform readiness to oblige, and, like his great
master, Reynolds, as uniform an integrity in painting the countenance
of the poor man, as well as of the rich man, to the best of his abilitythese brought my friend into considerable practice and general esteem.
I may, indeed, here be allowed to advert to ONE portrait executed by
his pencil—of HER, who, for many a long year, has shared with me the
toils and buffets of a troublesome world-with sensations of no ordinary
gratification. It is, or rather was ( " Eheu-fugaces labuntur anni !")
as perfect a resemblance as it is, in all respects, a sweetly executed
picture.
" Sie oculos, sic ILLA manus, sic ora ferebat. ”
CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 149
father was a Frenchman, his mother an Englishwoman, and he was born in this country ; yet his
earlier years were spent abroad, at Paris, where he
saw the first breakings out of the French Revolution
in all its thickening horrors. I have heard him
describe some of the public scenes of butchery of
which he was a very young but most sensitive spectator ; and of the hair-breadth scapes which befel
him. Like a sensible man, who made all his pursuits available to the purposes of his profession,
my friend conceived the happy thought of obtaining
permission to make a portrait of Bonaparte (then
First Consul), and afterwards, portraits of his generals the whole of which was concentrated in one
grand picture, of the size of life, and exhibited in
this country as Bonaparte reviewing the Consular
Guard* . Its success was complete. The likenesses
* The origin of this picture was simply as follows :-premising that
it was painted at the very height of public curiosity to see a portrait of
the man who was preparing to subjugate all the world, and just after his
proposals for peace, on his being made First Consul, had been rejected.
My friend was painting a portrait of Captain ( since Admiral) Schank,
to whom he expressed a wish to see his mother, then resident at Paris.
Admiral Schank, being a Commissioner of the Transport Board, kindly
promised him a licence for that purpose. When at Paris, Mr. Masquerier, through the interest of a friend acquainted with Josephine, got
permission to be at the Thuilleries-where he saw Bonaparte in the
grey great coat which has since been so well known throughout Europe.
My friend observes, that his appearance, in this costume, was so different from all the portraits of him which he had seen, that he resolved to
fix him in his sketch-book in that identical surtout : the French thinking
that the portrait of a great man must necessarily be tricked out in
finery. He sketched him just as he saw him, and carried him to England ; placing him upon a grey horse, his usual coloured charger, and
150 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.
were admitted to be admirable ; and the profits
arising from upwards of twenty-five thousand visitors
during the season of its exhibition, convinced the
artist that his judgment had been equal to his powers
of execution. It laid the foundation at once of his
fame and his fortune.
While upon the subject of ART, I may as well
notice my introduction, a year or two before, to the
celebrated Mr. Copley, the father of the present
Lord Lyndhurst. At the time of introduction,
Mr. Copley was busied with his great picture of the
relief afforded to the crew of the enemy's gunboats on their taking fire at the Siege of Gibraltar * .
surrounding him with his staff. The picture told in all respects. The
Prince Regent (afterwards George IV. ) and Tallien, then in London
on his return from Egypt, were among the twenty-five or thirty thousand
visitors who came to see it. Tallien left in the exhibition-room the
following testimony to the likeness of the First Consul.
"Jai vu le portrait du General Buonaparte fait par Mr. Masquerier,
et je l'ai trouvé tres resemblant.”" TALLIEN, Londres ce 24 Mars, 1801 .
There is a print of this picture, but I believe it to be rather scarce.
The original was afterwards sold for the purpose of going to America ;
but its present destination is unknown to me. My friend netted about
10007. by this speculation, but the remuneration did not overpay the
toil. Such was the reaction, from incessant application and anxiety,
that the artist was confined to his room several weeks afterwards.
* This grand picture is now more generally known through the
medium of the engraving by Bartolozzi ; an engraving, by the by,
which disappointed the expectations of the knowing. Of the principal
group standing on the bastion, one ONLY now survives-the historian
of the siege my good friend Colonel Drinkwater, who is seen to the
right. It is a pity that the history of such a siege should not be reprinted ; for as long as the country or the world stands, the glorious
and successful bravery of the BESIEGED will live in the memory of every
succeeding generation. When Copley's magnificent picture, now hang-
CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 151
The picture was immense ; and it was managed by
means of a roller, so that any portion of it, at any
time, might be easily seen or executed. The artist
⚫himself was raised on a platform. I had the strongest
inclination for this visit, as I had gazed again and
again with admiration and delight on the Death of
the Earl ofChatham and of Major Pearson* . Mr.
Copley received me kindly, and even warmly. For
a short time we were well acquainted. His picture
was at length completed, and a most signal mark of
royal favour was granted him, by his receiving pering up in the Egyptian darkness of the Council- room in Guildhall, was
first exhibited, I placed myself in front of it, and was sketching the
portrait of Lord Heathfield with a pencil on the last blank page of the
catalogue when some one to my right exclaimed, pretty well, but you
give too much nose." I turned round : it was the ARTIST HIMSELF—-who
smiled and commended my efforts.
66
* The Death of the Earl of Chatham is now among the attractive
ornaments of the National Gallery. I cannot help considering it a
most highly wrought and thoroughly national picture, combining portraits, grouping, and harmonious light and shade. The resemblances
are considered perfect. There is nothing throughout the whole but
what is fairly met and successfully encountered. The subject-matter
was worthy of the painter's best efforts, for Lord Chatham was a sort of
ultimus Romanorum in his class and of his kind. The burin of Bartolozzi was successfully exercised upon it on a large scale, but that of
Nicholson-of miniature dimensions- in Mr. Major's national gallery,
is a perfect miracle of graphic art. Many is the time and oft that I have
stolen, in privacy and in secret, to a contemplation of the Death of
Major Pearson, when it was hung up in a back room on the second
floor, in the late Alderman Boydell's repository in Cheapside. From
latest boyhood I loved this picture-as the most perfect, on the score
of picturesque treatment, of all its author's productions. Had the event
commemorated been of sufficient national importance, its popularity
would have been without bounds. No painter has subdued the staring
glare of scarlet so successfully as Copley.
152 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.
mission to erect a tent in the Green Park for its
exhibition. It attracted thousands. Beneath the
principal subject, in small, was painted Lord Howe's
relief of the garrison of Gibraltar ; and the portraits
of Lords Heathfield and Howe * (heads only) occupied each one side of this smaller subject.
Having about this time become a married man,
it was necessary, at least, to assume the semblance
of business, and a very humble set of chambers was
* The fame of Copley as a PORTRAIT PAINTER is comparatively
limited. I can speak but of four of his portraits from " Reminiscence ;"
those of the late Earl Spencer, Lord Sidmouth, Lord Colchester, and the
late Richard Heber, Esq.-the latter when a boy of eight years, now in
the dining-room at Hodnet Hall. These portraits, with the exception of
the last, are all engraved. That of Earl Spencer, in his full robes as a
Knight of the Garter, and in the prime of his manhood, now placed at
the bottom of the great historical portrait gallery at Althorp, must have
been a striking likeness ; but, like almost all the portraits of the artist,
it is too stiff and stately. The portrait of the young Heber has, I
think, considerable merit on the score of art. There is a play of light
and shadow, and the figure, with a fine flowing head of hair, mixes up
well with its accessories. He is leaning on a cricket-bat, with a ball in
one hand. The face is, to my eye, such as I could conceive the original
to have been, when I first remember him a Bacholor of Arts at Oxford,
full, plump, and athletic . In short, as Dean Swift expresses it, " if you
should look at him in his boyhood through the magnifying end of the
glass, and in his manhood through the diminishing end, it would be
impossible to spy any difference." The contemplation of this portrait
has at times produced mixed emotions of admiration , regard, and pity.
Of all conceptions, as well as executions of portraits, that of Lord
Heathfield by Reynolds is doubtless among the very finest and most
characteristic. The veteran has a key, gently raised, in his right - hand,
which he is about to place in his left. It is the key of the impregnable
fortress of Gibraltar-and he seems to say, "wrest it from me at your
peril !" Kneller, and even Vandyke, would have converted this key
into a truncheon. What a bluff spirit of unbending intrepidity and
integrity was the illustrious ELLIOTT ! His country knows no braver
warrior of his class than HE.
CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 153
secured on the second floor in the smaller square of
Gray's Inn. But no business came. I had no business-like connexions, and none, therefore, could be
reasonably expected. To say the truth, I had no
thorough love of my profession at heart—at least of
its technical parts. Declarations, pleas, rejoinders,
and surrejoinders had no hold either of my judgment or fancy. They seemed to me to be as a vast
compound of wordy nothingness-as an effort to
conceal the truth, and to substitute mysticism for
plain matter of fact * . The composition of these
mechanical parts of a suit-the manufactory of this
wardrobe of ponderous and ill- assorted drapery—
is called drawing; and, on this score, I was a
copyist, in constant occupation, having been taught
to consider the special pleadings of Judges Wood,
Thompson and Bailey (all then living, and the latter
still) as classical models upon which to form my own
style. But oh ! how infinitely preferable to my ear
and understanding was a vocal period of Erskine
or a printed one of Blackstone !
I continued pretty regular in my attendance at
chambers ; but my Academic friends † found these
* Now-a-days, much of the circumlocutory verbiage of declarations
and pleas are done away with, and that, it seems, without prejudice to
law or to reason ! How much more superfluous entanglement may yet
be dispensed with? Swaddling clothes may be essential for the infant,
but if you wish the child to run alone, they must be exchanged for
lighter and shorter drapery. Some of the old counts, or forms of drawings, bordered closely upon profaneness.
+ See p. 104, ante.
154 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.
chambers a convenient place to call for an hour's
gossip when, instead of discussing the subtleties of
a demurrer, or the incongruities of a plea, we frequently fought over again the subject of the last
debate among the Academics-or the collisions between Pitt and Fox the evening before in the House
of Commons. This would NEVER do ; and he who
wishes to attain eminence in the Law, must deny
his presence or shut his ears on such occasions—or
rather should imitate the example of the elder Aldus,
the famous Venetian printer, by putting up an inscription over his door, saying, that " he has no
leisure for gossipping, and that those only are admitted who come upon business, when they are
especially requested to dispatch their business in as
few words as possible *."
It will, of course, be remarked by the initiated in
these matters, that the course of law here pursued
was the common law ; a very unfit legal education
for the plan shortly afterwards adopted of removing with my family to Worcester, and establishing
myself there as a Provincial Counsel. I had kept
all my terms at Lincoln's Inn, and waited only a
convenient opportunity to be called to the Bar ; as I
was told that nothing was so indiscreet, and so likely
to drive away practice, as a premature calling to
* See the account of the ALDINE FAMILY in the Bibliographical Decameron, and particularly at vol. ii. p. 209, where the above inscription
is referred to as being in Roscoe's Life of Leo X., vol. i . pp. 169–70,
4to. edition.
CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 155
the Bar*. I acquiesced, and prepared to pack up
my library, and to remove my Penates. I have
* This premature assumption of the wig and gown is easily accounted
for, impolitic and unadvisable as in many instances it undoubtedly is.
But who can sit, day after day, month after month, and year after year,
with no ingress of taped papers to cheer his languid eye, and to stimulate his anxious desire to excel ? Thus it was with one of my earliest
acquaintances and kind-hearted friends, MARCOLPHUS. He got little
or nothing as a pleader ; he got less than nothing as a barrister. But
he was abroad in the world every day ; could thread all the courts, and
see what was going on the most winning and instructive in each ; and
would criticise with acuteness and severity the speeches of the leading
counsel within the bar. Marcalphus went the circuit-now in the civil
now in the criminal court ; saw human nature under many degrading
and disgusting forms ; witnesses brow-beaten, till all sense of recollection was beaten out of them ; found truth suppressed, and many verdicts given in direct opposition to the charge of the judge and the justice of the case. He then became " vexed and disquieted ;" for, abstractedly, and without being mixed up with such occupations and
scenes, the whole becomes deadly dull and unprofitable. There is,
perhaps, a certain point beyond which the patience of a briefless barrister becomes insupportable. Marcolphus, in one of his northern
circuits, stopped, as if by instinct, at Lancaster, where indisposition
detained him several days. On rallying, he went to the lakes ; became
a disciple of Isaac Walton ; an angler of acknowledged dexterity ; purchased a cottage, built a boat, and was ever loitering upon the bosom
of the Lake of Windermere, where the sound of
"the light dip of the suspended oar"
stole with more charm across his ear than the war-note of Catalani or
the deep melodies of Grassini. He is at present, I believe, laking it in
Switzerland.
A similar fate, in the end, befel my friend MURCIUS. He possessed
talents, natural and acquired, and loved intellectual gladiatorship to the
core of his heart. But he was an only son, and had a loving father,
and all sorts of plans were laid to get that son introduced into what is
equivocally called " bettermost society." Murcius rented chambersand what was worse, a cabriolet. The echos of the splashing fountain
in Garden Court, Middle Temple, were less musical to his ear than the
grinding noise of carriages in Hyde Park, from the hour of four till six.
In the funereal roundabout of these carriages, the cabriolet of Murcius
156 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.
now forgotten the particular inducement which led
me to Worcester ; but having taken a small house
in a respectable situation (Bridge Street), I pitched
and fixed my tent there, continuing an inhabitant
of that city for two years. It is a beautiful provincial town, well placed by the banks of the Severn,
with a race-ground ; with the Malvern Hills, at seven
miles distance, throwing their lofty and undulating
masses from nine to twelve hundred feet in the air *.
was duly seen, and as duly wedged. At night, and at dawn of day,
("ante solis ortum, albescente die,"-as Paulus Manutius hath it in his
Epistle to Muretus) it was also seen at the door of Almack's ; and after
the whirl of three hard-working, consecutive seasons, no heiress giving
her heart with her hand, the courage of Murcius misgave him. He
was conscious that he had made a false start, but it seemed to him that
the retracing of his steps was impracticable : so he went forward, only
putting on the wig and gown upon great and stirring occasions, when
their appearance might get him admission within the court ; but the
words " Gentlemen of the jury” have never yet fallen from his lips.
A young lady at Almack's, knowing him to be a barrister, once asked
him what was the meaning of " granting a rule nisi ?"—which she constantly saw in law reports. He answered, smartly enough, " if any
gentleman ' proposes, ' you need not say ' yes' unless you like it."
* I am told that no country in Europe possesses a more perfect range
or group of hills than those of Malvern. I have twice walked over their
summits from one end to the other. They are beautiful and grand,
both on a near approach and distant survey. For a near view, the road
from Worcester, through Upton to Cheltenham ; and at a distance,
from Cheltenham to Gloucester. I rarely see these hills without calling
to mind what is said by Uvedale Price in his Essay on the Picturesque,
when he got on the highest point, in the spring time, to look at the
pear-trees of Worcestershire and the apple-trees in Herefordshire in
full blossom. He compared the sight to the white teeth of a grinning
fool ; a very odd and uncalled-for comparison. But how grand are the
vallies of England ! What cultivation ! What natural beauty of verdure
--what fructification ! Among these vallies, Worcestershire may boast her Malvern and her Evesham.
CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 157 *
The cathedral is a noble one, and the monument of
BISHOP HOUGH alone will repay a second and a
third visit to its interior. The streets are generally broad and well paved, and there is an active
and money-getting spirit abroad amongst its inhabitants. That portion of its environs which includes a stroll to Powick, with the Severn winding
its sinuous course at your left, and the Malvern Hills
becoming larger and larger to your right, is the very
enchantment of rural scenery.
My first client was, at the time, the humblest of
the legal fraternity residing there. He is now at the
very summit of the profession. A question of dowry
was the first upon which my humble attainments
were exercised *, and a case or two of commission
of bankruptcy succeeded ; but the reward was little
commensurate with the time devoted. I soon too
began to perceive that conveyancing exclusively was
the main source of business and of profit, and that
I had in consequence taken up a false position. " To
return were as tedious as go on. " The accidental
meeting of an old Reading schoolfellow of the name
* I yet possess a copy of the case and the opinion, together with
many similar copies. I loved case-hunting and case-quoting ; not
simply from the affectation of the display, but for the varying shades
of evidence, and sometimes the varying dicta of the bench. Some Reports I read determinedly, and with great profit ; and at this moment
may safely venture to recommend, among the materials of a well-chosen
library, the Reports of Raymond, Burrow, and Atkyns; the first incorporating the decisions of Lord Chief-Justice Holt, the second of
Lord Mansfield, and the third of Lord Hardwicke : illustrious names,
and long the leading lights of the profession !
158 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.
of Pruen * , contributed, with other things, to give
my mind a different and a very decided direction-
* The late REV. THOMAS PRUEN-with whom, off and on, my acquaintance could have been scarcely less than forty-five years. He
died in 1834, exemplifying, in his life, those vicissitudes ( not of humiliating dependence or pinching distress ) which arise from a capricious
fancy and disordered judgment. He was naturally shrewd and intelligent, but there was an occasional brusquerie in his replies which
offended strangers. He was integrity, and honour, and liberality to
the very backbone ; but his overweaning confidence in others made
him latterly a prey to the bitterest reflections. When we first renewed
our acquaintance in 1800, my friend, who had been in the law, was a
farmer of the post-horse duty, in full and prosperous employment,
with a wife and rising family. He offered to take me to the lakes in
his phaeton, sitting behind two beautiful and thorough-bred ponies, intending to unite business with pleasure. Within six weeks of our starting we returned, having sauntered upon the summit of Skiddaw, and
stood entranced before the Falls of Scale Force and Lodore. It was a
heavenly summer, and we wanted for nothing-young, healthful, and
in full pay. Our acquaintance ripened into a warm and steady friendship, which, for twenty-five years, never knew decay or diminution.
The latter years of my friend's life presented a sad subject of regret to
his relations and friends, for he had twisted himself into notions connected with his clerical profession, utterly repugnant to commonsense,
and subversive alike of scriptural doctrine and scriptural consolation .
But peace to his ashes ! In his society, with our mutual and illustrious
friend, the late Dr. Jenner, I have passed some of the pleasantest and
some ofthe most profitable hours of my existence. His spruce, modest
mansion at Prestbury (near Cheltenham) at the foot of Clive Cloud or
Winchcomb Hill, was the scene of much domestic happiness-and of
which I was the frequent partaker at all seasons of the year ; and to
him I owe, in a good measure, my fixed passion for BIBLIOPHILISM.
He had a choice library, with a sparing sprinkling of rare and earlyprinted books ; and on many a winter's evening have we devoured
booksellers' catalogues, just sent down, to pick out some choice article
of acquisition from the stores of Payne, White, Egerton, Cuthell, or
Faulder-now, ALL Swept away from this living scene-
"Truditur dies die,
Novæque pergunt interire lunæ !”
BOOKS ONLY REMAIN,
CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.. 159
and I could think and hear of nothing but Literature
and the Church. To give myself only due justice,
I had a thorough attachment to the character and
good tendency of that profession, of which I have
now been thirty years a humble but not slothful
member and at this time I turned an exclusive and
eager attention to excel, in the end, in its executive
part, in the church. I became a hearer of this and
of that preacher ; but whatever might be my opinion
of the doctrine inculcated, the mode of its delivery
too often chilled my heart * . I thought-still think
--and shall be ever disposed to think-that, of all
* The late Mr. Coleridge ( Table Talk, vol. i . p. 103, vol. ii. p. 353),
seems to lay a great stress upon the " sermon. " In the former place, I
do not think that he reasons with his usual acuteness about " emotions."
In the latter, even his subdued and pious feeling, on entering a church,
appears to have been fretted by a discourse which he calls " common
place," and as if being " invidious in its tone towards the poor." This,
doubtless, is very foolish in itself, and in direct opposition to the
authority of HIM, who hath said “ Blessed are ye poor ; for yours is the
kingdom of God." Luke vi. 20.
It may, however, be safely as well as seriously asked, whether there
ever yet was a sermon preached, to which, if we listened from beginning to end, and strove to put in practice what it enjoined, we might not re- tire from the church better as well as wiser men? With a man of Mr.
Coleridge's severe taste and wide range of reading, it were difficult to
make a deep or lasting impression ; but if the key to the production of
that impression be inquired after, I should say it was to be found in the
preacher's earnestness of feeling and of expression-that sort of earnestness, in which heart, and mind, and soul mix up with the voice. This
is the "action, action, action " of Demosthenes. Only throw yourself
into the bosoms of your auditory, and the quo modo, as to style and
reasoning, will be lost in that of the sincerity of feeling, and fervour of
expression, Homely truths always stick deeper and last longer than rhetorical flourishes. Of "the prayers," hereafter.
160 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.
professions, the CHURCH was, and is, one, in which
all the acquirements of education, of eloquence, and
of delivery are called up to shew their mastery over
the mind and heart of man ; that the " conversion
of a sinner from death unto life "-the eradication of
vice and wickedness from the human breast- the
path that leads to eternity-the glories of another,
and the perishable vanities of this, world-form
themes, and excite interests, in which every qualification from nature and art may be made especially
effective. Cowper led me to consider a preacher as
the St. Paul of Raffaelle preaching at Athens-in
which masterly picture every stage of the human
mind, from sullen indifference to rapturous conviction, is exquisitely depicted. But there can be no
parity of reasoning ; inasmuch as a christian auditory
comes with all its fixed principles to " hear and
receive the word of God gladly, being, in general
essentials, " of one heart and of one soul." On the
contrary, the Greek and the Roman, the " Parthian,
Mede, and Elamite " were a benighted and prejudiced
auditory, requiring all the energies of talent to rouse
them from their intellectual torpidity. To speak
without the slightest disrespect or irreverence, I
should say that St. Paul and St. Peter were necessarily great preachers both in action and in word * .
* What might not the impassioned reader conceive to have been the
attitude and power of expression of St. Paul, when he launched forth
his thundering reply against Festus ! " I am not mad, most noble
CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 161
I now, therefore, set myself seriously to work to
accomplish the great object in view, of getting
into holy orders. Thankful to the Great Disposer
of all things, for " a sound mind in a sound body,"
I consulted older and wiser understandings upon
the topic in question, and finding no absolute interest, and little profit, in " Indentures Tripartite, "
I disposed of my law books to one of my oldest
friends (then just established in chambers in Brickcourt), and, in due time, Mede, Chillingworth,
Festus," &c. What raising of the hand-what elevation of the voice !
The whole area was in a manner occupied with his figure exclusively.
The very judge upon the bench quailed and cowered before the thunder
and lightning of the prisoner's eloquence. And St. Peter, whose sermons, or addresses, in the Acts of the Apostles, are occasionally protracted, was evidently, throughout the whole of them, in a state of no
common excitation . As his zeal for his master was without limits, so
the evidences which he afforded of it in his Discourses teach us that if
we set about our work earnestly, we shall accomplish it successfully.
I remember, when a lad of about fifteen, being taken by my uncle to
hear the well-known Mr. Newton (the friend of Cowper the poet)
preach his wife's funeral sermon in the church of St. Mary Wolnoth,
in Lombard-street. Newton was then well stricken in years, with a
tremulous voice, and in the costume of the full -bottomed wig of the day.
He had, and always had, the entire possession of the ear of his congregation. He spoke at first feebly and leisurely, but as he warmed, his
ideas and his periods seemed mutually to enlarge : the tears trickled
down his cheeks, and his action and expression were at times quite out
of the ordinary course of things. It was as the " mens agitans molem
et magno se corpore miscens. " In fact, the preacher was one with his
discourse. To this day I have not forgotten his text. Hab. iii . 17-18 .
"Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the
vines ; the labour of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no
meat ; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no
herd in the stalls : yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God
of my salvation." Newton always preached extemporaneous.
M
162 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.
Bingham, Hall, Hammond, and Wetsten, were the
stately occupants, in folio, of my book- shelves. But
Bishop Marsh's Michaelis made me a Christian upon
conviction * . For sermons, explanatory of the text,
those of Sherlock and Jortin were my favourites ;
but Atterbury and Seed for elegance of style and
closeness of reasoning. I was told to make much of
South ; but he seemed to me to prefer a pun or a
witty point to weight of doctrine ; and his odious,
if not profane, flattery to Charles II., in the university pulpit of Oxford, absolutely disgusted me.
Such characters are little better than actors, hired
to play Cardinal Wolsey to-day and Sir John Falstaff
* Hear Bishop Marsh's commendation of a portion of this work :
" In the chapter which relates to the Authenticity of the New Testament, the evidence, both external and internal, is arranged in so clear
and intelligible a manner, as to afford conviction even to those who have
never engaged in theological inquiries : and the experienced critic will
find the subject discussed in so full and comprehensive a manner, that
he will probably pronounce it the most complete Essay on the authenticity of the New Testament that ever was published ." The palpable
and irresistible conclusion is, that, if authentic, then must it be an
inspired book : from the completion of its prophecies or predictions—
and epecially of that relating to the destruction of Jerusalem.
There are, however, two portions of the original work translated by
the bishop, to which I regret that the learned translator, as in other instances, did not furnish notes, either in support of or in opposition to the
original. These two portions are, the observations upon St. Paul's
Epistle to the Hebrews, and upon the Apocalypse : both of which are
considered by Michaelis to be apocryphal. Mr. Coleridge, without being
aware of the opinion of the German theologian, had the same notion of
the Epistle to the Hebrews. In the philological and critical departments,
Bishop Marsh's helps are invaluable. The reader will find a more extended list of eminent divines in the Library Companion, pp. 53-71 ,
second edition.
CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 163
to-morrow. Doddridge and Bishop Horne unveiled
to me all the loveliness of the Christian religion ;
and I rarely rose from their perusal without feeling
an intense desire of living more and more, every
day, " in CHARITY WITH ALL MEN." These amiable
and exemplary men, and most invaluable writers,
seemed, in my abstract moments, to be moving, as
it were, with the wings of angels, upon that great
intellectual and spiritual ladder which reaches from
earth to heaven. Lardner's Credibility of the Gospel
History was a storehouse replenished with every
thing necessary for attack and defence in the Christian's cause ; while Macknight upon the Epistles
seemed to have exhausted every debateable point, and
to have cleared up every harassing doubt *. In
Greek Testaments my little library was rather richly
stored. I revelled in choice copies of the first Erasmus and the first Stephen ; and defied any neighbouring clergyman to match me in Elzevirs and in
Tonsons. But Wetsten was always my great anchoring point in case of perplexity ; especially where
Bishop Pearce's Commentary failed to satisfyt.
•
* But I must in no-wise allow the student, as he grows older and
makes his " Body of Divinity" more and more impregnable, to dispense
with ESTIUS's invaluable Commentary upon all the Apostolical Epistles,
published in 1709, 2 vols. folio. Will that same student forgive my
referring him to so humble a quarter as to two notes at the end of the
second volume of my Sermons, published in 1825, in confirmation of
the value of that foreigner's labours ?
+ Gibbon's account of his "de die in diem" labour in his study,
when at Lausanne, had quite warmed my heart, and stimulated me to
M 2
164 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.
Thus I set forward upon a new road in the journey
of life. My excellent neighbour and friend, Mr.
Field (a medical practitioner in high repute) , applauded my motives and seconded my views ; and
as I had not taken my Bachelor's degree, it was
thought advisable to consult the Bishop of Worcester, the well-known DR. HURD, whether, in case
of a title offering, he would ordain me without such
a preliminary measure being carried into effect. I
called upon that venerable prelate at Hartlebury,
with a view of having this point settled one way or
the other, and waited his appearance in an anteroom. I had read Gibbon's acute remarks upon
his Letters on Romance and Chivalry, and upon
the Art of Poetry by Horace—and seemed to feel a
particular curiosity to see the friend and the editor
of Warburton, then far advanced in the vale of
follow, however feebly and imperfectly, in the steps of so voracious a
student and so exquisite a critic. I read hard and regularly, and daily
noted down my progress and my feelings. The more I went on my
way, the pleasanter the prospect became ; and if I commenced in doubt,
I concluded in conviction. Thirty years have rendered that conclusion
unshaken. My plan was, to interleave the quarto Greek edition of the
New Testament by Baskerville, and write down all the minor and
more puzzling points, with their solutions ; referring only to—or rather
giving copious extracts from-the authorities selected for such solutions.
BISHOP PEARCE was one of the brightest ornaments of our bench. He
was an elegant classical scholar, a judicious expounder of Holy Writ,
and a most thoroughly exemplary man. His conduct about the resignation of his see (Rochester) when age and infirmity had rendered him incapable of performing its functions, reflects upon him immortal honour.
With what BENEFIT to the Church might the occasional repetition of
such an example be attended ! Or why, when physical powers fail, may
not a bishop, as well as a judge, have a retiring pension ?
CHOICE OF A PROFESSION. 165
years. I shall never forget his appearance. It was
as if some statue had
66 Stepp'd from its pedestal to take the air.”
He was habited in a brocaded silk morning gown,
with a full-dressed wig, stooping forward, and walking and leaning upon what appeared to be a goldheaded cane. His complexion had the transparency
of marble, and his countenance was full of expression, indicative of the setting of that intellectual
sun which, at its meridian height, had shone forth
with no ordinary lustre. He was then, I think, in
his eightieth year. His reception of me was bland
and courteous ; but he deemed the taking of the
degree an absolutely essential preliminary measure.
On asking me what was my then course of studies,
and on receiving my reply, he added, " you cannot
do better."
There was, therefore, but one intelligible plan to
be pursued. I bade adieu to the society and to the
environs of Worcester ; took my degree with as little
delay as possible ; and, in pursuit of a title, established my residence at Kensington, where I continued an inhabitant for the next twenty-one years
of my life. Many inducements then operated to
this establishment, which, long ere I left it, had
ceased to operate ; but there I pitched my tent, and
there my destiny fixed me, for a succession of alternate pleasure and pain, such as is the usual lot
of mortality. I was ordained a deacon by the Bi-
\
166 CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.
shop of Winchester ( Dr. North) on the 24th of
December, 1804, and cast about seriously to maintain, if not to improve, the little reputation I had
acquired by the publication of the Introduction to
the Classics, of which the second edition had just
made its appearance. In other words, I determined
upon commencing AUTHOR in right earnest.
167
CHAPTER V.
AUTHORSHIP.
" Oh, grant an HONEST FAME, or grant me none !"
POPE.
FROM the conclusion of the last chapter, the
reader will be necessarily prepared for the subject
of the present ; and yet I must trespass upon his
patience some few minutes longer, ere I place him.
by the side of me in exploring the contents of my
shelves and my desk * . It may be just as well to
fix myself in the professional niche which I occupied
during the progress of those labours, which were
unsweetened by preferment, and unrequited by anything approaching to adequate remuneration. For
upwards of twenty consecutive years were those labours unremittingly continued. My neighbour and
excellent friend, the Rev. Mr. King †, used to cheer
* Of a portion of that "DESK," upon which I am at this moment
writing, and upon which all my lucubrations have been penned, a small
vignette-view may be seen at the end of the Bibliographical Decameron,
vol. iii . p. 469. In how many seasons of sorrow and anxiety has it
been my constant and comforting companion !
+ This worthy man and sound scholar was, I believe, the senior
fellow of New College, in possession of a fine living, the brother-in-law
168 AUTHORSHIP.
and comfort me, by telling me, not long after I had
been in orders, that " if a man got preferment at
forty, he must think himself a lucky fellow. " I own
that this did not strike me as very logical or very
encouraging ; especially when I knew that I had no
friends from whom I could expect preferment in the
way of claim. I was resolved, however, to work on,
and to hope on; -trusting to a gracious Providence to
of Sir Thomas Bernard, Bart. , and the old and intimate friend of Dr.
Huntingford, the late Bishop of Hereford, to whom the bishop dedicated the second volume of his Sermons-of which in due course. His
later professional labours were devoted to a translation of portions of
the earlier Fathers in support of the evidences of Christianity. Whatever he took in hand, he took earnestly in hand ; and his friendship
partook of this earnestness and warmth of feeling. Great as was the
disparity of our years, he entered into all my professional and literary
undertakings with the alacrity and zeal of a young man, and used to
quote Homer's definition of friendship with an air of conscious triumph,
in the amplified but vigorous couplet of Pope :-
" A generous friendship no cold medium knows ;
Burns with one love, with one resentment glows."
He was a most ardent and zealous anti-Bonapartist, and allowed himself neither composure by day nor repose by night as that restless
warrior went on in the career of victory. When I brought him the
news of the victory of Trafalgar and the death of Nelson, he raised his
eyes and hands to heaven, exclaiming, " How I envy him his EuTHANASIA !"
Disheartening, however, as might have been my friend's prediction
as to the time of life when I ought reasonably to expect preferment,
another clerical and mutual friend sunk my spirits to a much lower
pitch of despondency, when he told me that "if I preached like an
angel, it would never get me a living !" How startling to an inexperienced and susceptible mind are such gratuitous observations ! —and
how failing in general application or truth !—at least, while we think
of Dean Andrews in past days, and of the Master of the Temple in
present.
AUTHORSHIP. 169
dispense his favours and his blessings as to his infinite wisdom it might seem fit. At all events, I
was thoroughly conscious of the rectitude of my intentions ; and resolved in every way to exhibit, to
the utmost of my power, " peace and good will towards men." The cares of a family threw at once
increased responsibility and expense upon my situation, and nothing was left me but to set my shoulder
resolutely and vigorously to the wheel. It was clear
that, if I failed, the sin of sloth could not be attached to my door.
Within three months of taking orders, I was ordained a priest ; my time of life and professional
avocations appearing to justify a measure out of the
ordinary routine * . I was exceedingly anxious to
* I preserve the letter of the Bishop of Winchester (who ordained
me a deacon at Farnham Castle) to me on this occasion, and make no
apology for its insertion here. The bishop examined me in person for
deacon's orders, and I was both struck and pleased with the amenity of
his manners and the familiarity of his communication. Courteous,
gentlemanly, and affable, all the candidates seemed to love and respect
him. We afterwards dined with him. He was at that time old, and
much stooping ; but he performed the honours of the table with the air
of a man accustomed to good breeding, and as one 66 GIVEN TO HOSPITALITY." He was very like the portraits of his brother, the famous
Lord North, whom I had never seen ; and happening to sit next to him
at dinner, I was much amused by his playful reference (from some topic
started, which I have forgotten) to those gladiatorial skirmishes in the
House of Commons between his brother and Mr. Fox. The letter of the
Bishop just alluded to is as follows :-
66 SIR,
66 Chelsea, Feb. 10, 1805.
" It is my usual practice to require more time than you have passed
in preparation for priest's orders ; but there are certainly some circum-
170 AUTHORSHIP.
excel, and attended various churches and chapels
for the sake of awakening emulation and obtaining
a good taste. Above all, from earliest youth, was I
susceptible of good reading* ; and, in the lessons of
stances in your case very creditable to yourself not often occurring on
these occasions. I shall, therefore, on your sending in your proper
credentials, make no difficulty of admitting you at my ensuing ordination, to be held, should no impediment arise, on the 10th of March, at
Winchester House, Chelsea.
" I am, respected sir, your faithful,
"Humble servant,
B.Winchester
On the day appointed I attended at Winchester House. My examination lasted three minutes. Mr. Poulter, the bishop's examining chaplain and brother-in-law, simply asked me " if I felt quite satisfied that
the CODEX VATICANUS (as I had stated it to be in my Introduction to
the Classics) was of the fifth century ?" I replied, that “ my opinion
necessarily rested upon those of the authorities whom I had quoted."
He said he was quite satisfied .
* When a schoolboy, just turned of fifteen, I was taken by a friend
to hear the famous Septimus Hodgson do duty at the Asylum. As the
chaplain, he did the whole duty. His reading seemed, to my ear and
understanding, to be perfect. The second lesson of that morning's service happened to be perhaps the most touching, sublime, and in its pure
sense, dramatic, of all the lessons or chapters in the Bible. It was the
26th chapter of the Gospel according to St. Matthew-full of incident,
dialogue, and feeling-over the whole of which our Saviour's agony in
the garden of Gethsemane shines forth with a peculiar and awe-inspiring lustre : being wholly unearthly and sublime. There is no pathos
like unto it : but the reader approaches it with some peril-for too much
sensibility, by choking or impairing the voice, will necessarily diminish
the complete effect to be deduced. It seemed to me that Mr. Hodgsonwas
eminently successful, and mine were not the only eyes in the congregation which were suffused with tears. His preaching, both then and
afterwards, struck me as being very secondary. His advance towards the
AUTHORSHIP. 171
the church, I have been long and abundantly convinced that it is one of the most essentially necessary
parts of a clergyman's education and duty, to give to
their perusal all the force and expression of which
he is capable, and which the grandeur and beauty
of those lessons so imperatively demand. Of course,
I speak ofthe greater part of these lessons-of which,
however, many in the afternoon- service might be
judiciously displaced for others * . An English auditory is not, I think, much roused even during the
most animated and eloquent discourse. Some of
the more pious and celebrated preachers upon the
Continent would probably shock them t. A cerpulpit, in a full suit of silk robes, with a chapeau de bras under his
arm, was a piece of absurd affectation. In the pulpit he ceased to be
natural, pronouncing his words mincingly, without breadth or power of
expression . Both in voice and manner he appeared to me to resemble
Holman the actor in many particulars.
* Will my 66 REVEREND BRETHREN" forgive a suggestion ? From
the endless variety of the Bible, why are not lessons, both morning and
afternoon, selected for the Sabbath-service ? It may be answered, they
are selected. I reply, they are and are not selected ; that is, the second
lesson, both morning and afternoon, is merely in accordance with the
day ofthe month, which supposes the hearer to read his Bible on every
day in the year. It is, therefore, almost merely accidental that, of two
chapters, the more interesting and instructive one happens to be read.
The illustrations are without end ; and, what is to be deplored, some
chapters in the epistles are read which, however congruously and
fitly placed where they are, give rather pain than gratification on the
perusal. Surely, in such secondary matters, the hand of reform may
be wisely and safely exercised ?
+ Even Massillon, or Bossuet, or Bourdaloue-at this moment I forget
which-when he made that celebrated apostrophe respecting the immediate presence of our Saviour, as passing judgment on a prostrate
world-and as selecting the congregation before him as objects of that
172 AUTHORSHIP.
tain grave and fixed attention is uniformly observed ;
while, with very many, there is a sort of underground current of criticism to catch at venial errors,
or to take offence at periods inharmoniously formed.
In my younger days, I heard a very grave gentleman
assert that he would not, knowingly, sit beneath a
man the second time, who concluded a sentence
with a monosyllable * . All preaching, as to manner,
is a mere subject of individuality ; and we ought no
more to expect uniformity in preaching than uniformity in colour, form, and sound. As reasonable
were it to expect preachers to have the same manner of preaching, as the same form or expression of
countenance. The change of that manner, if it be
natural, for one that is acquired by an exclusive
imitation of another preacher, is equally absurd and
ineffective. The late Dean of Canterbury (Dr. Andrews), and the late Vicar of Greenwich ( Mr. Matthews), both preached in the same pulpit at St.
James's of which parish the Dean was also the
judgment, causing their hearts to quake with very terror-would have
comparatively, if not greatly, failed, had the temperament of his auditory
been composed of British materials ? This phlegm, however, belongs
only to an educated congregation of a particular class ; as who, in the
ordinary and lower classes of our countrymen, exhibit a more wild and
frenzied zeal in some particular points of religious belief and adherence ?
How many Peter the Hermits have we had under a different name?
* But such capricious criticism is not confined to matter : it is exercised sometimes against manner. I knew a person who left a place of
worship " because the clergyman took too many liberties with his right
hand !" And a fair critic has been heard to say, " she wondered how a
clergyman could presume to preach beyond twenty minutes!'
AUTHORSHIP. 173
rector. Their manner was as different as possible ;
but the effect of their preaching was equally marked
and powerful * . If a man walk out of himself, in
his pulpit, he is sure to go astray. His manner,
doubtless, may be a bad one, and, as such, capable
of improvement ; but I feel persuaded that the defect
of voice, of attitude, and of physiognomical expression (all essentially requisite for what is called a
perfect delivery of a discourse), are subordinate to,
or greatly remedied by, a natural earnestness—and
the throwing of one's self into the subject-matter of
the sermon. Only let our congregations feel assured that we are in earnest, and that we have their
temporal and eternal interests at heart, and, as far
as preaching goes, the GREAT OBJECT is obtained.
Fastidiousness, austerity, and prejudice will, in the
end, become merged in gratification and approval.
I am of course confining myself to clerical duty
within the church. My own avocations were, for
* What a thoroughly good man and most effective preacher was the
Dean. He was one of my earliest patrons, if, as he said, the preachership of so obscure a chapel as that of the good Archbishop Tenyson's
in Swallow, now Regent- street, could deserve the appellation. What
power in the pulpit-what playfulness out of it-had HE ! And when
he had turned the mortal corner of " threescore years and ten," how
enviable his spirits, how sweet his temper, and how conciliatory and
encouraging his manners to the younger clergy ! He had a full, strong
voice, and is said never to have used it more sonorously and effectively
than when, to the prime minister's question ( I think it was Lord Liverpool's, though Mr. Perceval gave him the deanery) " whether he would
be a BISHOP, " he answered " NOLO !" The chief feature or point ofattraction in Dean Andrews' preaching was, that " he spake as one having
authority."
174 AUTHORSHIP.
twenty years, precisely of that nature ; having obtained two alternate morning-preacherships under
the odious process of competition * . As far as personal feeling goes, the foregoing cannot be digressive-however secondary and unimportant it may
be to my readers.
I now commence in right earnest the HISTORY
OF AUTHORSHIP ; to be followed by that of PUB-
* “ Odious” in very many respects is this process of " competition ;"
but I see no remedy for the mischief, unless by the Bishop's taking the
jurisdiction of these chapels under his own immediate cognizance.
Why session after session is allowed to glide away, and no one step
taken in the upper house for the correction of this, and of other abuses
in church discipline, does sometimes strike one as a melancholy and
marvellous matter. A proprietor of a chapel reasons thus, or rather all
his reasonings are based upon this hypothesis : " I have laid out a large
sum of money in the purchase, repairs, and fittings-up of my chapel,
and I must have a certain rent to square with the principal sunk. I
cannot let my pews with indifferent preachers. They may be very
good and very learned young men ; but my congregation will be scanty
if they do not preach well." This, truly, may be an argument " ad hominem," or rather, perhaps, ad " rem" (" quocunque modo rem” ), but it
is one of the most selfish and offensive that can be brought forward
where SACRED INTERESTS are at issue. There is scarcely a consecrated
proprietary chapel in London ; and butts of beer and pipes of wine,
as articles of trade, form the usual strata of their crypts. To say nothing how frequently an amiable and highly- gifted young man is subjected to the coarse caprices of a money-getting, unlettered proprietor,
how revolting to all good taste is it to find public singers introduced
into their orchestras—and a Bishop sometimes almost elbowing them
in the pulpit ! Is it THUS, we may ask, that the fire of devotion is to
be kindled, and " the songs of Jerusalem" to be sung in our places of
public worship ? Is the ORTHODOX FAITH of our ancestors to be thus
compromised or neutralised ? And is nothing to be heard in such
chapels but a chant and a sermon ? What becomes of those PRAYERS,
of which Coleridge has so admirably observed, that " he never distinctly
felt their heavenly superiority till he attended some kirks in the country
AUTHORSHIP. 175
LICATIONS. But the first part requires a separate
treatment, as being more essentially personal. The
first engagement of a literary description into which
I ever entered, was that in conjunction with Sir
Robert Ker Porter, with the occasional aid ( if I
remember rightly) of his sisters *, an old Reading
schoolfellow of the name of Poole (long deceased),
and a few others, of whom, at this period of time,
my memory does not charge me with the names.
This engagement related to the conduct of a weekly
journal, called THE QUIZ, in which I undertook to
furnish the pieces connected with Antiquity and Art.
66 parts of Scotland ? " Table Talk, vol. i. 215. Lord Bacon's observation¸
is worth a place here. ' Though the gift of preaching be far above that
of reading, yet the action of the Liturgy is as high and holy as that of
the Sermon. It appeareth that, as preaching is the more original, so
prayer is the more final-as the difference is between the seed and the
fruit."-Pacification ofthe Church. Works, vol. iii . p. 154, 4to. edit.
* Jane and Anna Maria ; the latter now in her " shrouded sheet."
Theformer, yet living, and yet my " especial good friend," is the author
of three works which have justly found their way into our standard
novels ; namely, Thaddeus of Warsaw, the Scottish Chiefs, and the
Pastor's Fireside. I well remember their author, in the bloom of earlier
years-pensive, meditative-and the portrait of her, by Kearsley, “ her
rapt soul sitting in her eye." We now meet and talk as if times past
had not been ; or admit that they seem to be enveloped in a halo, impassive to immediate touch, or indefinable to present comprehension.
This united family had the merit, as well as the consolation, of long
watching over the declining years of an aged mother, who died in her
eighty-seventh year. My friend Sir Robert, the chieftain of the pencil
(see p. 143, ante), has lately erected the first Protestant Cemetery at
Caraccas, of which state he is the first accredited Consul by the British
Government. The object and its execution do credit to his head and
heart. A wood- cut representation of the cemetry may be seen in the
Saturday's Magazine for Oct. 18, 1834.
176 AUTHORSHIP.
There was no very definite or particular object in
the establishment of this paper ; and, it must be
confessed, that its name was neither attractive nor
classical. It was published once a-week, in the unassuming form of a crown octavo, at the moderate
price of threepence ; but its period of existence was
short indeed-perhaps fortunately for the reputation
of its contributors. A fire consumed the premises
of the printer, and, with them. all the stock in hand
the unfortunate QUIZ * !
I now approach a more decided and critical moment of my literary career, in the mention of those
" POEMS" from which such copious extracts have
been made in the preceding pages t. Such extracts
would imply their intrinsic worth ; but when the
reader is informed of the unsparing criticism passed
upon them by the hand of their author, in the first
edition of the Bibliomania ( 1809) ‡, he will not be
disposed to think that these " Poems" are introduced here for any other purpose than as a painter
is obliged to represent, however delicately, a scar or
any particular defect in the portrait which he is delineating. It belongs to the subject matter, and is
a part of the truth. On the calmer revision of ma-
* I do not remember, for the last thirty-five years, to have ever seen
a copy of " THE QUIZ." Most rare, doubtless it is, if not unfindable :
and I confess, crude and jejune as it may be, I would not " stick for a
trifle " to possess a copy-even of so ricketty a progeny of the brain.
+ See page 37, &c.
Which " criticism " is inserted, with a provokingly good effect, in
Mr. Pickering's last catalogue, No. 1055, affixed to a copy of these
poems, marked 17, 4s . !!!
AUTHORSHIP. 177
turer years, I am utterly surprised at the temerity
of the attempt of the publication ; but as " part and
parcel " ofthese " Reminiscences of a Literary Life, ”
I cannot, honestly speaking, blink their introduction
-in no very slight or indirect manner, as the reader
has already seen. That they abound with puerilities,
with halting couplets, crude conceptions, and feeble
execution, is possible, and natural enough, in the
lucubrations of a lad from fifteen to nineteen years
of age ; but that they offend against good feeling or
good breeding, or contain portions in which the
slightest infusion of slander, envy, or detraction,
appear, is, I should hope, something better than
mere negative commendation. Soberly speaking, I
am not ashamed of the specimens which I have laid
before the Reader ; and am emboldened again to
bring the volume under his notice, in a brief extract
or two from the poetry, and with the entire Preface:
*
* The poetical, or rhythmical, extract is as follows ; taken from the
fifth piece, called " The Pleasures of Intellectual Refinement,” and
dedicated to Mrs. William Compton, the wife of my uncle and guardian,
Mr. William Compton ; a man, of whose sweetness of temper and integrity of heart, I shall love, to my dying day, to reflect upon. See
page 43, ante. The lady is addressed by her Christian name.
Oh MELUSINA ! fav'rite of my song,
To whose just sense, such worthy themes belong,
Deign t' accept my lay : say, whence the cause,
What is Refinement, whence it claims its laws.?
Whence that fine polish in the human breast,
That makes true manly reason stand confest ?
That elevation breathing through the mind,
Expanding senses, and a soul refined ?
N
178 AUTHORSHIP.
Of the latter I have scarcely a wish to alter a single
wɔrd.
That source which lifts the intellectual powers,
To rove delighted through meads, lawns, and bowers ;
That source that pours such ecstasy of soul,
Completes the man, and perfect makes the whole :
That dawning virtue which our breast inspires
To feel, and own at times, celestial fires :
Say, whence the cause ? -for these are chiefly bought
By wisdom's rules, which distant ages sought.
* * * * *
Now when the various passions grow refined,
And blending virtues deck the liberal mind,
NATURE'S the field-fair Nature courts the sight ;
Adorn'd with ev'ry charm that breathes delight,
She pours along the earth in loose attire,
And with her rosy hand she strikes th' accordant lyre :
With this she sings "how Chaos, dark and rude,
Sprang into life, with various forms endued :
How darkness held her frightful, lifeless reign,
And how herself droop'd at its pow'rful fane :
When at th' Almighty's nod the fetters brake,
Form'd was each void, the loose foundations shake :
Nature and order took their various stand,
Alternate water, and alternate land."
These, the great works of heav'n's omniscient Lord,
Nature resounds, and sweeps her echoing chord :
Her golden locks in careless ringlets flow,
And in her face love, truth, and beauty glow :
Her snowy breast, and blushing cheek, disclose
The virgin snowdrop and enamour'd rose :
Her azure robes with various gems inlaid,
The pansied mead and flow'ry bed display'd :
The radiant zone that bound her yielding waist,
Shew'd the pale ivy round the oak embraced :
The polish'd sandals that adorn'd her feet,
Told how the various leaves and blossoms meet.
In hills, woods, groves, meads, lawns, and every dale,
Deep bow'rs, shell'd grotts, green glades, and chequer'd vale,
She holds her seat-eternal source ofjoy !
Thou NATURE, thou, each aid, each art, employ !
AUTHORSHIP . 179
So much for the volume itself, which is henceforward dismissed. A word about its author.
Infuse each gift, enforce the truth so great,
"
*
From Nature's mode, REFINEMENT shines complete."
* * * *
As, while some stone beneath a lofty row
Of rocks, that pour their splashing drops below,
Receives the trickling current on its head,
Moist❜ning each weed around its oozy bed :
Incessant waters on its surface play,
Bored by succeeding drops, the crumbling stone gives way—
So all the pleasure, gaiety, and joy,
Oflife debauch'd, the mind, and soul destroy.
It
I will inflict only one more torture on the reader, by requesting his
attention to the specimen selected by the Analytical Review in commendation at least of the portion selected . It is an ode
TO A LILY OF THE VALLEY,
Fair flow'r ! that bloom'st amidst an humbler shade,
Still breathing sweetness to the moss-crown'd side ;
How shall each reptile plant decline the head,
Or gaudier raise their stems through pomp and pride !
Go, gentle flow'ret, and in Emma's breast
There add a modest grace, a blooming charm ;
Secure reposing in that warmest nest,
What frost shall nip thee, and what wind shall harm ?
And while thou rear'st thy little snowy face,
To catch the honey which her lips distil,
Say, shall not Emma own how sweet the grace,
How rich the transports that her bosom fill ?
So, gentle flow'ret, may'st thou live thy day,
Claiming the tribute of her generous breast ;
Time soon must wear the fairest form away ..
Thy Emma too must fade—and sink to peace and rest.
PREFACE IN A LETTER TO
My dear Friend,
...
I HAVE at length ventured to comply with your request : in doing
which, I am aware that you have all along raised too favourable an idea
of the merit of these poetical trifles ; and have forced me, as it were,
N 2
180 AUTHORSHIP.
is an odd, and perhaps a puzzling question, whether
the joy on receiving a first proof- sheet, or the last
through the mere impulse of friendship and good nature on your part,
to commit myself, in a sort of precipitate way, before the formidable
tribunal of the literary world. I thank you, my friend, for your kindness ; and the hopes you entertain, and prayers you prefer, for the success of this very "delicate undertaking." Whether mankind may read
with the same good will, and criticise with the same candour as you have
done, it belongs to me to hope, rather than to assert. This I know, nothing
shall induce me to offer a mean and mortifying conciliation, or to indulge myself in assertions little becoming the modesty and decorum of
a young author.
In reading these pages, you will easily perceive, that the Poems have
been, at various times, and progressively, composed. The Pastorals,
and Laura to Cecilia, I wrote when I had just attained my sixteenth
year ; Twickenham Meadows, The Epistles, The Pleasures of Intellectual Refinement, and indeed all the rest, were finished within three
years after them. As you well know the leisure which a college life
affords, you may be sure my poetic moods became more frequent, and
my opportunities of application more various, than amidst the perpetual
bustle and perplexities of a school. I mention all this from motives
which I am sure you will construe in the most obvious and liberal manner : and I make this communication to the world with the idea, that
my youth will plead something by way of softening acrimony into for- bearance, and severity into candour. Should I fail of obtaining any little
share of praise at present, my time of life, perhaps, will not cut off all
hope of amendment.
Do not think, my friend, this mode of reasoning savours any thing of
arrogance ; nor imagine that I am indirectly endeavouring to raise myself to an eminence at a merciless depreciation of many of my fellowcreatures. God forbid I should abuse what appears to me the highest
happiness and satisfaction of a virtuous mind : —but I do say, that a
retrospect similar to that in which I am at this moment indulging,
affords a pleasure and consolation by no means derogatory to the dignity
of human reason. Yes, my friend, I am confident, in spite of temporary unevennesses and disproportions among mankind—in spite of
the momentary prosperity of" wicked men and fools"'---a time will come,
a period must arrive, when nothing shall save a man but integrity and
intellect. These will flourish and gather strength, when what appears
to a sensible soul undesirable and worthless, shall finally decay and
perish.
AUTHORSHIP. 181
proof-sheet, be the greater ?
Whatever be the
answer, the source of the joy, in each case, is essentially different : and I incline to the joy-inspiring
first proof-sheet. Hope is then most ardent-not a
feather of her wings is plucked, or drooping : there
are no after-thoughts, no misgivings ; the tribunal
of the public is yet at a picturesque distance. No
palpitations, just now, as you remotely approach it ;
but as you near it as you review and reconsider
what is printed—and as the solemn tribunal of public
opinion stands before you, clothed in all its terrifying
forms, you become a little nervous, and start back
a pace or two-till, summoning up your strength
and courage, you resolve to push onward and to
Digressive as these sentiments may appear to the immediate object
of the present publication, yet as they are not wholly irrelevant to the
dissemination of merit and truth, I trust, to a friend like yourself, they
need not be accompanied with the least shadow of apology. To revert,
however, once more, to "The Poems." What I have principally aimed
at, was a smoothness of metre and simplicity ofincident. Unambitious
of aspiring to " the sublime," and undesirous of descending to the trivial,
I have endeavoured to walk in the plain practical path of the Muses ; to
select subjects which rather demand a common conception, and which
nevertheless afford, I hope, a satisfactory share of entertainment. Surely,
all monuments of human genius need not be the same : there are orders
-there are degrees. Some may be lasting, though not so durable as
adamant ; some may be lofty, though not so towering as the pyramid :
peaceful and serene lie the heads of those secured and immortalised by
such stupendous memorials ! The laurels which blossom and thicken
about them, need not cast others into a barren shade : and though there
may be difference in luxuriance of verdure, I trust there may be a similarity in purity of growth.
St. John's College,
Oxon, 1796.
Believe me, my friend,
Yours, very sincerely,
THE AUTHOR.
182 AUTHORSHIP.
brave it. After all,, you think your book is very
clever and instructive and that in due time you will
be registered and enrolled among the
* * * * *
" Immortal heirs, of universal praise,
Whose honours with increase of ages grow,
As streams roll down, enlarging as they flow. ”
The printer subjoins the " imprimatur ; " and journals, magazines, and reviews, will quickly circulate
the praises of the fortunate candidate for fame. To
speak honestly, my own bosom fluttered a little with
anticipations of this nature.
But a circumstance occurred which materially
contributed to damp the ardour of hope, and to neutralise, at least, the expectations of fame and profit
derivable from this first attempt at AUTHORSHIP *.
In dining, one day, at a friend's chambers, where
several distinguished and rising young men, both in
literature and in their professions, were invited,
there sat a gentleman—to me wholly unknown-of
a middling time of life, with a sort of saturnine complexion and searching look, who was placed at the
right hand of the master of the feast, and who dealt
out his discourse with a sufficient mixture of positiveness and severity. He had dark eyes and yet darker
whiskers ; and not only was his voice loud and pene-
* The Essays alluded to in a note at page 103, ante, were, in fact,
my very earliest " Authorship ” productions : but these, and, if I remember rightly, two others, on War, and on Foreign Travel, (also
published in the European Magazine) , were printed without my personal
superintendence.
AUTHORSHIP. 183
trating, but his dicta seemed to be listened to with
something like reverential attention. My neighbour
whispered in my ear that " he was an Editor of one
of the Reviews." This intelligence rivetted my eye to
his person and my ear to his conversation. At that
moment there seemed to be no one in the room but
HE. After dinner, we discoursed of the influence of
Reviews *. " Sir (said the unknown, turning to me,
in reply to some observation which I had made)
their influence is inconceivable. I am one of that
Corps Diplomatique. I know a young man, at this
moment, not quite of age, who has a volume ofpoems
in the press. I know it will be sad trash ; and I am
whetting my critical knife to cut it to pieces the
moment it sees daylight. " Had I been made of
yielding materials, I must of necessity have fainted
away ; but, contrariwise, I stood to the charge, and
* At this time, if there were not more, there certainly were onlyfour
Reviews of any public distinction ; namely, the Monthly, the British
Critic, the Critical, and the Analytical. A full account of these and of
other literary journals has been published by Mr. Parkes ; and a more
compressed, but fair and candid one, may be seen in the " Preliminary
Observations" prefixed to a work recently published under the title of
Selections from the Edinburgh Review, 1833, 8vo. , 4 vols. -volumes,
which may and ought to find their way into every well-stored library.
The account of the effect ofthe establishment of the Reviewitself, given
at P. xxiv. of this preliminary piece, as if from the pen of the late Sir
Walter Scott, in the Edinburgh Annual Register for 1809, strikes me
as the production of a very different writer. Its style is too trenchant ;
and there is a sort of discourteous and saucy air about it, which is not
the characteristic of that eminent and amiable writer. Itis full ofability ;
but it is the ability of strong muscle and huge limbs which have just
mastered its victim, and are striding, with Zanga-like fierceness, over its
prostration in death.
184 AUTHORSHIP.
promptly and gallantly replied, that " I could not
comprehend how a man could be whetting his knife
to cut to pieces that which he had not seen, and
which, when seen, might possibly blunt the edge of
his weapon. " His rejoinder struck me as terrible ;
although I have long since learnt what commonplace stuff it is. “ Poh ! young man, ” said he, “ I
see clearly you know nothing of the world. There
are at this moment six unfledged authors begging
and praying for a good word from me.”
I was petrified : horror-struck ; not less at the insolence of this critical dictator, than at the meanness of those young spirits who could " beg and
pray " for his commendation. I said little during
the rest of the evening, but stole away somewhat
earlier than was " my wont," and retired to my pillow, rather than to my rest, with the image of this
"saturnine-complexioned" and savage-hearted critic
" How could He know of my having a
volume of poems in the press ? Had my printer
been faithless, and conveyed a copy to him surreptitiously ?" A greater night of torture was never experienced by any malefactor on the evening preceding
his execution. With mingled feelings of surprise,
anger, disdain, and contempt, I was impatient till
the grey morn" had lifted
before me.
her pale lustre on the paler wretch."
My fears, as to my printer, were entirely groundless ;
and all other fears were well nigh subdued, when
my printer sagaciously remarked, that " there were
AUTHORSHIP. 185
surely other young men with volumes of poems in
the press besides myself; " and that " he could bring
a Reviewer into the field to say clever things for me,
to the full as effective as the unknown critic's cutting
things." The whole affair now seemed to be so
evenly poised, or perhaps to wear so ludicrous an
aspect, that I desired nothing better than the arrival of the moment when the shell was to be
broken, and its occupant admitted to daylight and
air. That moment arrived in due course. But I
had no particular or exclusive publisher ; contenting
myself with soliciting permission to leave copies at
certain leading booksellers, on return.
The very
obtaining permission I thought a favour * .
The humble tome had no sooner made its public
appearance than an extraordinary, but I believe not
unusual, re-action possessed me-even to agitation.
The step taken was irrevocable ; and public opinion
might be as severe as irreversible. At that time I
had necessarily but limited notions of its power, and
* Such is the infantine and humble state of Authorship. It stands
at the very lowest step in the ladder of fame in the book-market. The
topmost step, or its extreme contrast, may be considered as the tender
of the leading booksellers of the day to become purchasers (and of course
publishers) of Mr. Fox's Historical Work, when Mr. Miller was the fortunate adventurer at the price of FOUR THOUSAND GUINEAS. I cannot now recollect who were the receivers of my humble ware ; but I left
them on return, upon condition of their having a good position in the window ; and I used frequently to walk by to see if they were still “ on
view." Alas, they always greeted my eye !—but when one bookseller
told me that he had sold five copies ( the book was published at 38. 6d. ),
I fancied myself at once in the sure road to fortune and fame !
186 AUTHORSHIP.
did not know that, even in the time of Elizabeth, one
of the most popular poets of the day yet wooed its
" GOOD OPINION *." Still, on the other hand, I felt
disposed to make use of no sinister or succumbing art, to ensure it even a meretricious notice, or a
short-lived existence, by means of the " puff-direct," in newspapers and journals ; and, upon the
whole, I buckled myself up to the stiff attitude and
stern air of defiance of Robert Heath-who, in one
of his epigrams, boldly exclaims-
" I'd have thee know
Pride scorns to beg ; modesty fears to woot."
* The poet alluded to is John Marston ; and the work in which that
poet and satirist's address to the public's " Good Opinion" appears, is
called " The Metamorphosis of Pigmaleon's Image. And Certain
Satyres. Printed by James Roberts, and sold at the signe ofthe Hand
and Plough in Fleet- street, 1598 , 8vo. " . The address itself is in verse ;
but the prefix to it runs thus : "To the Worlds Mightie Monarch,
GOOD OPINION : Sole Regent of Affection, perpetuall ruler of judgment,
most famous Justice of Censures, onely giver of Honor, great procurer
of Advancement, the Worlds chiefe Ballance, the all of all, and all in
all, by whom all things are that that they are. I humbly offer thys MY
POEM." The reader may possibly not object to the first of the three
stanzas by which this prefix is succeeded ; premising, however, that the
initials W. R. are subjoined.
Thou soule of pleasure, Honours only substance.
Great Arbitrator, Umpire of the Earth,
Whom fleshly Epicures call Vertues essence,
Thou moving Orator, whose powerfull breath
Swaies all mens judgements, Great OPINION !
Vouchsafe to guild my imperfection," &c.
Of the work itself, a further notice will be taken in the ensuing pages.
A beautiful copy of this rare book is in the old Bridgewater Collection
with Lord Francis Egerton.
✦ And yet, if a preceding note be duly considered, I cannot be reason-
AUTHORSHIP. 187
The final result is well known. The stream of
time quickly whisked it, from its slight weight, into
ably supposed to have exhibited the least audacity. The entire passage,
quoted from above, is as follows.
To my BOOK-SELLER.
"I'ave common made my book ; tis very true ;
But I'd not have thee prostitute it too ;
Nor show it barefaced on the open stall
To tempt the buyer : nor poast it on each wall
And corner poast close underneath the Play
That must be acted at Black-Friers that day :
Nor fee some Herring-cryer for a groat
To voice it up and down, with tearing throat ;
Nor bid thy ' prentice read it and admire,
That all i'th shop may what he reads enquire :
No: profer'd wares do smel : I'd have thee know
Pride scorns to beg : Modestie fears to wooe. "
It should seem, from this curious and descriptive extract, that the
announcement of new works was frequently stuck up or placarded by
the side of the play bills of the day. The above is taken from Epigrams
by Robert Heath, Esq., 1650, 12mo. p. 36, from a copy in the possession
ofthe late Rev. J. M. Rice. Heath was the author of a popular poem
called Castarella : but among his miscellaneous pieces there is possibly
not one which exhibits the peculiar quaintness of its author, together
with the odd phantasies of the times, better than the ensuing.
66
SONG IN A SIEGE.
Fill, fill the goblet full with sack,
I mean our tall black-jerkin Jack,
Whose hide is proofe 'gainst rabble-Rout ;
And will keep all ill weathers out.
What though our plate be coin'd and spent,
Ourfaces next we'l send to the mint :
And ' fore wee'l basely yield the town,
Sack it ourselves and drink it down.
"Accurst be he doth talk or think
Of treating, or denies to drink,
Such drie hopsucking narrow souls
Taste not the freedome of our bowles ;
188 AUTHORSHIP.
some nook or recess, in which it has been quietly
permitted to rot and perish-if the question of celebrity only be considered. Another lesson this, if
any were wanting, to add to those illustrative of the
blight of early hopes, or, rather, of the infatuation
of seeking to gather fruit where the seed is incorrigibly defective. And yet it is a curious feature in
the history of the human mind, or in that of its attachment to poetry, that many men, even to the last,
not only avow their unconquerable propensity to this
"divine art," but think the public have been perversely blind in not appreciating their excellence in it.
From a conversation I once had with Sir Humphrey
Davy at Althorp, in consequence of a passage in Ovid's
Metamorphoses, I felt quite persuaded that he considered himself to be a poet as well as a philosopher.
He had a right to be conscious of strong feeling and
good taste in the former ; but he must have been
yet more conscious of perpetuity of fame in the
They onely are besieg'd, whilst we
By drinking purchase libertie.
Wine doth enlarge, and ease our minds,
Who freely drinks no thraldome finds.
" Let's drink, then, as we used to fight,
As long as we can stand, in spight
Of Foe or Fortune ! Who can tel?
Shee with our cups again may swell ;
Hee neither dares to die or fight,
Whom harmless fears from healths affright :
Then let us drink our sorrows down,
And ourselves up-to keep the town."
Occasional Poems: 1652, 12mo. p. 22.
AUTHORSHIP. 189
latter . On the other hand, of all instances on
record of early failure in poetry being followed up
by the most transcendant success, that of the late
Lord Byron was perhaps the most remarkable *.
To return. The year of the publication of my
unfortunate volume of poetry was marked by the
publicity of another work, of a very different complexion, and less likely, in all respects, to win attention and secure profit. The reader will be pleased
to throw his eye upon a preceding page †, where
* I have read, more than once or twice, the Hours of Idleness, the
first poetic attempt of the above illustrious writer ; and with every possible effort and desire to discover in it a scintillation, however faint, of
the approaching splendour of the author's reputation-but in vain. It
was, however, with Lord Byron, as the apple falling on Newton's head.
An accident produced a miracle. This " idle " poem was fiercely attacked
in the Edinburgh Review, vol. xi . p. 285 ; and attacked as if a spirit of
personal hostility had uniformly invaded the critic. The haughtiness
of the peer could not brook the insult offered to his Muse, and forthwith
came his memorable poetical reply, entitled English Bards and Scotch
Reviewers. It was evident that the head which had achieved the
" Hours of Idleness " could achieve something of downright " pith and
moment." Lord Byron's Muse here appeared clad in robes of terror,
and with a scalping knife in her hand. The gashes were deep and painful ;
and when his first two cantos of Childe Harold came forth, the same
critical journal which had heretofore shewn such unprovoked severity
towards the author, was distinguished by a review of this latter work
equally remarkable for the justness of its canons, the amenity of its style,
and the warmth of its commendation. Mr. D'Israeli has here food both
for digestion and nutrition , if he ever meditate a continuation of his
Quarrels of Authors." In after life, the Reviewers were sorry to have
"cast the first stone," and the noble lord to have pelted so vigorously in
return . He called in his “ Bards and Reviewers,” and it became so
scarce, that although little more than some fourscore pages, a copy of it
(till it was incorporated in the noble author's works) has been sold for
as high as 27. 12s. 6d.
66
† See page 136.
190 AUTHORSHIP.
he will find some notice of my being employed in the
chambers of a special pleader upon making Analises
ofBlackstone. I had finished the first volume of the
Rights ofPersons in this manner, and felt a disposition to publish it under a dedication to Lord (then
Mr.) Erskine. Having requested the favour of an interview, that distinguished chieftain in his profession
not only received me promptly, but graciously ; and
seemed to recognise me as the " young gentleman,"
mentioned at page 124, ante *. I had several interviews, and several letters passed between us ; and
was strongly advised by him to do the Criminal Law
after the same fashion. In high spirits, I bespoke my
artist (whose name I have forgotten) to copy or cut
the whole sheet upon one piece of copper, and to use
his utmost skill and dispatch in bringing it before
the public at the commencement of the ensuing term.
It appeared about the middle of November. The
Dedicatee expressed his admiration and satisfaction ;
and I had nothing but a similar result to anticipate
from the publict. I was however cruelly mortified
* Lord Erskine received me at breakfast, before nine, attired in the
smart dress of the times, a dark green coat, scarlet waistcoat, and silk
breeches. He left his coffee, stood the whole time looking at the chart,
and appeared much gratified. On leaving him, a carriage and four
drew up to whirl him to some provincial town on a SPECIAL RETAINER.
He was then coining money as fast as his chariot wheels rolled along.
It was cut on one sheet of copper, measuring one yard in length
by about two feet four inches in width ; and was published on the
6th of Nov., 1797, by Ogilvy and Son, Clarke and Son, and Butterworth, all law booksellers. Some few copies had the more prominent
divisions coloured : these sold for ten shillings, the plain for five. I
AUTHORSHIP. 191
in that result ; and finding, that of two hundred and
fifty copies struck off, not quite fifty were sold in the
course of one year, nothing remained but to dispose
of the copper, to call in the straggling impressions,
and to put the best face I could upon this second
failure of authorship * . And yet, so far from being
dismayed, or irrevocably knocked down in this first
attempt at professional distinction, I published, when
at Worcester, on a very small sheet, price 6d. , the
Law ofthe Poor Rate ; at that time, and till of a
very recent period †, the puzzle and the plague alike
do not think that I have met with a copy these last twenty years ; and
I feel almost equally persuaded that there are many copies which have
been lost in the trade without any " valuable consideration " to the
author.
* I sold the copper for 31. 13s. 6d. , the value of the material. The
cutting cost me forty guineas !
+ If the Poor Laws be not now understood-and APPROVED as understood (making allowances for the almost infinite and insurmountable difficulties of the subject) the fault is surely not at the door of our
legislators ; and those who shrink from the effort to master the subject
upon broad, constitutional, principles, or according to the interpretation
of legal enactments, may, I think, have their knowledge enlarged and
their judgment strengthened by an article which has lately appeared in
the Quarterly Review under the running title of " English Charities."
So much information, such Teniers-like crispness and vigour of touch
in the several pictures delineated , such proper and noble- heartedness of
feeling "in the matter of the Deal boatmen," together with such a
range of intelligence upon all the points bearing or likely to bear upon
the subject, that, extended and elaborate as the article is, it is really
anything but the feeling of a solemn duty to go directly from one end
of it to the other. I never read so long an article in so short a time—
continuously, and without a single gape. Still, in some parts, the
knightly author runs rather sharp and close to the wind. The story of
the " black boy" is, however, altogether perfectly " sui generis "-of
course, I mean as to powers of narrative, and not as a matter offact.
192 AUTHORSHIP.
of parish officers and legislators. To the best of my
recollection, the sale just covered the expenses of
publication. If this were not a point gained, it was
certainly not a step lost.
But whatever might be the degree of discouragement, I was determined that it should not settle
down into black and comfortless despair...
"He would be a Soldier, would sweet Willy, O ! * ”
I had resolved to beat the bush in search of other
game ; and if pheasants and woodcocks were not
procurable, I might content myself with fieldfares and
larks. About this time, or rather after I had been
settled at Worcester as a conveyancer, the posthumous works of Gibbon, and especially his Journal of
his Studies, got into my hands. This put me not
only upon general reading, but upon making a Diary
of what I read, and of the reflections which came
across me during and after perusal. Then, too,
it was, that Harwood's account of the best editions
of Ancient Classical Authors first caught my attention ; and, what with Gibbon's library already
formed, and Harwood's instructions how to form one
of a classical calibre, my fancy took to run strangely
upon BOOKS... of all qualities and conditions. An
Editio Princeps, a vellum Aldus, a large paper copy
(terms, till then unknown and unappreciated) seemed
to strike my mind's eye as something magical and
mysterious-just as those arabic, or some sort of con-
* See page 54, note.
AUTHORSHIP. 193
juration, figures upon chemists' bottles, strike the
eye of the body. I was all upon the look- out. A
book-stall had irresistible charms ; but the catalogues of Payne, Faulder, White, and Egerton, exhibited so many stars upon which I loved to gaze
with an indescribable satisfaction. How often have
I sighed, when not even an editio princeps of a
second-rate classical author could be procuredfrom the scantiness of means of purchase ! Of all
fortunate book- collectors, I then considered Dr. W.
Hunter and the Hon. Topham Beauclerk as the
most so the one, because he was the purchaser of
the first Aldine Plato, upon vellum, at the sale of
Dr. Askew's library ; the other, because he was the
possessor of a large paper copy of Dr. Clarke's
Cæsar, at the price of 441. *
At length, I was resolved to approach the water's
edge, to view its clearness, and to feel its coolness, if
I could not take a bold and desperate plunge into the
* The highest sum ever given for this latter volume was, I should
conceive, the 647. which was given for the copy in the late Duke of
Grafton's library, at the sale of it in 18-. But it is doubtful whether
even such a copy would now bring half the sum. How capricious,
how inexplicable is taste ! The Aldine vellum Plato above-mentioned,
for which Lord Oxford had given 1057., and which was afterwards
purchased by Dr. Askew at one-fifth the cost, became the property of
Dr. Wm. Hunter, at the sale of Dr. Askew's library, for 527. 10s. It
is necessarily now at Glasgow, with Dr. Hunter's library and museum.
On referring to a MS. note made by me with the copy, sub oculis, at
London, some thirty years ago, I find it thus written : a perfect copy ;
nothing can exceed its splendour : in blue morocco binding." THIS
COPY, or SUCH a copy would now be worth three hundred guineas at the
least-low as the bibliomaniacal mercury has fallen.
(6
0
194 AUTHORSHIP.
mid- river. I thought I could produce a Manual,
or a guide to Editions of the Classics, which might
supply useful intelligence since the time of Harwood:
and after anxious days, and many sleepless nights,
appeared my Introduction to the Knowledge ofRare
and Valuable Editions of the GREEK and LATIN
CLASSICS. I was living in the country when it made
its appearance ; but on my publisher (alas ! poor
Dwyer! * ) writing me word that it was selling rapidly,
and that a second edition would be speedily called
for, I felt as I suppose the gamester to feel when he
throws doublets of sixes ! I had in fact secured the
" dog Tóu ol ," and was resolved to turn my " standing
room" to good account. The further history of this
publication belongs to the next chapter.
66.
And here, perhaps, I ought to notice the composition of those TALES, written just before the
peace of Amiens, in 1801 , which were the fruit of
leisure from professional or severe literary occupations. One of these tales, LA BELLE MARIANNE,
* An honest, worthy, painstaking bookseller, the brother of the late
Rev. Mr. Dwyer, well known to many in the vicinity of Cashiobury
Park, and with whom, in early life, I have passed more than one
pleasant and profitable hour. He always carried his heart in his hand ;
and when his brother, the bookseller, advised me to dispose of the copyright of the Classics to Messrs. Longmans, after the second edition was
exhausted, the latter evinced a liberality practised by few of his brethren ;
for by so doing, he parted with his own profits as vendor of the work.
When this book was first put into Mr. Dwyer's hands, it was little better
than a tabulated arrangement of the subject-matter, and the fruit of
little more than my own manuscript POCKET MANUAL: but it struck
the eye at once, from its brevity and obvious utility.
AUTHORSHIP. 195
has been privately printed ; and the only copy of it
which I know to have been brought to the hammer,
was that of the late Mr. Haslewood * . This tale is
not purely ideal, although it was written to illustrate the pathetic. Others were written to illustrate
other passions . SIR JOHN FALKLAND is even too
dreadful to think upon. THE TWO PILGRIMS IN
GREY was written to illustrate brotherly affection
or constancy t. GUISCARDO THE PIRATE was the
most elaborate, and might have been the most
popular. It is the only one of which the MS. is
preserved, and the reader, if he feel so disposed, may
venture upon the experiment of enduring its open-
* It produced the sum of21. 16s. in russia binding. Only thirty-six
copies were printed, every one of which has put on wings and flown out
of the cage of the author. This pelican-like generosity or prodigality
demands commiseration rather than admiration.
† The story was simple in its structure. A way-worn traveller enters
the church of St. Genevieve just before night-fall. The sun's parting
beams glance upon two recumbent monumental figures, habited like
pilgrims. Their dresses and physiognomical expressions strike him
with peculiar interest. He inquires of the attendant verger who they
might be? The verger replies that their history is most affecting, but
it is too long at that time of night to be entered upon. The traveller
urges him to make the attempt, for at the break of the following day he
has to set out on a far journey to the shrine of the Lady Saint whose
name the church bears, adding, by way of further inducement, that it
is now moonlight, and that the tale may be advantageously continued
and concluded by means of such aid, and, peradventure, more in accordance with the melancholy cast of the history. The verger complies, and both sitting upon a near monument, he takes up the tale.
Of its materials, scarcely the faintest outline dwells in my memory. I
gave the manuscript many years ago to a friend, who requited my
kindness by allowing it to be destroyed or lost. That is my present
impression of the matter.
0 2
196 AUTHORSHIP.
ing * . All these tales were written in a very curious
sort of dormitory, at the top of a small house at
* The commencement is as follows, preceded by the above title :-
" Fair was the morning and smooth the ocean, when Count Siffredi
and his attendants set sail from Loretto to Santiago, in Spain . It was
on the 16th of July that this coasting voyage was undertaken ; the
count having resolved to visit the several ports on the eastern side of
Italy, and so steer by Cape Passaro (the southernmost point of Sicily)
in preference to going by land through Tuscany, and hiring a vessel at
Leghorn. This latter route was strongly recommended to him the
evening before he sailed by an English gentleman whom he casually
met at the hotel. I thank you,' replied the count, but I have plenty
of time, and no dearth of money. I have, moreover, a wish to visit an
old college friend at Otranto, and am in the humour for a coasting
voyage.' As the Count seemed absolutely bent upon it, there was no
shaking his resolution. ' To be sure, ' said the Englishman, there is
little danger of a tempest in the Mediterranean ; I know not what
you have to be terrified at.' ' I have no fears,' returned the Count.
Siffredi and the English gentleman shook hands most heartily. The
next morning the count set sail.
6
"Count Siffredi was a very extraordinary man. (While the vessel
glides smoothly on a calm sea, and before it touches at Fermo, I will
endeavour to entertain the reader with a short sketch of his history. )
He was born and bred a gentleman . A very ample fortune secured
to him every attention from without, and administered to him every
luxury from within. His father was an Italian by birth, his mother
was a native of Seville, in Spain ; they had both high notions of family
renown, and bringing with each other an ample fortune, they had every
opportunity of keeping up the pomp and hospitality of their ancestors.
Nine gentlemen, with purple velvet cloaks and silver hilted swords,
with five valets waiting on each gentleman, attended the father of
Siffredi on his marriage day. Nine virgins, with necklaces of coral
and stomachers of wrought gold, with five females waiting on each
virgin, moved in the train of Donna Ximena, the bride, and the mother
of Siffredi.
"That day was a jocund one, and the sole offspring of that union was
THE COUNT SIFFREDI, who, at twenty- nine years of age, came into
possession of all the property of his deceased parents. The mind of
the Count was adorned with every accomplishment that can shed lustre on the human character. He was virtuous, he was generous, he was
AUTHORSHIP. 197
Wick, within a mile of Worcester ; overlooking
garden-grounds and orchards, with the sparkling
course of the Severn in the distance. But this little
rural retreat had other and more heart-entwining
attractions for me. It was adjoining the residence
of a friend of the name of Tyson, between whom
and myself the strictest intimacy was maintained—
alas ! for the space of two years only. I believe that
friend's end to have been hastened by filial ingratitude. Who could turn the heel upon such a parent ? My last visit to him ( some thirty-two years
ago) was in the midst of a frightful thunderstormbrave. His principles were engrafted on a religion which he believed
to be divine ; and his hours, whether of merriment or meditation, were
devoted in a manner consistently with the tenets he professed . Deeply
as the Italians and Spaniards love play, the character of Siffredi was
never polluted with the passion of gambling. His chief exercise was
the chace. He could dart the spear with unerring force against the
strength of the wild-boar and the fury of the wolf. His hall was hung
with trophies of his prowess. He could fence with the dexterity of a
master. His passion for music, accompanied with a clear and expressive
voice, made him excel on the guitar : but it was in his LIBRARY that
Siffredi shone with unrivalled lustre. Twelve thousand volumes of
choice works in every department and language, united to continued
application and unabated research, gave the Count an ascendancy over
every competitor that opposed him. It is not often that, in Spain, such
literary ardour prevails in a man of the revenues of Siffredi.
" Thus briefly have I spoken of his character. Said his steward to
him, the evening before he sailed, ' Count Siffredi, you are young, unmarried, and your rental cannot be less than 36,000 pistoles per annum:
these are things that require care and judicious management on your
part. Excuse me, but'- -Shall I injure these things,' replied sharply
the Count, by a voyage along the eastern coast of Sicily? ' ' God
forbid !' answered the old steward. They embraced each other most
affectionately before their departure, " &c.
198 AUTHORSHIP.
as night was coming on. I was on horseback, and
the rain and the lightning, commingled, nearly deprived me of the power of vision. Myfriend rushed
to the garden gate without his hat, commanding all
his servants to follow him. He received me with
the affectionate ardour of an elder brother. The
"fatted calf" had been previously killed ; but what
could the banquet, in any shape, have been, compared with the overpourings of a warm heart, and
the demonstrations of an hospitality which disdained
to fix limits to its exercise ? He had a wife who
shared all this friendly feeling with him towards
myself and my family. I stopped two days with
them both-and NEVER saw them afterwards.
1
S.M.
AUTHORSHIP. 199
About this time I became acquainted with the celebrated DR. JENNER, a character and a name which
England will do well always to cherish among those
of her most illustrious sons of science. What a fight
had he to encounter for the establishment of his beloved VACCINATION ! What quackery, what prejudice, what malice and ignorance, were opposed to
him ! He lived in the end to triumph over his foes,
and to acknowledge the remuneration of a grateful
country. It is true that Russia led the way ; and
the diamond ring of Catharine was perhaps equal,
as being an earlier demonstration of feeling, to the
£20,000 of the treasury of Great Britain *. I never
knew a man of a simpler mind or of a warmer heart,
than Dr. Jenner. I never knew a man who, being in
the road, as he was, to incalculable wealth, despised
it all for the benefit of his fellow-creatures ; and
* In pecuniary value, the present of the empress was doubtless far
below that of the British exchequer ; but Dr. Jenner was perhaps
yet prouder of it as a trophy, or mark of respect, from a great foreign
power. Its real pecuniary value was about 1500l. It consisted of a
cluster of brilliants, with a very large one in the centre ; the whole set
in an oblong, and, to an English taste, old-fashioned way. We could
never prevail upon its owner to wear it, except upon the birthday of
one of his children . No man hated pomp and display more thoroughly
than himself. His correspondence was latterly immense ; and when,
by the help of a secretary or a friend, he had got through his answers,
and returned from paying his professional visits, so as to have the latter
part ofthe day to himself, he would, when in the country, take his flute
into the garden, play a number of simple tunes ( of which " The Blue
Bells of Scotland," was a particular favourite) , saunter backwards and
forwards, notice the flight of the bat and the owl ; seeming to be absorbed in a sort of delightful reverie.
200 AUTHORSHIP.
having seen his system established to his satisfaction, retired to his native village-to the enjoyment
of his garden, his roses and honeysuckles, the hum
of the evening beetle, the echoing note of the cuckoo,
his flute and his cigar * !
While the vaccine contest was at its height,
Jenner availed himself successfully of the active zeal
and acute discrimination of his friend, Mr. John
Ring, a surgeon in Swallow, now Regent- street. A
more devoted friend, and a more determined coadjutor he could not have possessed ; and between
them both, with the importunity of Mr. Pruen † to
boot, I was induced to attempt a poem, in blank
verse, entitled VACCINIA. This was to be considered merely as a sort of peg to hang notes upon,
and I set about reading the whole history of smallpox, resolving to make it out (which in reality it
has been) the most frightful scourge of humanity.
Woodville was my text-book, and the notes were
* Dr. Jenner was a profound naturalist : in whatever department he
looked into, he looked into it earnestly and continuously. He had been
the favourite pupil of the great JOHN HUNTER, who had taught him to
consider all creation as one vast chain, of which every link had some
particular cause in itself of sympathy or affinity. Hunter kept eagles ;
loving to look at them, to watch their motions, and to mark their characters. Hence, as Jenner himself once told me, the pupil caught his
passion for ornithology ; and that pupil's first essay in the ornithological
department being " Observations on the Natural History ofthe Cuckoo,"
published in the Royal Society's Transactions for 1788, obtained him
an instant and decided reputation throughout Europe. Buffon might
have envied him such a distinction. In the year 1798 appeared his
first treatise on the Cow-pox.
+ See page 158, ante.
AUTHORSHIP. 201
doubtless preferable to the versification * . I had
imagined this crude effort to be yet in existence,
* I shall present the reader with the transcript of an original letter
of Dr. Jenner ( as if by a miracle yet in my possession), in which
allusion is made to this meditated work under reference to the " Paper."
It must also be premised, that at the time of its composition, the whole
nation was in a state of excitement by the threatened invasion of
Bonaparte, and by the system of volunteering then so generally prevailing. Indeed, I went through more than one drilling myself, by a Scotch
serjeant in the Coldstream guards, and heroically resolved upon entering
as a common soldier in the ranks of the Kensington Volunteers. Candidly speaking, whatever might have been my military ardour in earlier
years (see p. 49 ) , I thought drilling a very dull, mechanical piece of
business and generally got the serjeant to talk to me about the sieges of
Valenciennes and Dunkirk, in preference to hearing his word of command ; and, truth to say, my serjeant loved the amendment to the full
as much as the original motion.
Dr. Jenner's letter also makes mention of the unfortunate EMMET ;
he, over whose hapless and premature grave the muse of Moore has
poured forth one of the sweetest and most solemn of funereal dirges !
The letter in question is literally as follows : -
66 MY DEAR SIR,
: -
"Cheltenham, 10th Oct., 1803.
" You will be somewhat surprised at being informed that the first
intimation I received of your papers being at Cheltenham, was from
your letter. I posted down to Pruen's and at once took possession of
them, but have not yet had an opportunity of giving them that serious
perusal they require. An infant of Lord Berkeley's has lately been so
ill, as to take me repeatedly from Cheltenham to Berkeley Castle ; and
this has thrown my general concerns here into confusion. I hope that
no proof-sheet has yet gone finally to the press without my inspection ;
if so, I am confident, from the nature of things, more must be cancelled. Pray satisfy me quickly upon this head by a line, and say what
number of copies will be printed . Will the paper be thick enough for
cartridge-paper for the soldiers of the invading Corse?
" It is almost a folly, at the present hour, to speculate in anything
but swords and firelocks, drums and trumpets. The printer shall be
paid for his paper as soon as I know whether my banker in town has
cash enough to discharge the debt. Give Pruen a good trimming for
202 AUTHORSHIP.
but on inquiry of the friend with whom I had supposed it to be deposited, I find all traces of it to be
lost.
Just before returning to fix myself in London or
its vicinity, I was induced to revise and enlarge a
topographical octavo volume of the HISTORY OF
CHELTENHAM ; a place with which I was well acquainted, and of which the text of a Mr. Moreau's
work formed not only the basis, but supplied the
principal materials. It was undertaken chiefly to
+
his negligence. His late occupation has been that of erecting a billiardtable in his hall.
" Howgoes on Volunteering ? By this time, I trust you are almost a
General. Tell me how to address you. The volunteers of this place
were marched into a meadow yesterday afternoon for the second time
since their enrolment. I was struck with astonishment. They marched
and performed a variety of pedestrian evolutions with as much adroitness as veterans. A young nobleman just come post from Ireland, tells
me the sentiment of Emmet respecting the French is general there
among the common people. Will Bonaparte be so rash as to show
himself upon any of our shores ? You know I have been a particular
observer of the notes of birds. The crows, kites, and hawks at present
have assumed a kind of note that is unusual. There is more of the con
spirito and the vivace, than in their old common PASTORALES. When you
see my good friend in Swallow-street ( an ornithologist likes the term
better than New- street) , remember me kindly to him. I hope this
very day to look over your sheets.
"Yours ever most truly,
Edw ?
Jenner
One of Dr. Jenner's happiest, and very characteristic sayings was,
that he considered the genuine vaccine pustule as the dissection of a
pearl on a rose-leaf !
AUTHORSHIP. 203
oblige Mr. Ruff, the bookseller, who had so beautifully printed the first edition of the Classics, and
who then conducted the principal establishment at
Cheltenham. I now forget what was its sale, but
I remember to have received £30 for the editorship. One copy only of this unpretending volume
was printed upon large paper, of a quarto form,
and that copy is now in the library at Althorp. I
may therefore now be said to have fairly commenced
AUTHOR, both " by trade" and by good will. I was
in no condition to indulge large expectations, nor,
on the other hand, to incur heavy expenses.
small, bay-windowed mansion, in the terrace at Kensington, then comparatively a village, sufficed to
concentrate all my wishes, as to situation and the
ménage; and in the commencement of this career
I would frequently solace myself with another stanza
from the same poem from which the quotation at the
head of this chapter is taken.
" I care not, fortune, what you me deny ;
You cannot rob me of free nature's grace ;
You cannot shut the windows of the sky,
Through which Aurora shows her brightening face.
You cannot bar my constant feet to trace
The woods and lawns, by living stream, at eve:
Let health my nerves and finer fibres brace,
And I their toys to the great children leaveOf fancy, reason, virtue, nought can me bereave !"
A
204
CHAPTER VI.
PUBLICATIONS.
"Another and another still succeeds."
SHAKSPEARE.
LET not the reader imagine that I am about to
inflict upon him the punishment of wading through
a dry detail or list of PUBLICATIONS of which I
happen to be the humble Author, without the interspersion of ANECDOTE which may reconcile him in
some measure to its persual. A mere " Catalogue
Raisonné" of the choicest productions would now,
perhaps, pall on the public taste ; but, as in the
present instance, the intermixture of " LITERARY
REMINISCENCES " may give, even to secondary performances, a tone of interest of which otherwise they
would be dispossessed. The field before me is wide
and variegated. It shall be my object to make it
amusing and productive * .
* Will the reader endure that natural, if not pardonable, spirit of selflove, which, in the contemplation of the prospect above opened, solaces
itself in the application of the following quaint lines ?
"Tout le dehors ung paradis resemble,
Le dedens n'est, ne trop cler, ne trop brun,
Mais delectable a veoir, comme il me semble."
Illustrations de France : 1513, 4to. sign. Cii, rev.
This extract is from a portion of the work, " Epistle du Roy à Hector,"
usually added to these Illustrations.
Classics.] PUBLICATIONS. 205
Whether, as the conclusion of the last chapter
may induce, I was now to consider myself an Author
by inspiration or " by trade," I certainly commenced
my career in right earnest ; and set about the second
edition of the INTRODUCTION TO THE CLASSICS With
a zeal and heartiness which have never since been
surpassed. I was determined to face the thing manfully ; and fortunately derived great aid and encouragement from the Rev. Dr. Gosset, my near
neighbour, and one of the first bibliographers in the
country * . He used to smile on seeing me bring
home Maittaire one day, Panzer the next, and Clement on the third. For Fabricius I felt a respect
approaching to reverence ; and Harles was ever at
my right hand. But Clement was as my " Hortus
Adonidis." His seductive digressions-his interminable notes upon notes-his " rare"-" très rare"
- " excessivement rare " -introuvable, " &c. , delighted and distracted me by turnst. A❝specimen "
of this second edition ( 1804) preceded its appear-
* A tribute of respect to the memory of this intelligent scholar and
bibliographer, will be found in the Bibliographical Decameron, vol. iii .
p. 5. I have very great and sincere pleasure in here recording the wellbeing and well-doing of his two sons, the Rev. Isaac, and the Rev.
Thomas Gosset. We may meet again.
+ The comparative merits of all these Bibliographers will be found
stated in the third edition of the " Introduction," 1808 ; and in the
second part (" The Cabinet") of the second edition of the " Bibliomania." I remember giving nine guineas for Clement, in nine thin
4to. volumes ; a work which is now rendered so thoroughly obsolete
as to be unsaleable. This identical copy is still in the possession of
Messrs. Payne and Foss.
206 PUBLICATIONS. [Classics
ance. It promised so much comparatively with its
precursor *, that I was urged and flattered on all
hands to prosecute it with zeal, and to doubt not of
a favourable issue. Still I felt diffident about carrying it to market. I could command little attention
and as little sale : and if such a man as Sterne came
forward with hesitation and doubt about his Tris-
* Slender and unobtrusive as was this " precursor" ( see p. 194, ante),
it nevertheless received the good opinion of the late Bishop of Ely.
That most experienced bibliographer, as well as sound scholar, told me,
not long before his death, that " although the work was superficial, and
clearly the production of a very young and inexperienced author, yet it
gave proof of a tact and spirit which would lead to more successful
labour in the same line." In the preparation of the second, and greatly
enlarged edition-and which, indeed, might be called a new work-I
felt authorised to say, with Krause, in his preface to Boecler's Bibliographia Critica, 1715, 8vo. " Quanquam enim non fugiat me, plures
extare virorum doctorum lucubrationes, quibus idem est propositum, ut
harum rerum cupidos manu quasi ducant ad parandam rei litterariæ
cognitionem ;-non tamen omnes eundem attingere scopum, aut eodem
cum fructu legi, exploratissimum habeo." Sign. e. 3.
The first edition consisted of only 75 pages. It was beautifully
printed, in a tabular form-as to editor, place, size, and date of a
classic-with very brief notes at the bottom. In these notes I loved, as
the reader will see and which was natural enough-to dwell upon
beautiful, large paper, and vellum, copies. At that time, I could have
undertaken a “ journey to Mecca" to see a first Homer, or a first Plato,
printed UPON VELLUM : and when my neighbour and kind friend, Dr.
Gosset, used to describe to me the first Complutensian Polyglot Bible
of Cardinal Ximenes, printed in the same manner, and which was
brought to him on a bed of sickness (during the Pinelli sale) to gaze
upon, and to work à cure-clad, as it then was, in its original binding— nothing could exceed the eagerness and delight with which I listened to
his "tale." That identical copy having, since the days of Pinelli, seen
three masters or possessors, now reposes securely in the blue morocco
coating of Charles Lewis, in the very choice and valuable collection of
Frank Hall Standish, Esq.
Classics.] PUBLICATIONS.
207
tram Shandy * , it seemed to me, after such an
example, to be advisable to spare myself the mortifi-
* By the favour of Mr. Singer, I am furnished with a transcript of
Sterne's letter to Dodsley, the bookseller, touching the intended publication of this work. It will be read, I think, with no common interest.
"SIR,
"What you wrote to me in June last, in answer to my demand of 50%.
for the Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy- That it was too much
to risk on a single volume, which, if it happened not to sell, would be
hard upon your brother'— -I think a most reasonable objection in him
against giving me the price I thought my work deserved. You need
not be told by me how much authors are inclined to over-rate their
productions : -for my own part, I hope I am an exception ; for if I
could find out by any arcanum, the precise value of mine, I declare
Mr. Dodsley should have it 20 per cent. below its value.
66 I propose, therefore, to print a lean edition, in two small volumes, of
the size of Rasselas, and on the same paper and type, at my own expense, merely to feel the pulse of the world, and that I may know what
price to set upon the remaining volumes, from the reception of these.
If my book sells and has the run our critics expect, I propose to free
myself of all future troubles of this kind, and bargain with you, if possible, for the rest as they come out, which will be every six months. If
my book fails of success, the loss falls where it ought to do. The same
motives which inclined me first to offer you this trifle, incline me to
give you the whole profits of the sale (except what Mr. Kirksman sells
here, which will be a great many), and to have them sold only at your
shop, upon the usual terms in these cases. The book shall be printed
here, and the impression sent up to you ; for as I live at York, and shall
correct every proof myself, it shall go perfect into the world, and be
printed in so creditable a way as to paper, type, &c., as to do no dishonour to you, who, I know, never chuse to print a book meanly. Will
you patronise my book upon these terms, and be as kind a friend to it
as if you had bought the copyright ?
"Bè so good as to favour me with a line by the return, and believe me,
"Sir,
"Your obliged and most humble servant,
(Signed)
" LAURENCE STERNE.
"P. S. All locality is taken out of the book—the satire general ; notes
are added where wanted, and the whole made more saleable-about a
208 PUBLICATIONS. [Classics
cation of a refusal in annexing a price which would
probably be withheld. And so I determined to risk
the whole at my own cost and hazard. If, like its
precursor, this edition succeeded, I was satisfied
that the gain would be commensurate with the toil ;
for, in early life, the labours both of body and
mind are cheerily entered upon, and the world has
not yet taught us to be capricious or exorbitant.
I therefore exerted every energy for its completion,
and had worked myself up to a fixed determination
to listen to no terms. To be free and unshackled,
gave spurs to my industry. If unsuccessful, I should
at least be spared the taunts of a mortified publisher ;
and I looked again towards the faithful bookseller
who had successfully introduced the first edition to
the notice of the public. My printer was the late
Mr. Gosnell, of Little Queen- street, Holborn. My
residence, as before intimated, was at Kensington ;
and I yet call to mind, with emotions which it were
difficult to describe, those mornings, when, ancledeep in snow, I used to hasten across the Park to
deposit the last revise of the proof-sheet with the
printer. Again ; when, after eight or ten hours of
unintermitting labour during the day, I stood in need
hundred and fifty pages added-and to conclude, a strong interest
formed and forming in its behalf, which I hope will soon take off the
few I shall print on this coup d'essai. I had desired Mr. Kirksman to
write the purport of this to you by this post, but least he should omit
it, or not sufficiently explain my intention, I thought best to trouble you
with a letter myself.
" Direct for me, Prebendary ofYork."
Classics.] PUBLICATIONS. 209
of exercise ere I retired to rest-with what alacrity
and readiness would I frequently sally forth, beneath
the lustre of a January full-moon, and upon ground
indurated by frost to marble, nearly as far as Chiswick, and back-revolving, with all the ardour of
anticipated fame, upon the future fate of my labours
and situation in life ! That period of fond hope and
eager toil has long ceased : but the remembrance of
its existence, and of its application to an honourable
object in an honourable profession, will always bring
a consolation to me which I shall not fail to carry
to the grave * .
This edition was a thick octavo volume of some
600 pages, having an " Index Analyticus " at the
end. There were fifty copies printed upon large
paper, of a royal octavo form, with extra embellishments ; my first essay of the kind, and which,
* The above passage, beginning " and I yet call to mind," was printed
as a note in the first proof sheet of the preface of the fourth edition of
1827. Why it was afterwards withdrawn, I cannot now remember : but
certainly it is better placed where it now stands. It is true to the very
letter. And I may here add, that, more than thrice or four times, I
have examined nearly thirty authorities for the establishment of one
point. But my chief pride lay in the account of the GREEK BIBLES and TESTAMENTS. What in Harwood does not occupy six pages, was expanded by me into fifty.
+ These extra embellishments were, 1. A portrait of Bishop Fell ;
2. The arms of Cardinal Ximenes ; 3. Devices of a few eminent early
printers. There was a 4th plate, common to all the copies, which is a
fac simile of the Greek and Latin texts of the New Testament of
the Complutensian Polyglot Bible, than which nothing can be more accurate. The late Dr. Burney, in a note from him yet in my possession,
complimented me upon this as well as upon my book. The other plates
were all destroyed, after the given number had been struck off. These
P
210 PUBLICATIONS. [Classics.
giving an air of splendour to the book, seemed to
render it worthy, in the estimation of its author, of
being dedicated to a Nobleman of great literary and
senatorial distinction. That nobleman was the late
EARL SPENCER, who then declined the intended
honour * . At length the work made its appearance,
and within a given reasonable time every copy of it
was disposed of. I cannot now remember what were
my gains ; but I can remember that, when the first
copy of it, upon large paper (bound by Herring, in
morocco, with gilt leaves), was brought to me, I
thought all my toil abundantly remunerated by the
very appearance of the volume. No parent, on the
birth of his offspring, could feel a more heart- swelling delight ; or, rather, not even Cardinal Ximenes
himself, when he received the first perfect copy of
his Polyglot Bible at the hands of the younger Brolarge paper copies ( till the publication of the third edition in 1808) , have
brought 57. 58. a copy. In the library of St. John's College, Oxford,
there is a copy of it bound in 2 vols. , in blue morocco, containing duplicates of the plates, and a great number of drawings of illustrative portraits, by the Author of the work, deposited there as a " free-will offering" from himself.
* I had presented his Lordship with a copy of the neat, little, unpretending precursor of 1802, which he was good enough to receive
with " thanks," adding, that he should be " very happy, in the course
of the next winter, when he was in London, to shew me his old editions
before the year 1500." This note is dated Sept. 9, 1802. I feel proud
on its being yet in my possession , for it was the foundation, more or
less, of a correspondence which continued till within a fortnight of the
death of its noble author. I ventured to solicit permission for the dedication of my second edition to him, when I sent a " specimen" of it in
the year preceding its publication ; for his lordship's reply is dated July 4, 1803,
Classics. ] PUBLICATIONS.
211
cario * , could have experienced more gratifying sensations than I did at the moment in question.
For the sake of juxta-position, and not to weary
or distract the reader by recurring at a future period
to this particular publication, it may be as well to
say, that a third edition of this useful work (for such
it was now generally admitted to be) appeared in
1808, in a greatly extended and improved form, and
a fourth, and the last, in 1827 ; yet exhibiting improvements and additions. The distinctive differences and comparative merits, together with a few
not unacceptable " ANA" connected therewith, are
embodied in the subjoined note t.
6
* The anecdote, although a " twice told tale " by me, is in itself so
pretty, as well as short, that it may not unopportunely find a place here.
"I have often heard John Brocario ( says Gomecius) , son of Arnoldus
Brocario, who printed the Polyglot, relate to his friends, that, when
his father had put the finishing stroke to the last volume, he deputed
him to carry it to the Cardinal. John Brocario was then a lad ; and
having dressed himself in a very elegant suit of clothes, he approached
Ximenes, and delivered the volume into his hands. I render thanks
to thee, O God !' exclaimed Ximenes, ' that thou hast protracted my life
to the completion of these biblical labours ! ' And afterwards, conversing
with his friends, the Cardinal would often observe, that the surmounting of the various difficulties of his political situation afforded him not
halfthe solace as that which arose from the finishing of his POLYGLOT.'
Ximenes died the same year ( 1517 ), not many weeks afterwards." Introd. vol. i. p. 10, edit. 1827. Mallinkrot, Le Long, and Masch, seem
all to have delighted in mentioning this anecdote, of which the origin
will be found in the text of the first and most valuable biographer of
the Cardinal, namely, " Gomecius ( Gomez) de rebus gestis a Francisco
Ximenis Cisnerio Archiepiscopo Toletano. Complut. 1569," folio : a rare
book, and deserving a place in all useful libraries. For an account of
the Polyglot Bible, consult Bibl. Spenceriana, vol . i . p. 72, &c.
+ I have before (p. 194) mentioned the kind and liberal feeling of my
first publisher, Mr. Dwyer, in advising me to part with the copyright of
P 2
212 PUBLICATIONS. [Classics.
I revert to the year 1805, and take up the thread
of " Literary Reminiscences, " as well as of the acthe work, as it was quite certain the second edition, of 1804, would be
shortly out of print. I did so, to Messrs. Longman, Rees, and Co., for
2007. In the year 1808, that house engaged me to correct and improve
the work, which I believe was successfully done, by an addition of much
matter, and by some brief biographies of Editors and Printers of certain
celebrated impressions of classical writers ; but I judged it advisable to
omit the " Index Analyticus " peculiar to the previous edition of 1804.
To the best of my recollection, I received 1007. for my editorial labours ;
and 1250 copies were printed of this third edition of 1808, without any
copies upon large paper. Of course, such kind of works cannot have
a rapid sale ; but yet this third edition seemed to be getting on soberly
and regularly. About three years after its publication ( and after I had
received many letters from numerous correspondents, known and unknown) I was offered the perusal of a small thin MS. memorandum, of
some twenty leaves only, being a transcript of GIBBON's notes upon certain editions of classical authors, for 21. 28. The sum was large for the
very meagre object of temptation ; but it was accompanied by a letter,
so thoroughly racy and original, that the reader will probably be amused
by its insertion here ; and which, on one score, may not be without its
use. From mercy to the author, I suppress his name.
"
SIR,
' London, May 20th. 1811.
"I have in my Possesion a Collection of of Notes, to Harwood on the
Classics, written by E. Gibbon Esq: Authour of the Decline & fall of
the Roman Empire, Copy¹ from a interleav¹ Copy of Harwood, on the
Classics, formerly the Property of Mr. Gibbon himself. I am a Bookbinder by 'Trade and served my Apprenticeship to that Trade at Cambridge, Whare the above Book was sent to bind & Whare I took the
Liberty of Copying it. The Gentleman that brought it to Bind said he
had it sent to him to get it Bound by a Relation of Mr. Gibbon, & said
likewise, that MSS. notes was very Valuable, I took the Liberty of
Writing to you on the Subject, by seeing one of your books of the
Classics, thing it might be a service to you in a future Edition ofyour
book, I shall be Holladay making on Whitsuntide Monday if you wish³
to se them, I would bring them to Kensington ?
66 Yours, &c. ** * * ”
To the fourth edition, a more particular " avant propos" belongs.
The copyright was purchased of Messrs, Longmans, by Messrs. Harding
Classics.] PUBLICATIONS. 213
count of " Publications, " from that to almost the
present period. While the " Classics" were working
their way, and before the ultimate result could posand Lepard, and Whittaker ; and no less a sum than 500l. was given
by them for the copyright. A further sum of 500l. was given me, by
the publishers, upon condition of the enlargement of the work—to be
returned, by me, to them, if the proceeds did not, within eighteen
months, cover the expenditure of the publication. Two thousand copies
were printed, at 21. 28. per copy ; and 250 copies on large paper, at
61. 68. per copy. The sale by no means corresponded with the expenses
incurred ; and the money was, in due time, returned by me to the Publishers. Three palpable causes led to this failure. The price was too
heavy, both upon the small and large—especially upon the latter ; and
the number of copies of the latter was more than twice too many. A
most unnecessary and provoking delay occurred, after the work was entirely ready to meet the public eye, owing to some temporary disarrangement of Mr. Whittaker's affairs—and during that delay, Mr. Moss's
ManualofClassical Bibliography supplied the wants, or rather satisfied
the curiosity, of the public on this head. Of Mr. Moss's work, presently. This delay was as impolitic as unaccountable ; and might have
exempted me, in a court of equity, from the repayment of 500l. to the
publishers —because, when that bonus or premium was given, it was
most assuredly given on the understanding, implied, if not expressed,
that all due diligence and ordinary methods of business should be observed on the part of the Publishers to bring the article into the market
for the purchasers-who were almost clamorous for its acquisition.
66 While the field was thus infatuatedly left open and unwatched, an
Enemy" came and " sowed tares" in it. Fairly speaking, the public
were not to be blamed. A work of the sort had been wanted, especially
when the fourth edition of mine appeared to be so tediously delayed.
And forthwith came Mr. Moss's book ; not, however, till the article
"Aristotle" in mine had been committed to press. Nothing can be
more congenial to a kindred spirit ( and such I trust the author of the
work in question will give me credit for possessing ) than to have a
fellow-labourer in the vineyard in which he has himself so long toiled ;
and I hailed the appearance of Mr. Moss's performance as its being
likely, in conjunction with my own, to promote the instructive study of
bibliography. But the perusal of a very few pages served to damp my
ardour, and to disappoint my expectations : -not so much from the
regret experienced on finding so considerable a portion of what I choose
214 PUBLICATIONS. [Classics.
sibly be predicted, whether for " weal or woe, " it
must not be concealed that I had frequent misgivings.
to call extraneous matter*, as from observing that such large demands
had been made upon my own labours, with such sparing avowals of obligation. Mr. Moss is the most liberal borrower, returning the smallest
per centage for his loans, with whom I am acquainted. His descriptions
of the Editiones Principes are, with very few exceptions, taken from
the Bibliotheca Spenceriana ; varied, condensed, or amplified, as the
subject invited. It is true that that work is mentioned by name at the
end of the list of authorities quoted : but, if I mistake not, every such
authority had been previously examined and supplied by myselft.
Another objection may be reasonably urged, in which I can have no
individual feeling whatever. Authorities of minor importance, and now
well nigh obsolete, have been quoted at great length, and frequently in
a foreign language, respecting editions of inferior consequence, and indeed scarcely deserving of the slightest notice.
However, Mr. Moss's book was eulogised in one particular journal, for
the sake, apparently, ofmore than indirectly attacking the individual to
whom that author was so largely indebted for his materials. These are
among those "fantastic tricks," at which an inferior tribunal to the one
ordinarily referred to, may be reasonably said to laugh : but I believe
and know it to have brought its " bitters,” on a retrospective reflection,
with the author of the review. Of what under currents and shifting
sands is the mind of man sometimes composed ! A word only in addition. The fourth impression of the " Introduction " does not supersede
the third ; for although the addition to it of " Hebrew Bibles " is very
important, yet it does not contain the account of " Lexicons and Grammars"-which were to have formed a third volume, as a work of itself.
Why will not my amiable and competent friend, Mr. Edmund Henry
Barker, carry this desirable object into effect ? For myself, the cable is
slipt for ever from bringing me back again into this harbour.
* I mean, the account of Translations, and of Latin editions of Greek
authors ; as well as of commentators on Aristotle and other writers. See
a remark in vol. i . p. 327. I do not say that these are not legitimate,
and it may be even added, beneficial subjects of bibliography ; but
they should have been rendered more perfect by being more copiously
treated, and published in a separate form : as a companionable volume
to their precursors.
+ Among other specimens, confirmative of the above position, the
Classics. ] PUBLICATIONS.
215
The " saturnine complexioned " gentleman of whom
such express mention has been made in a preceding
page *, would now and then come across my imagination ; and I used to open with trembling apprehensions the monthly journals and reviews. At
length, an elaborate and commendatory review, with
an extract of the entire article of " Pindar, " set me
at rest. My heart danced with delight at this first
gravely pronounced judgment on my rising bibliographical reputation. The booksellers used to quote
me in their catalogues, and thus, at all events, gave
publicity to my name. This, to a young adventurer,
was more than half the battle ; but, now and then,
to vex me, on the other hand, I found my authorities
only quoted, with a studied and ungrateful omission
of the source whence those authorities were supplied.
A little time not only reconciled me to this, but to
many other vexations-the invariable attendant on
the calling of an author.
In this same year I was solicited by Mr. Ruff, the
printer of the first edition of the Classics, and the
publisher of the History of Cheltenham †, to translate FENELON'S TREATISE ON THE EDUCATION OF
DAUGHTERS. The motive on the part of Mr. Ruff
reader will be pleased to remark on that selected in a note at vol. i. p.
448. But why has Mr. Moss failed to consult the second volume ofthe
Edes Althorpiane, and the catalogue ofthe Cassano library ? --- which
might have supplied him with many useful notices of rare and valuable
early editions of the Classics.
* See page 182, ante. † See page 202.
216 PUBLICATIONS. [Classics.
was sufficiently honourable. He had received kind
attentions from the Duke and Duchess of Bedford,
who had taken a house at Cheltenham-and having
an unoccupied font of letter, he wished to put it
into play by the publication of some small work
which might with propriety be dedicated to the
Duchess. By whose suggestion the work of Fenelon
was selected, I have now forgotten ; but as the
Duchess of Bedford had been recently married, was
then the mother of two children, and likely to have
an increasing family, the choice of the work in question was rather happy than otherwise ; and I had
sincere pleasure in complying with the publisher's
wishes. The pencil of my friend Mr. Masquerier
was put into requisition for a frontispiece worthy of
the intrinsic value of the work ; and the Duchess
was so obliging as to give him more than one sitting
for the completion of that graceful composition which
faces the title-page *. In the summer of 1805 the
volume appeared, with so short a preface, that the
reader may tolerate its introduction in the subjoined
notet.
* This frontispiece, for the figure and face of which the Duchess sat,
consists of a mother or lady reading a book to a child of about five years
of age. The attitude of the child is exceedingly natural, bespeaking its
riveted attention to the matter read. The dress of both mother and
child are of the day-and elegant.
† The whole of the Preface is as follows :-"The translation of the
following work was undertaken at the request of Mr. RUFF, the publisher, who wished me to paraphrase what I thought might more particularly interest and edify the English reader.
"It is dedicated, by the publisher, to her Grace the DUCHESS OF
Fenelon.] PUBLICATIONS.
217
I yet think, as I then thought, that there are
parts and passages of this work in all respects
BEDFORD-and he is anxious that it may be found worthy of her
patronage.
In
"The original French workwas first published in 1688 ; and the earliest
English translation appeared in 1707. This translation, which was by
Dr. Hickes, I have never seen. In the year 1797, another [anonymous]
English translation was printed at Hull, in a duodecimo volume.
this performance there is so close an adherence to the idiom of the
French language, that almost every page abounds with gallicisms. It
is not, however, entirely destitute of merit ; but it appears, on the whole,
to have been hastily executed for the purpose of ensuring a cheap and
extensive sale.
"The present translation is offered to the public with a full conviction
of its inadequacy to give a just idea of the beauty and force of the original. The author of Télémaque' and ' De l'Education des Filles,'
appears, on a comparison of these two performances, very unlike the
same writer. In the former, his periods are flowing and luxuriant ; in
the latter, they are sententious and logical ; and nearly as difficult to
clothe in an English dress as those of the philosophical Tacitus. It will
be seen, therefore, that a literal translation has not been attempted ; and
a still greater deviation will be observable, from a wish to distinguish it
from the translation of 1797. Whether this has always been done for
the better, the reader will determine for himself. An Original Chapter
ON RELIGIOUS STUDIES' has been submitted to those whose opinions,
matured by experience, I have been anxious to obtain ; and it has received the sanction of their approbation.
6
" Ifthe work fail of success, it will not be from the want of spirit in
the publisher ; for it is accompanied with considerable beauty of type
and paper, and elegance of ornament. The frontispiece is every way
worthy of the ingenious artist by whom it was executed, and who has
long been known to the world from the taste and fidelity of his pencil.
The engraving, by Mr. Freeman, will convince the public that he requires only to be known to be more generally encouraged.
Terrace, Kensington, " T. F. D."
May 2, 1805.
Thirty years have elapsed ( as the reader will notice) since the composition of this preface : but it is with pleasure that I call his attention
to its concluding sentence-inasmuch as I have been enabled to shew
218 PUBLICATIONS. [Fenelon.
66
worthy of FENELON- than which France has no
name more illustrious on record. I will select a
few from the more important chapter (vii. ) " Of
inculcating Principles of Religion in the Minds of
Children."
" Shew children a house, and make them comprehend that this house
did not build itself. The stones or bricks, say you, were not elevated
without some one's carrying them so high. It may be as well, too, to
shew them the masons at work : then make them contemplate Heaven
and Earth, and the principal things which God hath made for the use
of man. Say to them, how much more beautiful and better made is
the world than a house ! Was it made of itself?' ' No ; assuredly it
was made by the hands of the Almighty.'
" First follow the method of scripture. Strike their imaginations in
as lively a manner as possible. Propose to them nothing which may
not be clothed with sensible images. Represent God as seated on a
throne : with eyes more brilliant than the rays of the sun, and more
piercing than the lightning : represent him with ears that hear every
thing ; with hands that support the universe ; with arms always stretched
out to punish the wicked ; and with a tender and paternal heart to make
those happy who love him. The time will come when this information
may be rendered more exact. Observe every opening of the mind which
a child presents to you. Try her by different methods, so that you may
discover how these great truths will best occupy her attention. Above
all, talk of nothing new without familiarising her to it by some obvious
comparison," &c. &c.
"The most difficult truth for a child to comprehend is , that we have
a soul more precious than our BODY. Children are at first accustomed
to talk about the soul ; and the custom is advantageous-for this language, which they do not understand, is perpetually exciting them to
have a (confused) notion of the distinction of body and soul, until they
are able really to conceive it. In proportion as early prejudices are
my own sense of the merits of the artist by whom the frontispiece was
engraved, by having paid him, on different occasions, at least ONE
THOUSAND POUNDS " of lawful money of Great Britain." Of this sum,
upwards of 400l. was derivable from the Tour alone. But see post
-in the order of " Publications. "
Fenelon.] PUBLICATIONS.
219
pernicious when they lead to error, so are they useful when they conduct the imagination to truth, until reason is gradually directed towards
it by the force of principles. But, at length, we must fix a true persuasion and how are we to set about it ? Is it by plunging a young
girl in philosophical subtleties ? Nothing is worse calculated for it.
We must confine ourselves to render clear and distinct to her mind
what she hears and speaks every day. As to her person, she is perhaps
too well instructed in the knowledge of that. Everything induces her
to flatter, adorn, and idolise it. An essential point is gained, if you can
inspire her with contempt for it, by observing something of greater value
about her.
66
6
6
Say, then, to a child who is capable of a little reasoning, ' is it your
soul that eats ? ' If she answer absurdly, do not be harsh with her :
but tell her mildly that the soul does not eat. It is the body that eats :
the body, which resembles the brutes. Have brutes intellect ? Are
they learned ?' No,' the child will answer. ' But they eat,' you will
add, although they have no intellect. You see, therefore, that it is
not the soul which eats : it is the body which takes food to nourish it :
it is that which walks, and which sleeps. ' ' And what does the soul do ? '
' It reasons : it knows every one : it loves certain things, and dislikes
others, " &c. &c.
6
"Never indulge yourself before children, in any railleries about
things which have relation to RELIGION, or on the indiscretion of any
pious persons. You may think all this innocent. You are mistaken :
it will have its certain consequences. Never speak of God, or of what
regards the worship of him, but with seriousness and respect, free from
all levity. Observe decorum in every thing, but particularly on this
head. People who are very nice observers of it in what regards the
world, are frequently gross and negligent of it in respect to religion.
"When a child shall have made such necessary reflections as lead to
a knowledge of herself and of God—add to them the historical facts in
which she has already been instructed . This union will enable her to
have a correct idea of the whole of religion ; and she will remark with
pleasure the connexion between such reflections and the history of
mankind. She will have observed that man did not make himself ;
that his soul is the image of God ; that his body has been formed with
so many admirable resources, by an industry and power which can
only be divine-and she will then recollect the Creation. Afterwards
she will think that he is born with inclinations contrary to reason ; that
he has been deceived by pleasure ; carried away by anger ; and that his
body hurries on his soul, contrary to reason, as a furious courser rushes
forward with a horseman—instead of the soul governing the body.
220 PUBLICATIONS. [Fenelon.
She will perceive the cause of this disorder in the history of the sin of
our first parents ; and this history will lead her to that of the SAVIOUR,
who reconciles man to God. Such is the foundation of religion," &c. &c.
But one more short extract upon the ordinary
duties of women, and I conclude :
" In the education of a young woman, her condition ought to be
regarded, and the situation and cast of life she will probably move in.
Take care that her expectations do not exceed her fortune and rank ;
if they do, they will cost her many sorrows. What would have made
her happy, will become disgusting to her, if she have cast a wistful
eye on a superior condition. If a girl is to live in the country, turn her attention betimes to the occupations of the country. Keep her
a stranger to the amusements of the town : shew her the blessings of a
simple, active life. If her situation be among the middling ranks of
life , let her not come near the people of the court. This intercourse
will only serve to give her unbecoming and ridiculous airs. Confine
her, on the contrary, within the bounds of her own station, and point
out to her good examples among those of the same condition. Form
her mind to what will be the business of her life : teach her the management of a tradesman's family : the care that ought to be taken of his
income, whether from returns out of the country, or rents of houses in
town : what belongs to the education of her children : in short, the
whole detail of business or of commerce, into which you foresee she
may probably be thrown, when she is married," &c. &c.
The intellectual machine being thus put into motion, it were perhaps difficult to stop it effectually
for any length of time ; and finding that
" The labour we delight in physics pain,"
I was naturally anxious to add literary to professional occupations ; the more so, as the latter only
occupied me on the Sunday, producing a very
stinted income-but in accordance with the usual
stipends of the day. For nineteen years I continued
my career as an alternate morning preacher, with
PUBLICATIONS. 221
an evening lectureship, to which the salary of only
30%. was attached * . It must be confessed that my
professional gains could startle no one by their
enormity ; and that if it had not pleased a gracious
Providence to grant me even robust health of body,
with an unsubduable activity of mind, I must have
over and over sunk beneath the pressure of the
"res angusta domi." I have before observed that
at this time, Kensington was, comparatively with
its present state, a village. Not one tenement even
was built upon Camden Hill.. All about and beyond Lord Holland's house was what is called the
country; and in this immediate neighbourhood, as
well as in the lower meadows, about Gloucester
Lodge, it was equally my habit and delight to stroll,
taking with me one day a volume of the letters of
Erasmus, Scaliger, Casaubon, and Lipsius-an-
* This was at Brompton. After the first year, the evening congregation made up a little purse of an additional 30%. , which was continued more or less during my whole stay. The duty was both reading
and preaching. With the exception of one family, the individuals
of this congregation whom I visited, have ALL paid the debt of nature.
Some of them were not only civil and courteous, but encouraging and
hospitable. Among the latter, was my amiable friend, PHILIP AINSLEY, Esq. , a chancery barrister, who had a delightful little villa at
Stanwell, in Middlesex, and where my family and self have passed
many happy days. Of late years, fate threw us apart : he, to be the
owner and cultivator of a fine domain in Hampshire ; myself, to be the
rector of a large parish in Marylebone. It was only last year that I
read of his demise. A gentler-hearted, or a more thoroughly gentlemanly, man could scarcely be said to exist. How thoroughly did I
esteem and respect him ! It is the snapping of such cords as these
which renders our walk along life's path comparatively unsteady and
forlorn.
222 PUBLICATIONS.
other day, a volume of old English Divinity, scoring
the more striking passages-to be afterwards inserted in a common-place book * . I may with truth
say that I have seen many a
66 summer sun roll unperceived away”
* There are several editions of these Epistles, more or less portable ;
but my favourite was an Elzevir 8vo. volume, of the latter half of the
seventeenth century. There is, however, a folio edition of 1709, where
the letters are numbered ; and in one of Casaubon's ( Ep. DLXVI. ) there
is a very lively description, given by the author, of the progress of his
famous edition of Polybius, finishing at the press a sheet per day ;
fagging resolutely all the morning, and spending the evening with his
friends. In writing to Dom. Bandius ( 1607) about some copies of his
verses, which the latter had sent to him, and to the chancellor at Paris,
Casaubon says, " I am surprised that you sent no copy to the GREAT
THUANUS ; but probably that is gone through a different channel." He
adds, " I was not a little gratified with the account of your journey to
England." Edit. 1709, p. 302. Casaubon's first letter to DE THOU
and he wrote a great many-is quite delightful. He seeks the acquaintance, and even aspires to the friendship of that great man, in terms
which remind one of a timid and trembling bird essaying to alight upon
some favourite spot of cultivation. In the first letter, the author seems
to hug himself in his BOOK-LUXURY : “ itaque ἐγκαλυψάμενος involvo
me in meos libros, et quando publicè minus possim, mihi certè quotidie conor prodesse. " It is ( I think) in one of Scaliger's letters that
the sad but too interesting account of LIPSIUS is given, which I incorporated in a biographical note about that author in the Introduction to
the Classics, edit. 1808-and which re-appeared in one of the later
numbers of the Museum Criticum, derived from the same source as
my own.
In a letter from Gerard Vossius to Hugo Grotius, mention is made
of the famous BLEAU, the Antwerp printer, who published the huge
Atlas that goes under his name. Vossius wanted some particular work
to be executed in a very smart type. Bleau, whose characteristic indolence was well known, waited for some " new and elegant types from
Frankfort, before he could begin to print, and then he thought he could go to work and knock the business off in three weeks." " Sed ubi id
tempus advenit ( growls Vossius) errorem suum animadvertit." Ep. 234.
Edit. 1690, Londini. There is, however, ONE anecdote connected with
PUBLICATIONS. 223
in these occupations ; and would sometimes task myself to vigorous as well as long- continued studies.
my love of Classical Epistolography, which the fullness of my heart will
not allow me to withhold. On my regular annual sojournings at Althorp, I was always in the habit, more or less, of seeking this department of reading—and always loving to fancy that I could hear Erasmus,
Melancthon, Scaliger, Casaubon, Grotius, and Vossius talk in their
respective letters. On the year following that ( 1819) , when my eldest
son went to India, I happened to stumble upon the following most
moving, and too apposite, passage of a letter from Gerard J. Vossius to
his son John-who had also departed to that country. " Pluribus si
monere, et hortari velim, metuo ne videar diffidere. Quamobrem finem
faciam scribendi : sed non deum rogandi, ut te salvum, ac sospitem, et
ad Indos ducat, et nobis reducat. Hoc orant quoque mecum, mater,
[fratres], sorores : nec desistent orare, usquedum, yel te nobis iterum
stiteris, vel meliores in sedes erimus relati. Vale, dilecte fili, atque
iterùm vale, et tertiò vale."—Amst. 1634. What was the fate of John
Vossius I know not : -what was the fate of HIM to whom the similitude
applies, may be seen on the mural MONUMENT erected within the
chancel of Exning Church !!
For the volumes of OLD ENGLISH DUTY, few were of a portable description ; but I made up within doors for the out-of-door inconveniences.
The following were among my extracts at this time. First, ARCHBISHOP
USHER upon the Sacrament : —
P. 117.-" With what astonishment, then, may we behold our dust
and ashes assumed into the undivided unity of God's own person, and
admitted to dwell here as an inmate under the same roof? and yet, in
the midst of these everlasting burnings, the wish to remain unconsumed, and to continue fresh and green for evermore. Yea, how
should not we with Abraham rejoice to see this day, wherein not only
our nature, in the person of our Lord Jesus, is found to dwell for ever
in those everlasting burnings ; but, in and by him, our persons also are
brought so nigh thereunto, that God doth set his sanctuary and tabernacle among us, and dwell with us ; and, which is much more, maketh
ourselves to be the house and the habitation wherein he is pleased to
dwell by his spirit." -Body of Divinity, 1678, folio, p. 429. Again,
the same great man-upon Trial by Affliction, or Conscientious Conflicts :-"God raiseth a great storm, and when he intends to bring a
man to some great work, or to a great deal ofjoy, he first humbleth him.
The Prince of our Salvation was consecrated by afflictions, and we
224 PUBLICATIONS.
About this time, too, it was that I fell upon Warton's History ofEnglish Poetry, which was at first
must be conformable unto Christ our head. When the storms are
past, the sea will continue raging for a while ; and when you have
turned the wheel round, if you take away your hand, it will go round
itself for a time. So when you are justified by faith, the storm is
over yet the roaring of the waves will continue. It will be so with
the children of God : though there be a calm, yet there will be some
remainders of a storm, " p. 275.
I was early taught to respect CHILLINGWORTH, who is rather a dexterous disputant than an eloquent doctrinist : but I felt the force of the
following too sensibly not to give it a place among my extracts. It is
upon " Works, and not Faith only."
" Shall we, who have the oracles of God-nay, the whole perfect will
of God, fully set down in the Holy Scriptures-shall we, I say, content
ourselves any longer with bare hearing and knowing of the Word, and
no more? God forbid ! Rather let us utterly avoid this holy temple
of God ; let us rather cast his word behind our backs, and be as ignorant
of his holy will as ever our forefathers were. Let us contrive any course
to cut off all commerce and intercourse, all communion and acquaintance with our God, rather than, when we profess to know him, and
willing to allow him all those glorious titles and attributes by which he
hath made himself known unto us in his word—in our hearts to deny
him, in our lives and practices to dishonour him, and use him despitefully.
" It were no hard matter, I think, to persuade any but resolved
hardened minds, that fruit is necessary before any admission into
heaven."-Chillingworth's Sermons, edit. 1742, p. 22.
In regard to " Customs and Ceremonies commanded by the Church,
when Scripture is silent,” I felt great attention due to the strong good
sense of JACKSON, in the following passage.
" For, in all cases of this nature, that is, in all cases where the thing
itself or action is expressly commanded to be done, and the manner or
circumstance of doing it not so expressly commanded, the authority of
superiors must rule our affections or opinions, for the manner or circumstance of doing what is commanded. Whoever, in this case, heareth
not his lawful pastor or governor, heareth not Christ. Whosoever, in
this case, despiseth the canons and constitutions of the church wherein
he liveth, despiseth Christ. Whosoever, in this case, wilfully offendeth
against the canons of the church, is offended in Christ, and puts a
PUBLICATIONS. 225
absolutely devoured. Ellis's Specimens ofEnglish
Poetry formed a lighter or second course in the
intellectual banquet ; and I now renewed my acquaintance with Henry's History of England-so
that, altogether, I was pretty severely occupied both
abroad and at home.
An occasion soon presented itself for applying
the fruits of this application to a good and profitable object. The ROYAL INSTITUTION was at
this time in great vogue. The lectures of Sir Humstumbling-block in his own way; yea, he bars himself out of the kingdom of grace, expressly promised here in my text, to all that are not
offended in Christ, and in more special sort really exhibited to all that
worthily receive this BLESSED SACRAMENT of his body and blood.” —
Works, vol. ii . p. 559. London, 1673, folio.
Among SERMONS of rather the olden time ( for the copious extracts
from those of the very olden time, in the Library Companion, may
satisfy the ordinary reader) I was much struck with the following
passages fron ALLESTREE ; 1684, folio, part i. 148, and part ii. 6, 83.
The first relates to the Death-bed ofthe Wretched. " And now should
we behold a madman on his deathbed, spending his only one remaining
minute in execrations ; the paleness of a shroud upon his face, but
blood and crimson sins upon his tongue ; the frost of the grave over all
his parts, but a lascivious heat in his discourse ; in fine, one that had
nothing left alive in him but his iniquity :-Would not an horror seize
you at that sight ? And the same frost possess you but to hear him ?
And yet his madness is his excuse, and his disease his innocence."
The second is illustrative of the text, " Blessed are they that mourn.”
"Wee learn hence the unequitable mistake of those men, who expect
and gape for all good things in both lives, quadrigis cœlum petimus—
they would go to heaven in triumphal chariots, and in smooth and broad
ways sleep themselves into bliss ; have two Paradises ; all ease here, and
heaven hereafter. No, my brethren, the comfort is promised not to
them that have it here, but to the mourners: take heed least the blessings you receive in this life be called ' your good things, or your consolations.""
226 PUBLICATIONS.
phrey Davy and the Rev. Sydney Smith attracted
large audiences, ofwhich the first ofrank and fashion
formed a considerable portion. Albemarle-street
was regularly crowded with carriages on the days of
lecture. The whole had the character of a noonday opera-house. There stood DAVY, every Saturday morning, as the mighty magician of nature—
as one, to whom the hidden properties of the earth
were developed by some Egerian priestess in her
secret recess. Begirt by his immense voltaic battery—which was as so many huge cubical links of
wood and metal, forming a vast mysterious chain,
and giving to the whole a sort of picturesque and
marvellous character-the lecturer called forth its
powers with an air of authority, and in a tone of confident success. The hardest metals melted like wax
beneath its operation. Copper, silver, gold, platina,
became in an instant soluble. The diamond was pulverised into charcoal ; and oh ! incomparable art, had
charcoal been re-resolved into the diamond ! The
tremendous force ofsuch an agency struck the learned
with delight, and the unlearned with mingled rapture
and astonishment ; and the theatre or lecture- room
rung with applause as " the mighty master" made his
retreating obeisance. I notice only one of the more
prominent features of these lectures, which, from
beginning to end, embraced a vast field of science,
and became the nucleus of many of those subsequent
discoveries which have ranked their author among
the greatest philosophers of his time. But for the
PUBLICATIONS. 227
lecturing-room in the Royal Institution, Sir Humphrey Davy had not sat in the chair of the President
of the Royal Society * .
* I was at Paris in the summer of 1820, when the news of the death
of Sir Joseph Banks reached that capital, where Sir Humphrey Davy
was then resident . The late Earl and Lady Spencer were then occupying
the greater part of the Hotel de l'Empire, in the Rue d'Artois, on their
return from Italy, when, in their presence, the subject of Sir Joseph's
successor was discussed. Sir Humphrey himselfwas decided and urgent
for the succession of LORD SPENCER; and had not, I verily believe, the
slightest expectation, or even notion, that He himself was eventually to
be the honoured individual in question. Lord Spencer, both abroad and
at home, frequently, in my hearing, disclaimed all pretensions to that
distinction on the ground of his not being a scientific man : observing
that, "the chair ought to be occupied by Sir Humphrey, and no other."
The result is well known ; or, such as desire to have information, have
only to open the instructive pages of Dr. Paris' Life of that great philosopher -for SUCH Sir Humphrey Davy must undoubtedly be considered.
When a member of the Royal Society, I used to make a point of attending the Bakerian anniversary oration, delivered by the president, partly
in praise of defunct members of eminence ; and I am free to confess
that I have never heard more original and more beautiful ideas, clothed
in more forcible language, than those which were delivered from the
chair of the president ; and this, more than once, or twice, or thrice.
Among those who were intimate with Sir Humphrey, and whose
sympathising pursuits help to tie the knot of intimacy more tightly, it
was said, that no man loved SCIENCE more intensely, and more affectionately, for its own sake, than did HE ; and that his marriage with a
widow of large income, and his introduction into the highest circles of
society, never, for one moment, weakened his attachment or slackened
his ardour in those pursuits upon which, exclusively, he must at heart
have been convinced that his reputation would become as permanent as
immovable. Wisely did he act under this persuasion, although, to indifferent observers it might sometimes seem that he affected the airs of
a man of the beau monde, and would rather be considered fashionable
than philosophical. I know, indeed, that among some of the scientific
fraternity this was talked of, if not admitted. But it was as a vapour
across the sun's disc : as you looked, it melted away. It was not for a
mind like Davy's to seek gratification among the lisping fops and designing aspirants of the day. He would necessarily leave such a monQ 2
228 PUBLICATIONS.
The effect produced by Sir Humphrey Davy, in
the theatre or lecture- room of the Royal Institution,
was equalled, both in the number of auditors and
warmth of applause, by that produced by the Rev.
Sydney Smith ; at that time considered the most
popular preacher in London, and one of the most
powerful contributors to the Edinburgh Review.
He took for his subject MORAL PHILOSOPHY-a
subject which, on first feeling, should seem to compose the muscles into unbending rigidity, and to
forbid the exuberance of mirth. Paley had established a fame, which alike defied rivalry and diminution, by a work under that express title, and
written, from beginning to end, in a strain ofgravity
and the closest reasoning. But under the plastic
hands of Mr. Smith, this subject was gilded by
endless varieties. The humours, caprices, and follies of mankind were touched and treated with infinite power and effect ; and now and then the lecturer would come down with a magnificently eloquent passage, or period, which shewed the vigour
grel breed to crawl on, in their chrysalis-state-while it was for HIM to
fly upwards on his wings of gold, and disport in the sun- beam of heaven !
Take him "for all in all," he was our greatest philosopher since the
time of NEWTON. There is no spot in the civilised world but what has
rung with his praise. What attic DAYS as well as NIGHTS were those,
during the Christmas recesses at Althorp, when Davy and Wollaston
were enlightening the circle by science, as Burney and Elmsly were
by classical, Mackintosh by literary, and ****** by historical, information ! And what ACCESSORIES, both living and mute, to render
the picture complete !
DE
VILLE
LYON
PUBLICATIONS. 229
of his conception, and the felicity of his style, and
which could not fail to electrify the audience * ·
It is, however, due to ONE presiding or influential
' person, connected with the Royal Institution, to say,
that it was mainly owing to his exertions and his
judgment that the lecturers just mentioned came
forward with such splendid success before the public. I necessarily allude to the late SIR THOMAS
BERNARD, Bart. , who, of all men with whom I was
ever acquainted, had the happiest tact in the ma-
* I remember being present at a very diverting, shrewd, and eloquent lecture delivered by Mr. Sydney Smith on " Female Education,"
which, a few months afterwards, I read, totidem verbis, in one of the
numbers of the Edinburgh Review ; and it read as well as it was
heard. Arare compliment-but which, I fear, will not induce its author
to resume his pen in that popular critical journal. The pen, like the
sword, may become rusty by quiescence ; or is " Mr. Dyson's speech on
the Reform Bill" to be considered as " the winding-up of the concern?" Mr. Smith always writes like a man of fearless independent
spirit of a moral courage, which disdains compromise, and will truckle
to no hollow truce. He has evinced consistency and principle, which
are to be considered as cardinal virtues " in these degenerate days."
Few men, however, have hit harder than the Rev. Mr. Smith in his
time. Crichton himself could not have managed his rapier with greater
dexterity—as his reviews upon Methodism and Roman Catholic Emancipation, in the journal just mentioned, unequivocally prove ; and I
am free to confess, that I think these reviews did GOOD in their day :
although, in regard to the former topic, now that the " albescens capillus " ( of Horace) hath quieted the temperament, and caused the
heart's blood to flow less hotly, I incline to believe, that if they were
rewritten, they would be largely and advantageously remodified—
" Singula de nobis anni prædantur euntes ;
Eripuêre jocos," &c.
I am among those who consider Mr. Smith's sermons to be among the
most original, terse, and in many places eloquent, in our language ;
and I felt equal pride and pleasure in embodying two of them in a
work which will be noticed in its chronological order.
230 PUBLICATIONS.
nagement of bodies corporate-divested of the mace
and the fur gown. It is true, the honour of the
establishment of the Institution itself may, by some,
be supposed to be shared by COUNT RUMFORD * ;
but if these two gentlemen should both " divide the
crown" on this point, it is certain that Sir Thomas
(then Mr.) was the great stirring and influential
member of the committees, and that no important
measure was thought of being carried into effect
without his concurrence and guidance. Under these
circumstances, I became acquainted with Sir Thos.
Bernard through the introduction of his brother-inlaw, the Rev. Mr. King †, who, in the warmth of
66
* The Earl of Winchilsea, the Bishop of Durham, and Mr. Bernard
were, in fact, the founders of the ROYAL Institution in 1799, of which
the original object was for bettering the condition of the poor." The
charter was drawn up by Mr. Bernard in the month of April in the
same year. See Mr. Baker's Sir T. Bernard, 1819, 8vo. pp. 45, 46.
But as Count Rumford left England for good in 1802, the whole machinery of the Institution may be said to have been under the direction
of Sir Thomas Bernard, who did not become a baronet till 1810. The
Earl of Winchilsea was the first president.
+ See pp. 167-68, ante. Of SIR THOMAS BERNARD, a brief outline,
even on the score of gratitude, may be here reasonably expected . He
had very considerable attainments-was a very good, as well as a gentlemanly, man of business : clear-headed in conception, prompt in execution, and I believe that his heart was as benevolent as his head was
strong. There are those who might have thought otherwise, and that
his extraordinary efforts in behalf of the POOR-for at one time he may
be said to have had half of the poor in the metropolis nestling under
the wings of his patronage—were the effect of mere personal vanity and
unsubduable restlessness of spirit. And what then ? "Personal vanity"
should be made of " sterner stuff" than this. If Sir Thomas Bernard
was hence a vain man, so was Pitt as a statesman and Howard as a
philanthropist, Motives are always of a mixed nature ; and there is
PUBLICATIONS. 231
private friendship, thought that I might succeed as
a lecturer at the Royal Institution. I made no hesionly ONE POWER, " to whom all hearts are open, and from whom no
secrets are hid," which knoweth the prevalent quality of such motives.
Sir Thomas Bernard did much and great good as a philanthropist. In
easy circumstances, bred up to the bar-from which profession he had
the sense and happiness to retire, after twenty years' labour had netted
him a sufficiency-he resolved to devote the approaching autumn of
life to objects of real practical utility, and he made BETTERING THE
CONDITION OF THE POOR one of those most essential objects. Howard
explored dungeons. Sir Thomas visited drawing-rooms, to lay them
under contribution for the support of his avowed darling object. In
short, benevolence may be said to have become fashionable under his
influence. Great efforts, on all sides, were made, and societies and
establishments out of number sprung up to " bless our victuals with
increase, and to satisfy our poor with bread." Seasons of rigorous
severity were met, and in a manner vanquished. Rumford with his
soup, and Bernard with his societies, kept the cold " out of doors" as
much as possible, and furnished the " rich man's table" with abundance of " crums," which were largely distributed to the poor.
His publications connected with the societies were at once numerous
and incessant. Nothing escaped his notice. A foe to irreligion and
the slave-trade the associate of Bishop Barrington and of Wilberforce--he strove heart and soul to disseminate the blessings of Christianity
and of freedom. With a ready pen, his printed addresses, which might
reach thousands to whom he could personally never be known-schools,
chapels, hospitals, dispensaries, infirmaries—to how MANY of these was
he known by his exertions and his liberal patronage! The blind, the
fevered, the destitute-all became objects of his care. And what he
touched he improved. As treasurer of the Foundling Hospital, that
institution attained a healthy tone and vigour such as it had never
before experienced. Both preachers and household officers were under
his regulation. I will give but one specimen of his powers as a writer
on these topics, which I take from his address respecting the establishment of a Free Chapel in West Street, St. Giles's-in the heart of as
much depravity and destitution as the " by-ways" of London contain.
The address was published in 1801 .
" It may appear to future ages an inexplicable enigma, that the social
benevolence and religious energy of this country should have been
entirely exhausted in missions to distant and unknown countries, while
232 PUBLICATIONS. [Lectures.
tation about the choice of subject. ENGLISH LITERATURE had been, from earliest manhood, the parathe centre of our metropolis remained uncultivated and forgotten ; and
the spring from which religion and virtue, or vice and iniquity, must
flow through a peopled land, was neglected and deserted. Regarding
the established Church of this country as the most pure and unmixed
of all the existing sects of Christianity, and being really and conscientiously attached to it, it is my most anxious wish that every scandal
and evil should be removed ; and that, in this respect, the Church of
England should not only have as much, but should possess more merit,
in earnestly inviting the poor to hear the Gospel preached to them, than
the Methodists, the Dissenters, or any other of our Christian and Protestant brethren.
" To those who view with a fixed and attentive eye the awful series
of events which is now ( 1801 ) desolating—and, we may hope, at the
same time reforming-the Christian world, much important observation
will occur on the present subject. It is written in the recent History
of Europe, it is inscribed in the summary of the preceding ten years,
that there is no protection against the calamities which are now laying
waste our quarter of the globe, except that purity of faith and integrity
of life which are to be derived from the vivifying influence of religion ;
extending, like the solar ray, to every class of our fellow-subjects, and
operating in the moral amendment of the great mass of the people.
" I venture to submit to those, from whom only such a measure can
properly originate, the expediency of providing some remedy for this
national evil. What I have to suggest may be considered as a mission
for the instruction and conversion of our neglected fellow-creatures,
THE PAGAN INHABITANTS IN THE CENTRE OF LONDON. I should be
very far from soliciting subscriptions for the support of the petty
Chapel of St. Giles's, whatever its funds might be. I consider that as
of little use or service, unless as the first in number and order of many
such houses of prayer and instruction, which our duty to our fellowsubjects and the circumstances of the metropolis require. It may stand
prior in time, but I flatter myself it will be the last in magnitude and
consequence, of many Free Chapels, which will eventually be opened
for the benefit of the poor of the metropolis."
Enough upon these topics. Touch we now upon that of the LITTERE HUMANIORES, Sir Thomas Bernard, as an author in the usual
sense, will be known by a very ingenious Essay, called An Historical
View of Christianity, 1807, 4to, and by the Comforts of Old Age,
Lectures.] PUBLICATIONS. 233
mount object of my studies. What a wide and varied
field did it comprehend ! Divinity, poetry, ethics,
n
of which latter work several editions have been published, and it is
now, I believe, under the process of a fifth. The " Historical View
contained " Select Passages from Scripture, " with a " Commentary
from Gibbon, Bolingbroke, and Voltaire," in attestation of the worth
and solidity of Christianity. The thought is ingenious enough ; but the
essay was somewhat roughly handled in the Edingburgh Review ;
said to be " done " by afriend. The Director, 1807, 8vo. 2 vols. , was
a collection of essays of his planning and part execution ; but as I had
a material share in this publication, I shall bring it under the reader's
notice in a following page. The ARTS were also greatly indebted to
Sir Thomas Bernard, for to him we owe the establishment of the
British InstitUTION, on a plan so entirely delightful and profitable
(especially that part of it which makes us acquainted every spring with the productions of the ancient masters), that every tongue and pen must
admit its value. The ALFRED is also another of his institutions for the
assemblage of gentlemen, and the convenience of reasonable as well as
excellent dinners. The Athenæum, the United Service, and the Travellers' Clubs have doubtless thrown the Alfred into comparative shade,
but it could once boast of names amongst its members ( and may still)
of the highest celebrity.
Sir Thomas Bernard was one of the very warmest supporters, as well
as founders, of the JENNERIAN SOCIETY. I have before ( p. 199) made
mention of his intimacy with the illustrious Jenner, with whom I was
in the frequent habit of meeting him at dinner. His patronage of
Dr. BELL is well known. The Madras System of Education was a
hobby-horse which I thought he rode to excess ; and no man, on the
score of " quantum meruit," ever was more fortunate than the Scotch
schoolmaster, who ended his days as prebendary of Westminster and
master of Sherborne Hospital-leaving behind a fortune running closely upon £200,000 . But his Aberdeen legacy was a noble one. I never
scrupled the freely imparting my own sentiments to Sir T. Bernard
upon the respective merits of the Lancaster and Bell systems. I then
thought, as I have always since thought, that too little was done for
the former, and too much for the latter-who, in fact, only transplanted
the flower, growing wild upon the sands of Madras, to the more congenial soil of this country. Personally, Dr. Bell seemed to me to be
puffed up" with his knowledge, such as it was. In society he was
dry and sometimes drowsy. His introduction to Sir Thomas Bernard
66
234 PUBLICATIONS. [ Lectures.
tales, romances, were all enclosed within its circle.
I made a rough sketch of its leading features, and
having submitted them to Sir Thomas, it was agreed
that I was to be announced in the next bulletin
from head-quarters. The terms were liberal ; but
had they been less advantageous, my zeal or ambition would have blinded me to their inadequacy.
I had thus time to collect and arrange my materials before the announcement took place. But
all along I was fearful of the earlier or introductory
Lectures-not knowing by what magical process I
could make such names as Gildas, Nennius, the
Saxon Chronicle, Ingulf, and William ofMalmesbury (some of our earlier historians) acceptable to
the ears of a polished and fashionable audience.
However, I had great helps in many able works ;
and in poetry, Warton, Ellis, and Ritson, were my
grand authorities. At length the day arrived-not
without emotions which, for one short moment, assumed the character of perturbation. And this, not
on account of a large audience, but from the occupation of an arena which had been filled by such Lecturers as the two just described. However, my materials were before me, and I was resolved to glue
my attention to them, so as to commit as few errors
was a fortunate one for him ; it obtained him the notice and patronage
of the Bishop of Durham, who rewarded him with the mastership of
Sherborne Hospital. At this time, the names of Bell and Lancaster
were absolutely as those of opposite feuds ; but, as before, the Lancastrians got worsted in the end.
Lectures. ] PUBLICATIONS.
235
as possible. The clock told the hour of two—the
little door was opened and I made my obeisance to
an audience of some five hundred ladies and gentlemen. The contrast, from a small dark room, to one
of large size and splendour, produced a momentary
hesitation. However, the building is well constructed
for sound—and in a few minutes I got on with the
perfect conviction of at least being heard. I delivered, in the whole, twenty-eight Lectures, at three
different seasons ; and if I might venture to fix, at
this distance of time, upon those which seemed to
have greater attractions than others, they were the
three Lectures upon Ballad- Poetry, from the time
of Chaucer to Cowper ; -upon which I received
many compliments from the late Lady Crewe, Sir
Harry Englefield, and the late Bishop of Durham * .
There was, about this time, a sort of hue and cry
(set agoing by the author of the Pursuits of Litera-
* Among the prime helps to the composition of these Lectures on
Ballad Poetry, was the " Minstrelsy ofthe Scottish Border," published
under the fascinating editorship of the late Sir Walter Scott, first printed
in 1802, 2 vols. 8vo. , and much enlarged in 1803, 3 vols. 8vo. The
first is both a rare and beautiful production ; but the second furnishes
more copious materials for the student and antiquary. Absorbed in the
reputation of this delightful work, even on the score of its notes, has perhaps long been in the blaze of that resulting from the Editor's original
productions, yet I know of no work of its kind which comes within the
range of competition with it. Genius may be seen in notes as well as in
text. I recommend every young man, of any pretension to cultivated
taste, to assign to these volumes a choice place in his library. They will
kindle not less the love of country than of kind. Some of the ballads
are exquisite , and above all praise : but the Editor, whenever an opening
serves, gives evidence of being endued with no small portion of the inspiration with which the originals are stamped.
236 PUBLICATIONS. [Lectures.
ture) against black-letter reading ; and the lovers
and abettors of that species of reading were held up
to something like public ridicule or contempt. As
a pretty severe digger in such a soil, I felt bound to
vindicate its value ; and when the course of my Lectures brought me to the commencement of the sixteenth century, I addressed my audience in the following terms, as a preliminary portion ofthe lecture :
" Certainly no reflecting human being who has had the advantage of
a classical education, and who is alive to the numberless intellectual
beauties which mark the sixteenth century, will allow his enthusiasm to
abate, or his judgment to be warped, by the shallow hypercriticisms which have been advanced against THIS SPECIES OF STUDY. On the
contrary, if there be greater praise in forming a beautiful statue from
brittle or untractable materials-or if greater ingenuity be shewn in
laying a broad and safe foundation where the winds and the waves oppose then, surely, more merit is due to that person who, from appearances so generally forbidding, moulds into shape, and kindles into life,
what before had appeared deformed and inanimate. It is a feeling like
this which has stimulated some of our best critics, and given rise to
some of the ablest dissertations in our language, whether in poetry or in
theology.
"But the black-lettered Student *-ifhe must be so denominated-lays
claim to merit of a higher class than that of being only the pioneer of
learning-to cut away brambles and fences, and make room for a mere
skirmishing body oftroops. If he be not the discoverer of absolute and
hitherto unknown merit, he oftentimes points out to us how a hint, or a
sentiment, of one writer has been expanded into imagery, or strengthened
into a maxim by another : -he shews us the slender and subtle materials
of others, with which later poets and writers have built up a precarious
reputation ; who, coming forward in the world with the boasting pretensions of originality, have been detected in their chicaneries, and
hurled from the throne which they had usurped. Or, if the reader of
* I am much pleased with the following passage of a letter from the
late Bishop of Hereford to Mr. Dove the printer, who was kind enough
to make me a present of the letter. The Bishop writes thus :-" Why
the oldfirm and BLACK LETTER should be superseded, I know not : but
that, within some few late years, every thing since 1762 is to be set
aside."-Winton Coll. May 18, 1825.
Lectures. ] PUBLICATIONS. 237
past ages meet not with instances of such gross deception, he shews us
how later authors of celebrity have transplanted flowers from an ancient
soil to expand and to bloom in the warmer rays of their own superior
genius : how Shakspeare has borrowed from Chroniclers and Romancers,
Spenser from Tasso, Milton from Du Bartas, Dryden from Chaucer,
and Sterne from Burton.
" These, and many other similar pursuits, occupy the lover of the
ancient literature of his country—and, in truth, it is this feeling and
these pursuits which are the parent of more than half the intellectual
delights that we enjoy : as the historian is hence influenced to examine
the records of former times, that his own pages may hereafter be read
with that improvement which a love of truth can never fail to impart.
Who is insensible to the advantages which are to be derived from the
historical pages of Clarendon, Rapin, Carte, Tyrrel, Tindal, Robertson,
and Hume? Shut up the volumes of Ingulph, M. Paris, W. Malmesbury, Froissart, Fabian, Hall, Holinshed, and Grafton, and you cut off
at once the source of almost all the advantages derivable from these
later writers. Then, again, in poetry : —why do we feel such frequent
transport in the perusal of Spenser, of Shakspeare, and of Milton ? It
is because the minds of those great men had been stored by a perusal of
some of the most celebrated productions of their predecessors. And
even now, to what sources are we remotely indebted for that certain
charm which we feel in the chivalrous language, gothic scenery, and
romantic colouring, of the two great modern poems of the day. To the
spirit of the ancient legends, chronicles, and romances, may in part be
attributed the fire and fancy which seem to have so strongly animated the
feelings and marked the diction of the author ofTHE LAY and MARMION.
Enough has probably been said upon the utility and importance of
researches into ancient literature, and in commendation of a pursuit from
which, it is sincerely to be hoped, no rational and spirited student will
be deterred by any appellation, however technical or pointed. Virtuous
industry will live down all the calumnies which assail it : and he must
possess very airy and fantastic notions of human life who imagines that
he can walk from the cradle to the grave unridiculed by ignorance, and
unaspersed by calumny. LITERATURE, like TRUTH, is GREAT, and WILL
PREVAIL."
I yet preserve, with the loss or misplacing of only
two, the whole of the Lectures delivered at the
Royal Institution ; of which one course, commencing
with the Art of Printing, was redelivered at the
238 PUBLICATIONS. [Lectures.
} London Institution, in Finsbury-square, in the year
1823 *.
* Ten, only, of the Lectures above specified , were delivered by me
at the London Institution, in the spring of the year 1823. The first of
these related to the " Origin and Influence of the Art of Printing upon
the Literature of Europe." My excellent friend, Mr. George Hibbert,
then resident in Portland-place, and in possession of a library than which
very few finer could be boasted of in London, was so kind as to furnish
me with a carriage full of his earlier printed volumes, to shew to my
auditors, by way of illustration of the perfection of the art of early
printing. A sight of the interiors of these volumes produced a great
effect-which, indeed, it might well do upon an auditory of the gravest
phlegm. I was always much struck with the number offemale Quakers
in those audiences ; and still more so with the evident marks of satisfaction which the specimens of the ballad-poetry produced upon them.
The lecture-room of the London Institution is a noble one, and the
library is in all respects a worthy pendant. It is one hundred feet in
length ; and boasts, among the past curators of its treasurers, the names
of PORSON and MALTBY. What a start or pulsation was there at the
projecting of this establishment ! How the shares flew about, with
shuttlecock-like nimbleness, from one quarter to another—from this side
to that ! The city character was stamped upon every stage of the proceedings-and premium and per centage seemed to be engrained in its
very nature. Will Mr. Thomson, one of the present librarians—an
antiquary, a herald, and an illuminator-ever give us an account of the
depredations and peculations of the library ? Such a furtive history
would not only be amusing, but might operate beneficially, by way of
warning, to others who possess the organ offurtivity.
But I should be ungrateful to close this account, however brief, of the
London Institution, without express mention made of one of its most
active, intelligent, and commendable members, W. H. Pepys, Esq. To
say that he " stood my special good friend " in the matter of the lectures,
scarcely amounts to anything beyond the declaration of an interested
party ; but to add how much and ardently he always has the interest of
this Institution at heart-how constant his attendance-how useful his
exertions—and how salutary his counsel, is only to say what is the real truth of the case. And all this, perhaps, only the reflex of his exertions
in higher quarters-in the council of the Royal Society, where he shone
and shines as a lover and patron of science-as the friend of Davy,
Hatchett, Children, Roget, Daniel, and Griffiths. Most delightful also
Lectures. ] PUBLICATIONS.
239
It may possibly be gratifying to the reader, or, at
any rate, it cannot be considered irrelevant to the
matter of these pages, if I submit the heads of the
twenty-eight Lectures which were delivered " ON
THE RISE AND PROGRESS OF ENGLISH LITERATURE."
LECTURE I.—Introductory. Dr. Johnson ; Tyrwhitt ; Thomas Warton ; Dr. Henry ; Ellis and
Ritson -writers who have treated, more or less, of
the subject under consideration.
LECTURE II.-Remarks on the Aboriginal Inhabitants, and state of civilization and literature, in
this country, previously to the invasion of the Romans. Druidical Learning.
LECTURE III . -State of Learning in Great Britain
from the Roman to the Saxon Invasion.
LECTURE IV.-Progress of Literature in Great
is it to see a man, as one sees Mr. Pepys, blending with these philosophic pursuits the lighter studies with which the volumes of Isaac
Walton and others of this sort of reading furnish him. Pleasant it is
to see him rising from the perusal of the experiments of Cavendish, to
take water at the Old Swan stairs, and glide upon the scarcely ruffled
bosom of the Thames, with an uncut first Angler in one hand, and a
rod of exquisitely sensitive construction in the other. The last rays of
a setting sun light him home to the enjoyment of his well-earned
booty ! ...
"The bright eyed perch, with fins of Tyrian dye ;
The silver eel, in shining volumes roll'd ;
The yellow carp, in scales be-dropt with gold ;
Swift trouts, diversified with crimson stains ;
And pikes, the tyrants of the wat❜ry plains."
Pope's Windsor Forest.
But what " philosophy" can reconcile a man to the eating of a " PIKE ?"
240 PUBLICATIONS [Lectures.
Britain during the government of the Saxons. Biographical account of Learned Men before the reign
of Alfred.
LECTURE V.-Reign and Character of Alfred.
LECTURE VI. —Progress of Civilization and Literature in Great Britain from the death of Alfred to
the invasion of William the Conqueror. Characters
of Canute, Edward the Confessor, and Harold.
LECTURE VII. —The reign of William. Influence
of Norman Literature. High Character of William.
Eminent Literary Men in Great Britain during the
Eleventh Century. Ingulf, Lanfrac, Anselm. The
Saxon Chronicle.
LECTURE VIII.—Romance and Minstrelsy. Their
origin, and effect upon the Literature of Europe and
of Great Britain.
LECTURE IX. -Continuation of Remarks on Romance and Minstrelsy. Account of the more popular Romances of the 12th, 13th, and 14th Centuries,
with specimens. Influence ofthe Welch and Scottish
Languages during this period. Writers who have
treated on Romance and Minstrelsy.
LECTURE X.-General Review of the Literature
of Great Britain previously to the reign of Edw. III.
Eminent Writers in the 12th and 13th Centuries.
Progress of Poetry during that period.
LECTURE XI.-Literature of the 13th and 14th
Centuries. Anecdotes and Specimens illustrative
of this subject. Robert de Brunne, Adam Davie,
Barbour, Hoccleve, Higden.
Lectures. ] PUBLICATIONS. 241
LECTURE XII.-Characters of Edward III. and
Queen Philippa. Anecdotes from Froissart. The
Black Prince. Froissart-his Life and Writings.
Specimens of the latter. His Character as an Historian. Editions of his Works. Mr. Johnes's translation.
LECTURE XIII.-Continuation of Writers in the
14th Century. Richard Rolle-specimens of his
principal poem, " the Pricke of Conscience." Laurence Minot-specimens of his poetry. The Life
and Writings of Sir John Maundeville -extracts
from his Travels. Robert Langland-specimens of
his celebrated poem, called " The Visions of Pierce
Ploughman. " Originality and excellence of that
work. " The Creed of Pierce Ploughman. " Author
of this singular work unknown.
LECTURE XIV. -Chaucer. Specimens of his
Poetry. His high character as a poet.
LECTURE XV. -John Lydgate-specimens of his
poetry. List of his works.
LECTURE XVI.-The Poetry of Gower. Origin
of Ballad Poetry. Its influence during the middle
and later centuries. Specimens.
LECTURE XVII.-Ballad Poetry continued. Specimens of later Ballad Poetry.
LECTURE XVIII.-The Ballad Poetry of Scotland-with specimens.
LECTURE XIX.-John Wicliffe. His Life and
Writings. Character. Specimens of his Translation
R
242 PUBLICATIONS. [Lectures.
of the Bible * .
Institutions.
William of Wykeham. His public
Beneficial effects of them to the cause
* There are few things which have afforded me a more sincere gratification than the researches now set on foot in respect to the RELIQUIÆ
WYCLIFFIANE. That many things are received as his, of which assuredly he was not the author, is, I think, evident upon a dispassionate
consideration. His was a sort of " nomen receptum " for all biblical and
devotional pieces of the age. That he was a great, if not a wonderful
man, considering the general darkness of the elements through which he
piloted his tempest-beaten bark, is most certain. Had he lived a century
later, the PRESS might have been the propagator at once of his doctrines
and his fame ; but in the prevailing "darkness" of which I speak,
he held, vigorously and unflinchingly, the torch of truth in his hand, " to
be a light to lighten" the benighted portions of this and other kingdoms.
A great part of his history is necessarily involved in obscurity ; but
the biographical manual of Mr. Le Bas, and the more elaborate Biography of Mr. Vaughan, are delightful helps to instruct us in the more
interesting parts of it.
Two things are most gratifying to subjoin. The one, a collation of
the Wycliffe MSS. in the library of Trinity College, Dublin, by no mean
or unpractised hand, which appears in a recent number of the British
Magazine-to be continued ; the other, a projected edition of WycLIFFE'S BIBLE from two of the most ancient and valuable MSS. extant.
These MSS. are printed side by side, as text, with running notes, exhibiting variations of other MSS. The editors are the Rev. I. Forshall
and Sir Frederick Madden, both of the British Museum ; names, which
bespeak, and are sure to command, success. But will these gentlemen
endure or forgive a suggestion from me? Is it tanti to print the text
of two MSS. side by side only ? To the public, this will be considered
only as a matter of critical nicety, about which they will be generally
indifferent. Might not this opportunity be seized, of printing what
these learned editors conceive, upon the whole, to be the better of these
two MSS. in one column-the version of Coverdale from the Bible of
1535, in another column ; and that of the Bible of James I., in 1611 ,
in a third column : and thus, you have the three parent streams of the
sacred text in our own language, running in parallel lines. If Wycliffe's
text be alone printed, it will be a sealed book “ to the many." Associate
it with the valuable texts above specified, and you make the volume at
once popular and instructive. As an illustration of the progress of our
language alone, such a book ought to be received with acclamation.
Lectures.] PUBLICATIONS. 243
of Literature in Great Britain. Character of that
eminent Prelate. Summary review of the progress
of English Literature during the 14th century.
LECTURE XX. -Origin of Printing. Its influence
on Literature and Religion. William Caxton, the
first English printer. Specimens of his composition.
LECTURE XXI.- Reign of Henry VIII. Dean
Colet, Cardinal Wolsey, Bishop Fisher. Influence
of the Reformation upon Literature. Luther. Latimer.
LECTURE XXII.—Character of Sir Thomas More.
Specimens of his works. John Leland.
LECTURE XXIII. -Poetry of the reign of
Henry VIII. John Skelton. Sir Thomas Wyatt.
Earl of Surrey. Specimens of their works. Rise
of the English Drama.
LECTURE XXIV.-Importance of preserving National Literature. Publications of the Primer and
the Book of Common Prayer. John Bale. Dr.
Wilson's Treatise of Rhetoric. William Lilye, the
Grammarian. Account of Roger Ascham. Specimens.
LECTURE XXV. —The reign of Elizabeth. Her
character in a private and literary point of view.
Her character as a Sovereign. Influence of both
upon the Literature of the age. Anecdotes relating
to the Queen.
LECTURE XXVI.-Poetry of the reign of Elizabeth. The Mirror for Magistrates. Paradise of
Dainty Devices-with specimens. Sir Philip SidR 2
244 PUBLICATIONS. [Lectures.
ney. Gascoigne. Marlowe. Tuberville. Drayton.
Harrington.
LECTURE XXVII.-John Fox. His Book of
Martyrs. Critical analysis of that celebrated work.
Holinshed the historian.
-
LECTURE XXVIII. —English translations of Ancient Classical Authors. Sir Walter Raleigh. His
character as a poet, author, and statesman. His
martyrdom and high bearing on the scaffold.
Such is the outline of those Lectures which I delivered at the Royal Institution, in the years 1806,
1807, and 1808. It must be admitted that such an
outline comprehends a great space or period of time
in the annals of our indigenous literature ; and that
the putting together of the materials, to which the
several heads of these Lectures point, could be a
work of no very trivial or inconsiderate toil. Most
certainly I "laboured hard in my vocation." The
extracts or specimens of the several authors referred
to, helped to lighten my labour, and certainly relieved the didactic gravity of an hour's address. The
chief point which I hoped to carry, was this : to impress upon my audience a pretty correct notion of
the progress of our literature both in poetry and in
prose ; and so far as my performance was of a mixed
character, it had the advantage of the extensive
works of Warton, Ellis, and Burnett, which are exclusive : the first two, to poetry-the second, to
prose. All these Lectures, some in a less amputated
state than others--and two or three yet missing-
PUBLICATIONS. 245
are lying quietly by the side of me-possibly to be
one day consolidated into a comely octavo volume * ,
of which the superintendence may be (as the education of his children was to Gil Blas) " the occupation and amusement of later years ; " when the
leaves of autumn shall have all taken their departure,
and each branch of the tree be rendered hoar bythe
frost of winter.
I must not conclude this account of the Lectures
of the Royal Institution, or fold up the muster-roll
of the eminent Lecturers who were there engaged,
without due and honourable notice of PROFESSORS
CROWE and CROTCH : the former of Public Oratory,
the latter of Music, at the University of Oxford.
The first lectured upon Poetryt, the second upon
* Not very long ago I was induced to offer the MS. of these lectures
to a great calculating bibliopolistic house in the city, on the speculation
ofits being likely to succed in a printed form. Calculation replied " No."
The altered character of the times, and that of the present reading
portion of the public, might have led to the anticipation of such a reply :
but in another quarter, less calculating, there may be a response of a
more encouraging nature.
+ With Professor Crowe, of New College, I had the pleasure of a
long rather than of an intimate acquaintance : but I saw and knew
enough of him to assure me of the warmth of his heart and the attainments of his head, as well as of the extreme simplicity of his manners
and address. Perhaps no man who wore the academic gown so long
and so constantly, ever suffered so little of the rust of a rural life to be
worn off. I used to think him at Oxford, especially in presenting to
degrees, or in any rostrum exhibition, a fine old Roman in his way :
the broad Winchester style of pronouncing the a giving great and good
effect to his harangues. The Public Orator was a good Latinist ; and
some of his occasional sermons at St. Mary's, in that language, had a
decidedly popular effect. He was, of all men, one of the most original
し
246 PUBLICATIONS.
Music. They each did honour to the Institution,
and to the crowded audiences by which their courses
of Lectures were attended. At this moment I see
Dr. Crotch expatiating upon the beauties, while his
flying fingers " give a delightful practical proof of 66
in his habits and modes of expression ; and of a spirit so meek and
gentle, that he would not knowingly tread upon the meanest insect.
But the Public Orator was a POET of no mean calibre. His poem on
Lewesdon Hill can never be read but with admiration and delight. He
had strong feelings and lofty conceptions about poetry ; and his lectures
upon that subject, at the Royal Institution, although many of them were
too crudely planned and too hastily put together, shewed him to be a
master of his subject. The first, upon Hebrew poetry, was admirably
got up, and most effectively delivered .
The Public Orator had been a " Liberty Boy" in his way. When the
tide ofjacobinism, during the early stages of the French revolution, ran
strong and high, William Crowe was now and then disposed to smite
William Pitt in a very rude manner : and once said, “ If he could get
no one else to cut off his head, he'd try and do't himself." He was
much thought of, and sought after, about this time : but he hated display of any kind, and the " digito monstrari " was an abhorrence to him.
Once, in a large circle, at New College, it was expected that he would
shew off before some strangers who were tacitly invited "to meet the
author of Lewesdon Hill." Crowe sat silent a long time. It was in
summer, and very hot. At last, unbuttoning nearly the whole of his
waistcoat, and placing his arm within, and balancing himself in the seesaw action of his chair, the poet, looking out on the lawn, exclaimed,
" Lud, lud, how green the grass looks ! " These were the only words
which escaped him during the symposium. In the early revolutionary
war with France, and when things were looking dark and disastrous
towards the allies, the Public Orator would often thunder forth his predictions of disaster ; and once, it is said, he carried this feeling so far in
the pulpit, as to quote the following verse of Virgil by way of a pun :
66' Sæpe sinistra cava prædixit ab ilice CORNIX."
I remember the great delight manifested by the late Dean of Canterbury when I mentioned this anecdote at his table. William Crowe was
Public Orator of the University forty-five years.
PUBLICATIONS. 247
the effect, of the " harmonious blacksmith of Antwerp. " To mention the Lectures of Mr. WoOD on
Perspective is only to say how a dry and apparently
exclusive subject may be made generally intelligible
and instructive to the meanest capacity. The Rev.
Mr. HEWLETT's Lectures on the Belles Lettres always
evinced the correct taste and sound judgment of the
lecturer. They were listened to with promptitude,
and remembered with profit.
But one of the principal features attached to the
Royal Institution Lectures in 1807, was the serious,
and at one time perilous, illness of Sir Humphrey
Davy, towards the latter end of the year. This illness, for the particulars of which I refer to Dr.
Paris's Life of Sir Humphrey, arose in consequence
of excess of intellectual labour in the prosecution of
his scientific researches. The mind had, after many
vigorous and gallant efforts of resistance, sunk under
bodily exhaustion ; and a "little cloud" seemed to
be gathering in the horizon to alarm the fondness of
friends, and to darken the hopes of the country.
Medical skill and unremitting medical attendance
were called in to watch and to divert the progress
of a disorder that threatened in a short time the life
of the sufferer : and when the names of Baillie,
Babington, and Franks, are mentioned, it will be
necessarily conceded that more effectual aids could
not have been resorted to.
Towards the close of the year, after many weeks
of acute suffering, a favourable turn in the disorder
248 PUBLICATIONS.
At
was manifest ; and ultimate, although remote, convalescence was confidently calculated upon.
this crisis, early in December, it fell to my lot to
make this announcement to the anxious circles which
frequented the lecture-room ; which was done in the
following manner, as may be collected from Dr.
Paris's biography * .
" Before I solicit your attention to the opening of those lectures
which I shall have the honour of delivering in the course of the season,
permit me to trespass upon it for a few minutes, by stating the peculiar
circumstances under which this Institution is again opened, and how it
comes to pass that it has fallen to me, rather than to a more deserving
lecturer, to be the first to address you. The managers have requested
me to impart to you that intelligence, which no one who is alive to the
best feelings of human nature can hear without mixed emotions of
sorrow and delight.
" Mr. Davy, whose frequent and powerful addresses from this place,
supported by his ingenious experiments, have been so long and so well
known to you, has for these last five weeks been struggling between life
and death. The effects of those experiments recently made in illustration of his splendid discoveries, added to consequent bodily weakness,
brought on a fever so violent as to threaten the extinction of life. Over
him, it might emphatically be said, in the language of our immortal
Milton, that
'Death his dart
Shook, but delay'd to strike.'
Had it pleased Providence to have deprived the world of any further
benefit from his original talents and immense application, there certainly has been already enough effected by him, to entitle his name to
a place amongst the brightest scientific luminaries of his country. That
this may not appear an unfounded eulogium, I shall proceed, at the
particular request of the managers, to give you an outline of the splendid
* Some few dozens of the address were printed for the sake of circulation among those who were not present at its delivery. I preserve
no copy of it, and consider these flitting pages to be among the very
rarest of those which trace their parentage to myself.
Director.] PUBLICATIONS.
249
discoveries to which I have just alluded ; and I do so with the greater
pleasure, as that outline has been drawn in a very masterly manner by
a gentleman, of all others, perhaps the best qualified to do it effectually."
The lecturer then proceeded to take a general and rapid view of his
labours, which it is unnecessary to introduce in this place, and conIcluded as follows :-
"This recital will be sufficient to convince those who have heard it,
of the celebrity which the author of such discoveries has a right to
attach to himself; and yet no one, I am confident, has less inclination
to challenge it. To us, and to every enlightened Englishman, it will
be a matter of just congratulation that the country which has produced the two BACONS and BOYLE, has in these latter days shown itself
worthy of its former renown by the labours of CAVENDISH and Davy.
The illness of the latter, severe as it has been, is now abating ; and we
may reasonably hope that the period of convalescence is not very remote."
Fortunately for the scientific world, and for a large
circle of admiring friends, this prediction was verified ; and in the month of February Sir Humphrey
was again before a crowded audience, which greeted
his return in a manner overwhelmingly affecting.
The year 1807 was one marked with a great deal
of literary occupation in my humble life . Besides
the preparation of my lectures, I had the superintendence and editorship of a weekly journal or
paper, entitled THE DIRECTOR ; of which, in fact,
Sir Thomas Bernard was not only the projector,
but the furnisher of " the sinews of war" for its
support. This paper appeared in an octavo form,
containing two sheets, or thirty-two pages, and was
published every Saturday, from the 24th of January
to the 4th of July inclusively, 1807. It ceased to
appear at the close of the season. Its objects were,
1. Essays, on subjects of literature, the fine arts,
250 PUBLICATIONS. [Director.
and manners ; 2. Bibliographiana, or accounts of
rare and curious books, and of book-sales in this
country from the close of the seventeenth century ;
3. Royal Institution, or analyses of the lectures
delivered weekly ; 4. British Gallery, or descriptions of the principal pictures exhibited for sale.
The publishers were Messrs. Longman and Co.,
Hatchard, and Miller. The work was completed
in two volumes. It is now, I believe, an uncommon
book. A short account of it may not be unacceptable.
Of the writers of the essays, the first, on the
" State of English Art," those on the " Life of
Thomas Proctor," on " The Drama" (three essays),
and on " Good Living," were written by Sir Thos.
Bernard, who also wrote the concluding essay, being
an " Account ofthe Author ofthe Fly-Flap * ." The
essays on the " Causes which have impeded the
progress ofAncient Art," on " The Gaelic Poems in
* Sir Thomas's account of these Essays, of which he was himself the
author, is whimsical and amusing enough. " As to these essays (says
he) though I know the author as well as I know myself, and am in
habits of intimacy with him, yet I shall say nothing about him. My
affection for him is warm and permanent, and I am in his confidence.
I cannot, therefore, persuade myself to reveal all I know of him. To
caricature the person of an author, and to advertise his foibles and
imperfections, would have too much the air of a modern Editor ; and
therefore, because he hath offences in him which thou wouldst discover
if thou couldst, I shall let him continue, and reserve what I have to
say upon this subject to a more convenient opportunity. In the meantime, I beg to subscribe myself, with unfeigned regard and respect,
my dear Director, your sincere and affectionate friend, TRISMEGISTUS
SECUNDUS." -Vol. ii. p. 381.'
Director. ] PUBLICATIONS. 251
Ireland," and " Parallels between Art and Science,"
were written by the late Sir Humphrey Davy, and
must now be considered as a curiosity. " I discover (says Sir Thomas Bernard in his Fly-Flap)
that these essays are written by a person bearing,
at an early period of life, the bloom, the flowers,
and the fruits of genius ; who, having been distinguished even in boyhood for superiority of science,
was called to an elevated and honourable philosophical situation at an age when many begin their
studies. Courted and beloved as he is in private
life, and filling, with honour to himself, and benefit
to the public, appointments which very few at any
period of life might venture to aspire to, I perceive
that he retains an undiminished attachment to
science and literature, together with perfect simplicity and modesty of manners." I cannot, with
certainty, pronounce upon the parentage of all the
other essays, but I think the late Sir Geo. Beaumont, Prince Hoare, the Rev. Mr. Crowe, and the
Rev. Mr. Collison, were the principal. That upon
the " Statue of Achilles, " in the vestibule of the
British Institution, was by Mrs. Forster, the daughter
of the great artist who achieved it. Those entitled
"Sketches of Modern Characters," " The Walk
in London," " The Mirror ofTruth *,” and “ The
Alarmist, " were my own productions ; as were all
* This paper or essay happening to receive much commendation, I
reprinted it in the Bibliomania, p. 633, &c. second edition .
252 PUBLICATIONS. [Director.
the strictures contained in the department of the
"British Gallery." Perhaps it may be unnecessary
formally to announce, that " Bibliographiana” was
also the offspring of the same pen which had executed the four latter essays. Upon the whole, I
may be said to have furnished the materials of at
least two-thirds of THE DIRECTOR * .
And here I commenced in right earnest to concentrate my scattered information upon Bibliography,
and to give it all the point and force of which I was
capable. An unrestrained opportunity presented
itself, and I was resolved that it should not pass by
uncultivated. These " Bibliographiana" may be
considered as the germ of a work, under the title
of THE BIBLIOMANIA, which at once established my
reputation as a bibliographer. There is yet a good
deal of information in these " ANA," with which,
after a separation of twenty years, I am well pleased
to renew my acquaintance. They begin with an
account of the sales of the libraries of Sir Charles
Scarborough and Archbishop Tillotson, at the close
of the seventeenth century. The account of the
Harleian Library is yet worth perusal. The work,
however, met with a cold reception. Afew squibs
(as usual) were let off against it, which were answered by a few crackers from the opposite party.
* I trust that the hour may never arrive, —as it hitherto certainly has
not, when I may do anything to forfeit the good opinion expressed of
myself and my labours which appears at vol. ii. p. 278, of this pub- lication.
PUBLICATIONS. 253
The numbers, as they came out, appeared to languish upon the tables of drawing-rooms ; and on
calling a council of war, it was judged wise and prudent to effect a timely retreat. Had the opposition
been fierce and clamorous, we must have strapped
on our bucklers, and maintained a tough fight.
It was during my constant and familiar intercourse
with Sir T. Bernard, while "The Director" was going
on, that I met the celebrated Mr. COLERIDGE- himselfa Lecturer at the Royal Institution-at the table
of the baronet. I shall never forget the effect his
conversation made upon me at the first meeting. It
struck me as something not only quite out of the
ordinary course of things, but as an intellectual exhibition altogether matchless. The party was usually
large, but the presence of Coleridge concentrated all
attention towards himself. The viands were usually
costly, and the banquet was at once rich and varied ;
but there seemed to be no dish like Coleridge's conversation to feed upon-and no information so varied
and so instructive as his own. The orator rolled
himself up, as it were, in his chair, and gave the
most unrestrained indulgence to his speech-and
how fraught with acuteness and originality was that
He was not a constant Lecturer-not in constant harness, like
others, for the business of the day. Indisposition was generally preying
upon him, and habitual indolence would now and then frustrate the performance of his own better wishes. I once came from Kensington in a
snow- storm to hear him lecture upon Shakspeare. I might have sat as
wisely, and more comfortably, by my own fireside-for No Coleridge
appeared. And this, I think, more than once.
254 PUBLICATIONS.
speech, and in what copious and eloquent periods
did it flow ! The auditors seemed to be rapt in
wonder and delight, as one observation, more profound or clothed in more forcible language than
another, fell from his tongue. A great part of the
subject discussed at the first time of my meeting
Mr. Coleridge, was the connexion between Lord
Nelson and Lady Hamilton. The speaker had been
secretary to Sir Alexander Ball, governor of Malta
--and a copious field was here afforded for the exercise of his colloquial eloquence. For nearly two
hours he spoke with unhesitating and uninterrupted
fluency.
As I retired homewards ( to Kensington) I thought
a SECOND JOHNSON had visited the earth to make
wise the sons of men ; and regretted that I could
not exercise the powers of a second Boswell, to record the wisdom and the eloquence which had that
evening flown from the orator's lips. It haunted
me as I retired to rest. It drove It away slumber or
if I lapsed into sleep, there was Coleridge-his snuffbox and his 'kerchief before my eyes ! -his mildly
beaming looks-his occasionally deep tone of voice—
the excited features of his physiognomy-the secret
conviction that his auditors seemed to be entranced
with his powers of discourse ! The speaker, however, it must be fairly admitted, did not "give and
take." His generosity was illimitable, for he would
receive nothing in return. It was true, there were
very few who could give as they had received; but
PUBLICATIONS. 255
still, as an irritated hearer once observed by the side
of me, " fair play was a jewel." The manner of
Coleridge was rather emphatic than dogmatic, and
thus he was generally and satisfactorily listened to.
There was neither the bow- wow nor the growl which
seemed usually to characterise Johnson's method
of speaking ; and his periods were more lengthened and continuous ; but they were sometimes
"richly dight" in splendid imagery and resistless
argument -not, however, betraying such a range
of reading, or fraught with so much personal anecdote, as were those of Mackintosh. In fact, it might
be said of Coleridge, as Cowper has so happily said
of Sir P. Sidney, that he was
"the warbler of poetic prose*."
* I speak in reference to Mr. Coleridge's conversation. A pretty
correct notion may be formed of this conversation from the " Specimens
of Mr. Coleridge's Table Talk," just published, in two very taking duodecimo volumes, with a portrait of the “ Talker" prefixed . I saw Mr.
Phillips in the execution, or rather, perhaps, finishing, of that portraitand I thought it, and yet think it, abundantly resembling-" VIR
IPSISSIMUS." Could sound have come from the lips, or action been imparted to the eye or hands of that painted portrait, there was COLERIDGE
HIMSELF. The lithographised copy prefixed to the " Specimens❞ is unworthy of all parties concerned. The " Table Talk " itself has been
copiously and vigorously reviewed in the Quarterly and Edinburgh
Critical Journals. I incline to give the latter Review the preference ;
simply because it is more close, pointed, and pertinent. The Quarterly
Reviewer seems himself to be both a poet and a relation ; and, in parts,
has allowed his imagination to run away with his severer judgment,
and his attachment to control the exercise of impartiality. This is
natural and pardonable, per se. On the other hand, the Magazines
of Blackwood and Tait have been yet more copious in their notices of
the celebrated deceased. The pro and the con have been exhibited with
256 PUBLICATIONS.
A love of truth, however, obliges me to remark
that Coleridge was a mannerist. It was always the
same tone in the same style of expression-not
quick and bounding enough to diffuse instant and
general vivacity ; and the chair would sometimes
assume the solemn gravity of the pulpit.
In consequence, when heard repeatedly, this would have,
and did have, the effect of tiring. But there was
such rhapsody, originality, and marked emphasis, in
almost every thing which fell from him, that the
hearer would, three times out of four, endure the
manner for the matter. There was always this characteristic feature in his multifarious conversationit was delicate, reverend, and courteous. The chastest
ear could drink in no startling sound ; the most
serious believer never had his bosom ruffled by one
more formidable powers of contrast in these respective Periodicals. The
one dips its critical pencil into molten gold, and produces a picture
warm enough for the admiration, if not imitation, of Turner : the other
adumbrates in large masses, and the light is contrived to rest on few,
but sparkling, points. Yet each critical artist gives us an interesting picture ; and it is still a resemblance of the intellectual powers of Coleridge.
If I might presume to offer a very humble opinion upon this " Table
Talk" (to which the preceding pages have more than once or twice referred with satisfaction), I should bring forward the expression of regret
that the subject of POLITICS (cameleon-like and fleeting ! ) had been introduced ; or comparisons instituted of great departed philosophers.
When Mr. Coledridge talks of its requiring " two Bacons to make one
John Milton," or " two or three such men as Newton and Galileo to
make one Kepler"-it surely does imply the possession of something
like superhuman powers in the judge, to institute such a comparison !
Was Coleridge deeply read in the Calculus of Newton ? And upon
what book, after the Bible, does INSPIRATION ITSELF seem to brood as
upon the Principia of Newton ?
PUBLICATIONS. 257
sceptical or reckless assertion. Coleridge was eminently simple in his manner. Thinking and speaking were his delight ; and he would sometimes seem,
during the more fervid moments of discourse, to be
abstracted from all and every thing around and about
him, and to be basking in the sunny warmth of his
own radiant imagination. As a POET, in the large
sense of that word, I do not think that his fame
will be deeply fixed in the annals of the rising generation ; and yet, his very soul seemed to be imbued
with all the stirring elements of that divine art * .
* The name of Coleridge must however be written in large characters
in the muster-roll of England's POETS ; because, if not in some of the effusions of Coleridge, where is POETRY to be found? His " Ancient
Mariner" and " Christabel " are the brightest gems of his Muse ; but
even these are not divested of that occasional air of dreamy mysticism
by which his usual efforts are characterised. His subjects were in a
measure unearthly. If he chose a cottage girl at her spinning wheel
that wheel never went round, nor did that girl spin, in the ordinary
routine of such an occupation. To rural characters he sometimes gave
the colouring of philosophical abstraction. External nature seemed to
have the impress of something very opposite to what was usually attached
to it. To Coleridge's ear the roaring of the ocean's incoming tide, or
the lifting up of its huge waves, spoke a language which He only could
understand, and imparted ideas which He only could comprehend and
appreciate. The pale blue sky-the conglomerated darkening cloudsthe whistle ofthe rising storm-and the roar of the pealing thunderwere, to his mind, all objects of peculiar and intensely absorbing interest. Of all the criticisms upon his poetry, that which appeared in the
Magazine of Blackwood for October, 1834, is the most extraordinary and
elaborate : evincing, in the Reviewer, the outpourings of an imagination
scarcely less poetical than that which is reviewed-being full of peculiarities, aphorisms, and conclusions, which evince a surprising daring.
It is, however, too lengthened ; so that the portrait of Coleridge should
seem to be overlaid by the ponderous and splendid frame in which it is
fixed.
S
258 PUBLICATIONS. [ Quarles.
The year 1807 was one of unusual occupation with
me. At its close, I edited a small volume of great
moral and devotional excellence, written by the wellknown FRANCIS QUARLES, about the middle of the
seventeenth century, under the title of " Judgment
and Mercy for afflicted Souls, or Meditations, Soliloquies, and Prayers. It was edited under the
feigned name of REGINALD WOLFE, Esq. -a king's
printer in the reign of Henry VIII. , and contained
a biographical and critical introduction. There was
also a copy of Quarles's portrait, engraved by Marshall, prefixed * . Quarles had long been a favourite
with me ; and I fully agreed with the late lamented
Headley, that had his " little piece” entitled “ Enchiridion," been written at Athens or Rome, its author would have been classed with the wise men of
his country . In regard to the work first named,
* The copy of Marshall's engraving was by Freeman, who was now
rapidly advancing his claims upon my humble patronage. There is a
copy of this work somewhere abroad, bound in green morocco, with a
broad border of gold, which contains three impressions of Mr. Freeman's
engraving-one, on india paper, before the letter ; another, an early
proof; the third, the ordinary impression. The book was printed by
Gosnell, upon miserable paper, having a black and red title -page ; and
is now so scarce, that I know not where a copy may be found. It might
be advantageously reprinted in a more creditable manner. For a complete list of Quarles' pieces, consult Lowndes' Bibliographical Manual,
vol. iii . p. 1525 ; and for Quarles' poetry, see Ellis, vol. iii . p. 121 .
+ See Headley's " Select Beauties of Ancient English Poetry, with
Remarks," 1787, 8vo. A scarce volume, till its reprint in 1810, bythe
late Henry Kett, who has introduced an elegant and affecting tribute,
together with a sweetly-turned sonnet, to the memory of HEADLEY ; a
young man, of Trinity College, Oxford, of splendid promise, who died
midway between twenty and thirty. Headley's volume is full of in-
Quarles.] PUBLICATIONS. 259
and of which, in a borrowed guise, I became the
editor, it may be necessary to remark that the plan
is briefly this. The author introduces a variety of
immoral characters indulging in studied commendations (under the most specious modes of reasoning)
of their particular and vicious habits of life. Thus ;
the drunkard, the liar, the profligate, the sabbathgenious and just sentiments about our old poets, whose merits he appreciated with a tact which Warton has rarely surpassed, and Ellis as
rarely equalled. To the poetical world, Headley's loss was irreparable.
And here, over the grave of his ENCOMIAST, who would not pause a
short minute to meditate ? In later life, I knew Mr. Kett intimately
well ; and I remembered him in early life, at Oxford, when he would
stand in front of the iron gates of his College, with his master's gown
puckered up behind him, and sniff, in a manner, the incense of the
passing homage of his pupils. At that time, he was among the most
distinguished tutors of Oxford. I will say nothing of his publications ;
except that his Elements of General Knowledge passed through seven
editions, and his HISTORY the Interpreter of Prophecy, received the
warm commendation of the late Bishop Tomline. His Juvenile Poems,
1793, were suppressed. The work first named received most undeserved
treatment at the hands of those whose prominent stations should have
taught them at least courtesy and civility over a falling antagonist.
There is no saying what, in the after-rubs of life, may ensue to the
attacker as well as to the attacked. The stoutest hearts may in the end
quail for unmerited chastisement inflicted. How poor Kett, after being
haunted by Oxford spirits, and living a restless and incomprehensible
life, terminated his career, is too well known and too generally lamented.
I call to mind the many pleasant days when we gallopped together, on
fiery steeds, in the vicinity of Ramsgate, shortly after the publication of
myDecameron, and, when nearing the old Roman castle of Richborough,
(the ancient RUTUPINUM) my companion would quote Juvenal, Virgil,
and Horace, by scores of verses, and put Dryden's version of the second
poet at the head of every translation of an ancient Classic. And then,
at evening, when the hospitalities of the dining table had ceased, howmy
companion would enjoy his quiet rubber, and quote Cowley, Prior, and
Pope, as he shuffled and dealt out the cards ! Who but He seemed, at
that time, to be among the most rationally happy of the Sons of Men?
$ 2
260 PUBLICATIONS. [Quarles.
breaker, each pronounces a studied eulogium on his
own particular pursuit. Immediately afterwards,
the upbraiding voice of conscience begins to operate.
Certain prohibitory texts of scripture come forward
to his recollection. A SOLILOQUY ensues, in which
the odiousness and the danger of the first mode of
reasoning are strongly dwelt upon. Then follows a
PRAYER, in which repentance is manifest, and pardon
entreated. In the second part of the work, the same
plan is adopted, except that, in the first instance, the
character indulges in a strain of melancholy and
despair the soliloquy reproves, and the prayer administers consolation.
I subjoin a specimen of each part : but, before
doing so, I must be allowed to indulge in expressions
of approbation of the author's manner of handling
his subject, and of the fervid, original, and frequently
ingenious style of its execution. His periods are
round and harmonious. His compound epithets
rarely clog their flow. His fancy is fertile, and his
mode of expression happy. Quarles is an author
for all ages. I will now submit an illustration of
the first part of this pious manual.
" THE SABBATH-BREAKER'S PROFANATION.
" The glittering prince that sits upon regal and imperial
throne, and the ignoble peasant that sleeps within his sordid
house of thatch, are both alike to God. An ivory temple
and a church of clay are prized alike by Him. The flesh
of bulls, and the perfumes of myrrh and cassia, smoke his
altars with an equal pleasure. And does he make such dif-
Quarles.]
PUBLICATIONS. 261
ference ofdays ? Is he, that was so weary of the new moons,
so taken with the sun, to tie his Sabbath to that only day?
The tenth in tithes, is any one in ten : and why the seventh
day not any one in seven ? We sanctify the day : the day
not us. But are we Jews ? Are we still bound to keep a
legal Sabbath, in the strictness of the letter ? Have the
Gentiles no privilege by virtue of Messiah's coming, or has
the Evangelical Sabbath no immunities ? The service done,
the day is discharged, my liberty restored ; and if I meet my
profits or my pleasures, then I will give them entertainment.
If business call me to account, I dare afford a careful ear.
Or if my sports invite me, I will entertain them with a
cheerful heart. I will go to matins with as much devotion
as my neighbour ; I will make as low obeisance, and as just
responds as any ; but soon as the evening's ended, my
church devotion and my psalter shall sanctify my pew till
the next Sabbath call. Were it no more for an old custom
sake, than for the good I find in Sabbaths, that ceremony
might as well be spared. It is a day of rest ; and what's a
rest ? -a relaxation from the toil of labour. And what is
labour but a painful exertion of the frail body ? But when
the exercise admits no toil, their relaxation makes no rest.
What labour is it for the worldly man to compass the sea
and land to accomplish his desires ? What labour is it for
the impatient lover to measure Hellespont with his widened
arms, to hasten his delight ? What labour for the youth to
number music with their sprightly paces ? Where pleasure
is reconciled to labour, labour is but an active rest. Why
should the Sabbath, then, a day of rest, divorce thee from
those delights that make thy rest ? Afflict their souls that
please, my rest shall be what most conduces to my heart's
delight. Two hours will vent more prayers than I shall
need ; the rest remains for pleasure.
" Conscience, why startest thou? A judgment strikes
me from the mouth of Heaven, and saith,
"Whosoever doth any work on my Sabbath, his soul shall
be cut off-Exod. xxxi. 14.
262 PUBLICATIONS. [Quarles.
"Remember to keep holy the Sabbath day; six days shalt
thou labour, and do all that thou hast to do, but the seventh
day, &c.-Exod. xx.
" Ye shall keep my Sabbath, for it is holy unto you.—
Exod. xxxi. 14.
"Verily, my Sabbaths thou shalt keep, for this is a sign
between me and you, throughout your generations. —Exod.
xxxi. 13.
" And they returned and prepared spices, and ointments,
and rested on the Sabbath day, according to the commandment. -Luke xxiii. 56.
66
66 HIS SOLILOQUY.
My soul, how hast thou profaned that day thy God
hath sanctified ! How hast thou encroached on that which
Heaven hath set apart ! If thy impatience cannot act a
Sabbath twelve hours, what happiness canst thou expect in
a perpetual Sabbath ? Is six days too little for thyself, and
two hours too much for thy God ! O, my soul, how dost
thou prize temporals beyond eternals ! Is it equal, that
God, who gave thee a body, and six days to provide for it,
should demand one day of thee, and be denied it ? How
liberal a receiver art thou, and how miserable a requiter !
But know, my soul, his Sabbaths are the apple of his eye.
He that hath power to vindicate the breach of it, hath
threatened judgments to the breaker of it. The God of
Mercy, that hath mitigated the rigour of it for charity's
sake, will not diminish the honour of it for profaneness'
sake. Forget not, then, my soul, to remember his Sabbaths, and remember not to forget his judgments, lest he
forget to remember thee in mercy. What thou hast neglected, bewail with contrition ; and what thou hast repented,
forsake with resolution ; and what thou hast resolved,
strengthen with devotion.
66 HIS PRAYER.
" O! eternal, just, and all -discerning Judge ! in thyself,
glorious ; in thy Son, gracious ; who triest without a wit-
Quarles. ] PUBLICATIONS. 263
ness, and condemnest without a jury. O ! I confess my
very actions have betrayed me ; thy word hath brought in
evidence against me; my own conscience hath witnessed
against me ; and thy judgment hath passed sentence against
me. And what have I now to plead but my own misery ?
and whither should that misery flee but to the God of
Mercy? And since, O Lord ! the way to mercy is to leave
myself, I here disclaim all interest in myself, and utterly
renounce myself. I, that was created for thy glory, have
dishonoured thy name. I, that was made for thy service,
have profaned thy Sabbaths. I have slighted thy ordinances, and turned my back upon thy sanctuary. I have
neglected thy sacraments, abused thy word, despised thy
ministers, and despised their ministry. I have come into
thy courts with an unprovided heart, and have drawn near
with uncircumcised lips : and, Lord, I know thou art a
jealous God, and most severe against all such as violate thy
rest. The glory of thy name is precious to thee, and thine
honour is as the apple of thine eye : but thou, O God ! that
art the God of Hosts, hast published and declared thyself
the Lord of mercy. The constitution of thy Sabbath was
a work of time ; but, Lord, thy mercy is from all eternity.
I, that have broke thy Sabbaths, do here present thee with
a broken heart. Thy hand is not shortened, that thou canst
not heal ; nor thy ear deafened, that thou canst not hear.
Stretch forth thy hand, O God ! and heal my wounds. Bow
down thine ear, O Lord ! and hear my prayers. Alter the
fabric ofmy sinful heart, and make it tender of thy glory.
Make me ambitious of thy service ; and let thy Sabbaths be
my whole delight. Give me a holy reverence of thy word,
that it may prove a light to my steps, and a lantern to my
feet. Endue my heart with charity and faith, that I may
find a comfort in thy sacraments. Bless thou the ministers
of thy sacred word, and make them holy in their lives, sound
in their doctrine, and laborious in their calling. Preserve
the universal church in these distracted times. Give her
264 PUBLICATIONS. [Quarles.
peace, unity, and uniformity ; purge her of all schism , error,
and superstition ; let the king's daughter be all glorious
within, and let thine eyes take pleasure in her beauty ; that,
being honoured here, to be a member of her militant, I may
be glorified with her triumphant ! ”
A specimen from the Second Part is not the less
likely to strike the reader's fancy and command his
approbation.
66 THE WIDOW'S DISTRESS.
" So vain, so momentary are the pleasures of this world;
so transitory is the happiness of mankind, that, what with
the expectation that goes before it, and the cares that go
with it, and the griefs that follow it, we are not more unhappy in the wanting it, than miserable in the enjoying it.
The greatest of all worldly joys are but bubbles full of air,
that break with the fulness of their own vanity ; and but,
and best, like Jonah's gourd, which please us while they
last, and vex us in the loss. Past and future happiness are
the miseries of the time present, and present happiness is
but the passage to approaching misery ; which, being transitory, and meeting with a transitory possessor, perish in the
very using. What was mine yesterday, in the blessedness
of a full fruition, to- day hath nothing left of it but a sad remembrance it was mine ! The more I call to mind the
joys I had, the more sensible I am of the misery I have.
My sun is set ; my glory is darkened ; and not one star
appears in the firmament of my little world. HE from
whose loins I came, is taken from me. My blessings in the
one, my comforts in the other, are taken from me : and
what is left to me, but a poor third part of myself to bewail
the loss of the other two ! I, that was owned by the tender
name of a child, am now known by the off-cast title of an
orphan ; I, that was respected by the honourable title of a
wife, am more rejected by the despisable name of a widow :
I, that flourished like a fruitful vine upon the house top, am
Quarles.]
PUBLICATIONS. 265
now neglected and trodden under foot. He, that like a
strong wall supported my tender branches, is fallen, and
left my clusters to the spoil of a ravenous swine. The
spring-tides of my plenty are spent, and I am gravelled on the low ebbs of all wants. The sonnets of my mirth are
turned to elegies of mourning ; my glory is put out ; and
my honour grovels on the dust. I call to my friends, and
they neglect me : I spread forth my hands, and there is
none to help me : my beauty is departed from me, and all
my joys are swallowed up.
" But stay, my soul, plunge not too far. Shall not He
take that gave ? Cannot He that took, restore ? The Lord
is thy portion, who saith,
"I will be an husband to the widow, and a father to the
fatherless.-Psal. lxviii. 5.
" Ye shall not afflict any widow, orfatherless child. —Exod.
xxii. 22.
66 Ifthou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto
me, I will surely hear their cry.-Exod. xx. 23.
" my And wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the
sword, and your wives shall be widows, and your children
fatherless.-Exod. xxii. 23.
" I will be a swift witness against those that oppress the
widow andthe fatherless. -Mal. iii . 5 .
"Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father
is this, to visit the fatherless and widow in their affliction.-
James i. 27.
66 HER SOLILOQUY.
--
"How hath the sunshine of truth discovered what appeared not by the candlelight of nature ! How many atoms
in thy soul hath this light descried, which, in thy natural
twilight, were not visible ! Excessive sadness for so great
a loss, can want no arguments from flesh and blood ;
which arguments can want no weight, if weighed in the
partial balance of nature. A husband is thyself, divided :
thy children thyself, multiplied ; for whom when snatched
266 PUBLICATIONS. [Quarles.
cannot he, my soul,
away) God allows some grains to thy affection : but when
they exceed the allowance, they will not pass in Heaven's
account, but must be coined again. Couldst thou so often
offend thy God without a tear? and
displease thee once without so many? Doth the want of
spiritual grace not trouble thee, and shall a temporal loss
so much torment thee ? Is thy husband taken away, and
art thou cast down? Hath thy God promised to be thy
husband, and art thou not comforted ?-True symptoms of
more flesh than spirit. Thy husband was the gift, thy God
the giver ; and wilt thou more despise the giver than the
gift ? Be wise, my soul : if thou hast lost a man, thou hast
found a God. Having, therefore, wet thy wings in nature's
shower, go and dry them in the God of nature's sunshine.
66 HER PRAYER.
" O God ! in the knowledge of whom is the perfection of
all joy, at whose right hand pleasures are evermore ; that
makest the comforts of this life momentary, that we may not
over prize them ; and yet hast made them requisite, that we
may not undervalue them ; I , a late sharer in this worldly
happiness, but a sad witness of its vanity, do here address
myself to thee, the only crown of all my joys ; in whom
there is no variableness, nor shadow of change. Lord, thou
didst give me what my unthankfulness hath taken from
me; but thou hast taken from me what thy goodness hath
promised to supply. Thou hast given and thou hast takenblessed be thy name for ever ! Thou, then, O God, who
art not less able to perform than willing to promise, whose
mercy is more ready to bestow than my misery is to beg,
strengthen my faith, that I may believe thy promise. Encourage my hopes, that I may expect thy performance.
Quicken my affections, that I may love the Promiser. Be
thou all in all to me, that am nothing at all without thee.
Sweeten my misery with the sense of thy mercy, and lighten
my darkness with the sun of thy glory. Seal in my heart
Quarles.] PUBLICATIONS. 267
the assurance of adoption, that I may with boldness call
thee my Father. Sanctify my actions with the spirit of
meekness, that my conversation may testify that I am thy
child. Wean my heart from worldly sorrow, lest I mourn
like them that have no hope. Be thou my bridegroom,
and let our marriage-chamber be my heart. Own me as
thy bride, and purify me with the odours of thy spirit.
Prevent me with thy blessings ; protect me by thy grace.
Preserve me for thyself; prepare me for thy kingdom ! Be
thou a father to bless me ; be thou a husband to comfort
me. In the midst of want, be thou my plenty in the depth
of my mourning, be thou my mirth. Raise my glory from
the dust, and then my dust shall show forth thy praise. Be
thou a wall to support my vine, and let my branches twine
about thee : let them flourish in the sunshine of thy grace,
that they may bring forth fruit to the glory of thy name. ”
:
While my lectures at the Royal Institution were
drawing to a close, and about the beginning of the
year 1808, I was occupied in the preparation of a
new edition of a work which, in its original form,
and at the period of its first appearance, made a
considerable noise throughout Europe. I mean the
UTOPIA of SIR THOMAS MORE. In the thirst for
black letter literature with which, about this time, I
began to be violently seized, I stumbled upon the
first English version of that celebrated work, by
Raphe Robinson *, and deemed it to be so very
* Robinson's title runs thus : A most pleasant, fruitful, and witty
work of the best state of a public Weal, and of the Isle called Utopia,
written in Latin by the Right Worthy and Famous SIR THOMAS
MORE, Knight, and translated into English by Raphe Robinson,
A. D. 1551.
268 PUBLICATIONS. [More's
curious and racy, that I resolved to make the public acquainted with its merits-bolstered up " with
Copious Notes (including the whole of Dr. Warner's) and a Biographical and Literary Introduction *." Mr. Miller the bookseller was then one of
* This introduction comprehended, 1. Some Account of the Family
of Sir Thomas More. 2. The Biography of Sir Thomas More. 3. Account of his Works, with specimens ; see his description of Jane Shore,
vol. i. p. lxxxiii. 4. Engraved portraits ofhim. 5. Editions of the Utopia.
This Introduction was preceded by the following Address to the Reader:-
66 GENTLE READER,
" I here present unto thee a new edition of a celebrated work, which
has not had the good fortune to be so much admired in our own as in
foreign countries. Whether this may have arisen from the want of
curiosity or discernment in our ancestors, is a point too delicate and
weighty for my determination ; certain it is, that almost all editors
have complained of the backwardness of our countrymen to notice and
commend the UTOPIA of SIR THOMAS MORE. The text of the present
edition is taken from the first English one, which was translated by
RAPHE ROBINSON, and printed by Abraham Veale, in 1551 , 12mo.; a
work of such scarcity, as to have escaped the notice of all editors of
ancient English authors. Its intrinsic value † has appeared to me to
be equal to its rarity. The notes which accompany the text, are exe-
"This first edition is particularly analysed at page lix, &c. post.
As specimens of the purity of its style, the reader may, in limine, consult pp. 24-5, of the Prologue, and pp. 46-7 , 124-5, of the first book.
If I were to mention any contemporary work analogous to it in style, it
would be Michael Wood's translation of the famous treatise " De Vera
Obedientia," by the Bishop of Winchester, with Bonner's preface,
printed at Rome, 26th of Oct., 1553, 8vo ; a work sufficiently known to, and coveted by, BLACK LETTER COLLECTORS. It is indeed curious.
The reader will compare the following with the first half dozen lines
of page 22, book i. ( post). " But as touching this bishop's worthy
praises, there shall be nothing spoken of me at this time ; not only
because they are infinite, but because they are far better known to all
Christendom, than becometh me here to make rehearsal.”—Fol. 1, rev.”
Utopia. ] PUBLICATIONS. 269
the leading publishers of the day ; and his liberal
spirit readily lent its aid to my wishes, by adding
cuted on the plan of a variorum edition ; and without the affectation
of antiquarian research, they are intended to throw some little light on
the manners, customs, and sentiments of our ancestors in the sixteenth
century.
"
" The Supplemental Notes,' while they may be thought to exhibit
amusing specimens of the literature of the seventeenth century, connect,
in some degree, the chain of research with the present times *. Those
notes which allude to modern customs and opinions, may probably, at
first sight, be considered superficial ; but it should be remembered that,
at a future period (if the edition be permitted to live), they may in
turn become interesting to the curious antiquary.
" The ' BIOGRAPHICAL and LITERARY INTRODUCTION' was intended
to give additional interest to the subsequent pages ; so that in reading
the most celebrated performance of Sir Thomas More, a tolerably accurate idea might be formed of the family, the life, and the works of its
author. In the present age of elegant and curious disquisition, the
Portraits of Sir Thomas More, ' and the Editions of the Utopia ' may
not be thought the least acceptable part of this Introduction.
" In fine (following the example of ancient Lyndsay, and the author
of the Complaynt of Scotland) I entreat the ' gude redar to correct me
familiarly and be charite, and til interpreit my intentions favourably †,'
or in the language of another ancient wight, ' the good reader is to be
praised, for his own relief and the author's, just to correct the errors of
the print, and then to read and judge' ‡. And thus heartily wishing thee
farewell,
Kensington, June 21 , 1808.
" I am thine,
" T.F.D."
* " I have adopted both the ancient and the modern orthography in
the extracts from the authors of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
The former, out of compliment to Dr. Johnson's remark in Hamlet
(Reed's Shakspeare, vol. xviii. p. 284, note 5) , the latter, from respect
to the good sense evinced by Mr. G. Ellis, as noticed at p. 75, post.
† Dr. Leyden's edition of the Complaynt of Scotland, 1801, 4to.,
p. 23 Prel. Dissert. and p. 27 of the text ; a work of equal interest and
erudition. The first 292 pages are devoted to a preliminary dissertation, the following 294 to a reprint of the text. A useful glossary of eighty pages concludes the volume.
" An Answere to a Supplicatorie Epistle of G. T." London, 8vo.,
no date. Printed for Tobie Smith.
270 PUBLICATIONS. [More's
an engraved portrait of More, in the stippling
manner-and an outline copper- plate engraving of
More's family, from the celebrated painting of Holbein, of which Vertue has made an engraving for
Knight's Life of Erasmus-from the well-known
Tabelle Patinianæ, published at Padua in 1691 ,
folio *. This outline engraving accompanied only
the large paper copies of the book, which were
struck off in a small but elegantly- executed quarto
volume t. I have now totally forgotten the quantum of remuneration " for work and labour done "
touching these two unassuming volumes ; but it had
little support from public patronage, and it eventually found itself in a sort of Capulet family vault of
a large trading bookseller, on Mr. Miller's retirement from business ‡. The " Supplemental Notes "
at the end of the second volume may be yet read
* Is it not really surprising, that an original picture of such a family,
and by such an artist as Holbein, in which all the portraits are wholelengths, and said to be of the size of life , should not be known to the
British public-when its destination is supposed to be in London ?
Where, but in the British Institution should such a picture have been
long ago exhibited ? The whisper once was, that it belonged to the
Society of Lincoln's Inn.
† Of these large-paper copies ( of which 150 were printed ) I once
received an urgent and unlimited request to ILLUSTRATE one, by the
insertion of every portrait mentioned in the fourth section of my Introduction. I did so. The copy was bound by Faulkner in a splendid
green morocco surtout, and was sold, on the death of its amiable and
generous owner, for some threescore guineas, according to received
instructions. Perhaps I ought to add, that there are some curious and
pretty wood- cuts interspersed throughout this edition of the Utopia.
To the best of my recollection, the late Mr. Stockdale, of Piccadilly
(father of the present bookseller of that name) became the purchaser
of several hundred copies at 2s. 6d. per copy.
Utopia. ]
PUBLICATIONS. 271
with instruction * ; and the Analysis of More's English Works, published in 1557, folio, is at least
creditable to the diligence of the analyser.
The remainder of this same year, 1808, was
wholly absorbed in the preparation of a new edition
of my "Introduction to the Classics," which now
assumed a new form, and was greatly improved by
corrections and additions. I refer to a preceding
page for a more particular account of this second
edition t.
In the ensuing year, 1809, there appeared a work
from the pen of the well-known Dr. Ferriar, under
the title of " The Bibliomania, an Epistle to Rich.
Helsor, Esq.," in a thin 4to. brochure, which, from
the bent of my then studies, made a very decided
* Among these " notes," is one embellished with a wood-cut of a
hawker, in the act of carrying his hooded hawks upon a square-framed
perch, which surrounds him. He holds a hawk upon his left hand or
fist, and on his head is a feathered cap. This is taken from the Devises
Heroiques de Paradin, 1563, 12mo. , fol. 173. My delight was excessive, some seven years ago, to observe a figure thus identically attired
in gay costume, in a hawking party belonging to Colonel Halls, in the
neighbourhood of Newmarket. It was a sad rainy day, and frequent
gusts of wind almost unsettled the birds from their perch. The late
Mr. Haslewood was with me, who always seemed to be hawking mad.
Great was that antiquary's delight on seeing the hood slipped from the
hawk's eyes, on the putting up of a covey of birds, of which one became
the victim to a beak strong enough to have upheld a hare. Then followed the process of the lure, whereat my friend's joy was redoubled ; but one 66 tone, ton-tavern, ton -tavern, ton-ton-taverne,” from the horn
of the huntsman ( as set forth in that most extraordinary production,
Randle Holmes's Accidence of Armoury, 1688, folio, ) seems to me to be
worth a whole season's sport of hawking. This, however, may be the
criticism of an ignoramus in either sport.
† Page 211 , &c.
272 PUBLICATIONS.
impression upon me, and induced me to try my
hand at the same subject-but in prose : Dr. Ferriar's epistle being in heroic rhyming couplets.
That epistle was doubtless a smart and clever performance, but was rather to be considered as a sort
of dessert after dinner. I thought the subject might
be more substantially treated ; and so I told my
friend, Mr. Heber, in the sale-room of Messrs.
Leigh and Sotheby, on the very day on which the
work came into my hands. As he had accepted a
dedication in verse, I presumed he could not object
to one in prose. It was accordingly settled that
my performance should be addressed to the same
individual, in a small octavo volume, of a moderate
price. It was written " calamo currentissimo,
within a lunar month, and had the effect of producing much innocent mirth, and exciting a general
curiosity after rare and precious volumes. The profits of the sale about covered the expenses of a
week's housekeeping * . I reserve further notice of
this work till I come, in chronological order, to
treat of the second edition of it in 1811—a volume
of an entirely different construction, and more full
and satisfactory under every point of view.
99
* The publishers were Messrs. Longman and Co. The book was sold
for 3s. 6d.; the author and publisher dividing the profits. The advertisements amounted to the astounding sum of 35l. ! “ un résultat qui
faisoit reculer ! " (I believe this was one of Mirabeau's observations. )
The " SPOLIA OPIMA" were somewhat under 87. ! —ofwhich I necessarily
took possession of half. Here was AUTHORSHIP !
PUBLICATIONS. 273
I now approach the notice of one of the most
arduous, elaborate, and perhaps useful of all the
publications to which my humble name is attached.
The reader will perhaps anticipate the mention of
the TYPOGRAPHICAL ANTIQUITIES OF GREAT BriTAIN. I have just said that the " bent of my studies " at this time connected me much with researches which had a reference to the illustration of
the " Bibliomania." All the articles in the " Director," under the title of Bibliographiana, had
somewhat initiated me into the mysteries of CAXTONIC LORE. I looked upon our venerable first
printer, William Caxton, as a sort of hero in his
way, to whom no common homage ought to be paid ;
and with the assistance of Lewis, Ames, and my immediate predecessor, Herbert * , I thought that I
might render him that justice which appeared to be
only his due. My plan was upon the most enlarged
scale, for I resolved to devote my first volume entirely to the productions of his press. I had been
collecting materials for this work during the three
preceding years, and felt disposed to make it a repertorium of English Literature, from the death of
Chaucer to that of Shakspeare ; for what is a his-
* Lewis's Life of Caxton was published in 1737, 8vo.; Ames's Typographical Antiquities in 1749 ; and Herbert's edition of the latter in 1785,
3 vols. 4to. I resolved upon skimming all the cream from the milky
production of Lewis, and reprinting, with copious notes, the Prefaces of
Ames and Herbert : to which, Memoirs of the two latter, with their
portraits in mezzotint, were appended . These introductory pieces occupy ninety pages of my first volume.
Τ
274 PUBLICATIONS. [Typographical
tory of the press but that of literature ? It embraced every department of human knowledge ; and
even the errors and crudities of science might be
corrected by those discoveries which had marked
the progress of later periods. It must be confessed
that the plan was bold and grasping ; and had it
been carried into complete effect, scarcely nine
volumes in quarto (a good companion, by the by,
to the Harleian Miscellany) would have witnessed
its conclusion. I also thought that the progress of
the Art of Engraving might be exhibited in the
same work, and did in fact compose a " Preliminary
Disquisition" upon this subject, for the first volume * .
Mr. Harris, of the Royal Institution, was, to the
best of my recollection, the first individual to whom
my plan was communicated. It received his entire
concurrence, and most ardent wishes for success t.
66
* The title is this : " Preliminary Disquisition on the Early State of
Engraving and Ornamental Printing in Great Britain." The treatise
occupies lxxi pages, and contains about forty-five wood- cuts : many of
them costly and curious. It is true that they are printed upon paper
of an inferior quality, and have been abundantly eclipsed in beauty,
singularity, and perfection of workmanship, by what appears of the same
character in the pages of the Bibliographical Decameron ; yet are theseearlier and ruder efforts in the " Typographical Antiquities " well deserving the antiquary's close attention. William Savage was the printer ;
and the workings in red do him great credit. In the large paper copies,
where the paper is of an excellent quality, the effect is most effulgent.
+ This is not the first time that I have made mention of the merits
of the late Mr. JAMES HARRIS, who was admirably fitted for his office
as librarian to the Royal Institution. When he was appointed, I was
a rival candidate for the same situation ; and wrote expressly a " Dissertation on Bibliography," with plans of a public library, to submit to
Antiquities. ] PUBLICATIONS. 275
About this time I was in the habit of paying frequent visits to the Marquis of Bute (grandfather of
the present marquis) at Petersham ; and that nobleman was not only pleased to receive me kindly, but
to stimulate my book-researches by begging that I
would pay a visit to Luton, and examine the treasures of his library there. I wanted not a second
invitation to carry so congenial a plan into effect.
Mr. Machel Stace (the amiable, the upright, the
intelligent Stace), his lordship's bookseller, was requested to accompany and attend me. I went-I
saw-and was enraptured * . What could possibly
the managing committee-but unsuccessfully. This, I think, was somewhere in 1804. My victorious opponent was backed by Sir T. Bernard,
and had been a most able and trustworthy sort of henchman to the late
Mr. Egerton, the bookseller. He was in all respects worthy of his office,
which he filled for twenty years. This “ Dissertation ” is yet in my
possession. It is crude, as the work of a tyro ; but there were no bibliographers on the committee. The library of the Royal Institution richly
deserves all the commendation bestowed upon it in the Bibliomania, p.
132 ; and since that period (twenty-five years ago) it has been enlarged
by valuable additions.
* And who might not be, of a much maturer time of life than I then
was, on his first visit at Luton ? I speak of the pictures and books.
A library of large dimensions and pleasing form, intersected by two
divisions, in immediate communication with each other-with cooling Rysdaels, graceful Parmegianos, and glowing Reynoldses-enrich
the spaces immediately above the books. And then, a library wherein
very many of the copies were of the olden complexion and original
marginal amplitude. I have now forgotten its chief characteristic ; but
incline to the belief that Voyages and Travels, Antiquities and Topography, bear a proud pre-eminence among the 25,000 volumes of which
it may be composed. Who, however, " among the sons of men," shall
venture adequately to describe some of the GRAPHIC TREASURES of Luton ? Who can think upon a Raffaelle, a Guido, a Velasquez, a
Cuyp, and a Teniers, and not say that there is one of each master HERE,
T 2
276 PUBLICATIONS. [Typographical
follow, but the dedication of my Typographical Antiquities to the nobleman who had thus inflamed
my fancy, and enlarged my knowledge, by this Iter
Lutoniense? The marquis was pleased to accept
the dedication, and a beautiful wood-cut engraving
of his arms was placed at the head of it. During
the progress of the printing, I used frequently to
meet the present KING OF THE FRENCH at the Marquis's table, and always found him an interesting
and well- informed guest. He appeared to have
travelled considerably, and communicated his knowledge in a pleasing and unassuming manner.
spoke our language with so deceptive a fluency, that
it would sometimes seem his vernacular tongue.
The Marchioness, who was among the most amiable
of her sex and rank, shewed him the most courteous
attention and respect * .
He
It was also during the early progress of printing
the first volume of these Antiquities, at Mr. Savage's,
which may bid defiance to competition in England ? It is due to the
present owner of this lordly mansion to say, that he has completed the
building which had descended unfinished to his grandfather ; but I
yet desiderate the softly-chiming, and sweetly-striking clocks, which
are now mute, and which were placed here by the first Earl Bute,
the prime minister, and rival of his master, George III. , in this branch
of furniture.
* During my visit to Luton, his majesty, then Duke of Orleans,
had lost his younger brother, the Duke de Monpensier, and he came
down there with his surviving brother to blunt the first pang of affliction on such a loss. I retreated precipitately, and a little prematurely,
on his arrival, for I was then deeply immersed in Bull's illustrated copy.
ofGranger's Biographical History of England. -Bitter, but inevitable
separation !
Antiquities.]
PUBLICATIONS.
277
in Bedfordbury, Covent Garden, that I used to see
the sheets of Mr. Fox's Historical Work hanging
up in every direction through the dwelling- house
and adjacent yard. It will be naturally supposed
that five thousand copies of a quarto volume, with
five hundred more upon a larger paper, and yet
another two hundred and fifty of an elephantine
size * , were not likely to be carried through the
press, where the premises were small, without seeming to suffocate every passage and corridor of the
building. At length, by the aid of one of the most
zealous and intelligent correctors of the press- to
whom I was often indebted for an ingenious hint
and a judicious emendation during the progress of
the printing of the " Director, " as well as of this
volume +-my book became in all respects ripe for
publication ; and my preface was finally executed
66
* It was doubtless the boldest experiment ever made with a large
paper speculation : but it succeeded. In due course, what at first came
forth as a rapid and overboiling torrent, at a high price, subsided into
a quiet channel, and became obtainable on very moderate terms. Yet,
considering the extraordinary number of copies printed , I do not consider this book of the commonest possible occurrence. As the work of
an AUTHOR whose name can never perish, it must necessarily form
part and parcel" of every well-ordered library. Why is it not dressed
in " rank and file" with the octavo HUMES, ROBERTSONS, and GIBBONS ?
+ I allude to Mr. Joseph Langton ; who, in his earlier days, had been
initiated in typographic mysteries at the Clarendon press at Oxford.
In later life, he has become more closely allied, by the filling of a station
of no mean notoriety in the parish of St. Mary, St. Marylebone, with
equal diligence, fidelity, and propriety. A bachelor himself, he has
more to do with children ´than any man in the same parish ; and although devoutly silent during the utterance of prayers, no " Amen” is
heard but his at their conclusion .
278 PUBLICATIONS. [Typographical
towards the end of the year 1809. The ensuing
year opened with its appearance before the formidable tribunal of the public. Cowper could not have
been prouder of his list of subscribers to his Homer
-nay, nor Pope himself-than I was of mine * .
* His Majesty George III., and their Royal Highnesses the Dukes
of York and Kent, together with eighteen public libraries, were at the
head of the subscription. The names of two hundred and thirty private
subscribers follow-of which one hundred and forty are, to my certain
knowledge, NO MORE. Of the existence of about twenty, I am doubtful.
Of those DEAD, beginning with the three first above-named, are, Col.
Barry, Earl of Bridgewater, Marquis of Bute (to whom the work was
dedicated) , William Beloe, Dr. Andrews ( Dean of Canterbury) , Charles
Butler, Rev. J. Conybeare, George Chalmers, Alexander Chalmers,
John Dent, Samuel Dobree, Francis Douce, Octavius Gilchrist, Joseph
Haslewood, Richard Heber, Dr. Jenner, Col. Johnes, Miss Fust Langley, Dr. Maton, Daniel Moore, Rev. R. Nares, Walter Scott, Earl
Spencer, Marquis of Stafford, the first Duke of Sutherland-Sir M. M.
Sykes, Bart., Rev. Stephen Weston, and John Towneley, &c. Of the
LIVING, I enumerate with peculiar gratification the following :-John
Barwis, John Britton, Peter Brodie, Sir Benjamin Brodie, Sir S. E.
Brydges, Rev. J. Collinson, Miss Currer, Col. Drinkwater, the Rev. H.
Drury, the Earl of Essex, Rev. Dr. Goddard, Jeremiah Harman, Chas.
Hatchett, Thos. Hill, Dr. Jamieson, Rev. N. Kerr, Earl of Leitrim,
J. H. Markland, Rev. Dr. Marsh (now Bishop of Peterborough), Geo.
Ormerod, Louis Hayes Petit, Rev. T. Rackett, Sam. Rogers, W. L.
Rogers, Rob. Southey, Rev. H. J. Todd, C. K. Tynte, Rev. Dr. Valpy,
J. V. Utterson, and Charles Whittingham, the Elzevir of his day.
The reader is not to infer that these names ( of the DEAD and the
LIVING) are here introduced by way of a pompous record of the author's
patrons and friends ; but he is rather to consider the matter in a serious,
moralising, and instructive point of view. He will first balance the
dead against the living, and reflect how soon ( if his name be among the
latter) his own departure may add to the preponderancy of the former—
even how soon the spirit which records these facts may be called away
to jointhose who have preceded him ! I consider a large " LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS as a sort of monumental tablet-which marks the contemporaneous existence of the wealth and intelligence—the public and private
spirit of patronage of our country at a particular period. It is, be-
""
Antiquities. ] PUBLICATIONS. 279
Sixty-six copies ( I know not why that number) of
the work were executed upon large paper of an imsides, pleasing to find the name of an ancestor or a relation among the
patrons of such a work as that of Pope or Cowper, which does honourto
the country. The great BRIAN WALTON was among the first who recorded the names of " the moreleading patrons "—the " Principes et Fautores eximii " of his Polyglott Bible ; and it is a distinction as peculiar as
flattering, that such names as CROMWELL and CHARLES II . are recorded
as patrons to the same work—and in the same preface. Even to this
day, my venerable friend * * * rubs his silver spectacles with unusual
energy and excitement, before he sits down to the perusal of the list of
subscribers to Pope's Homer. " I live, as it were, (says he) in that
identical period, as I read these names-and seem to shake hands by
turns with Addison, Harley, Godolphin, and Sunderland.” He might
have shaken hands less clean than these. Pope may be said to have
made his fortune by the subscription to his Homer : -but these "FORTUNE-MAKING” days have finally disappeared. And yet an honest pride
may be indulged and avowed, when the author of these " Reminiscences" contemplates a roll of subscribers which at least attests him to
be an 66 accredited agent ! ”
One word more. I have mentioned the names of individuals not in
the bookselling trade, who supported the first volume of the "Typographical Antiquities .” Of those dead, who , did so, were Bliss of Oxford, Collins, Cuthell, Dulau, Ford, Lackington, Lunn, Manson, Nicol,
Otridge, Sancho, and White. Of the living booksellers, the following
are the names : -Baxter, six copies ; Booker, six copies ; Carpenter,
two copies ; Clarke, one large, and two small ; Evans, one large, and
two small ; Hatchard, two small ; Leigh and Sotheby, one large, and
two small ; Longman and Co., three large, twenty-five small ; Miller,
five large, twenty- five small. In the whole (for Manson, Sancho, and
White had twenty-four copies between them) there were 164 copies bespoke in the trade ; these, added to those of private subscribers, made
the total number of small paper bespoke about 420 copies . If I remember rightly, there were 500 copies printed. I therefore, at starting,
pledged the public in a cup well-nigh filled to the brim ! All the LARGE
PAPERS were engaged at 77. 78. per copy ; and I may in sober truth
affirm, that the public had not before gazed upon a volume of more
singular embellishments, and more enchanting luxury of paper and
printing. Still, in the latter department, it was eclipsed by the subsequent volumes.
280 PUBLICATIONS [Typographical .
perial size, and I might have " challenged all England " at the time to produce a more magnificent
volume. The property also was entirely my own ;
nor could that property be considered very despicable
when I cleared six hundred pounds by the speculation *. I was as astonished as I was necessarily delighted by such a result. The toil, certainly, had
been severe and long-continued ; and the alternations
of hope, anxiety, and doubt had previously much
agitated my bosom t. But pain, and labour, and
* Such is my present impression ; for no traces of an " account
current" have survived . And yet I may over-rate it by a hundred
pounds. The gross produce could scarcely have been much below
£ 1800. At all events, I had abundance of assets to cover the expense,
if not to redeem the error, of having purchased an interleaved copy of
the first Ames-which had belonged to Ames and Herbert-for £42 : a
single, chubby quarto volume ! My knowing friends laughed at my indiscretion, under the softer term of misplaced zeal ; and Mr. Douce had
the provoking cruelty to call the book a sucked orange. But I defended
the purchase on every ground, and would not hear of having done
amiss. It was made under early and strong impulses, when I started
with a notion of my own similar work, and when the " sua cuique Deus
fit dira cupido." It seemed to me that such a " Deus," in its way, should
not be allowed to take up its quarters in any resting-place but my own
library. It was purchased of Mr. Fiske, the bookseller, the corner of
Marylebone-lane, Wigmore-street, and several years afterwards was
sold by me to Mr. Pickering for one-fourth of its original cost.
These points are thus alluded to at the end of the " ADVERTISEMENT," prefixed by way of Preface ; premising, that the " General Preface" is inevitably postponed to the “ Greek Kalends.”
" In fine, the Editor can honestly assure his readers, that neither
pains, labour, nor expense have been spared, in visiting the two Universities and other public repositories of books, and in the number and
variety of plates ( which have increased far beyond the original design),
to render this volume deserving of their approbation, and of the auspices
under which it is published. A great deal of curious and apposite
matter has been thrown into the notes, in order to avoid swelling the
Antiquities.]
PUBLICATIONS. 281
dread of want of success, were all lost sight of and
forgotten, as " order upon order " poured in for
execution. My little mansion assumed the appearance of an office of great business ; and for the first
three months, the postmaster-general had scarcely a
more active and efficient supporter of his establishment than myself.
Thus, the opening of the year 1810 was one of
peculiar promise and gratification. I had established something like a legitimate reputation as a
severe and active student in classical researches and
the literary antiquities of my country. I read early
and late ; and, like Casaubon * , spent most of my
evenings in the society of amiable and well- informed
book to an unnecessary size. If the letter of the text had been more
generally adopted, and the work had been printed in the modern broadmargin style, the reader need not be told that two volumes would hardly
have contained the matter which is here submitted to his consideration.
" In the ' GENERAL PREFACE,' to be published with the last volume,
the Editor will not fail to express the particular obligations he has been
under to those literary friends and acquaintances who have assisted
him with information in the course of his arduous undertaking ; an
undertaking, the nature and end of which he has endeavoured fully to
comprehend, and rationally to anticipate : towards the creditable completion of which much time, care, and labour are requisite, with no
small portion of health and animal spirits. The latter are in the dispensation of PROVIDENCE : the former it is in human power to manage
and apply. To worthy and impartial men in particular, ' as Hearne
has observed (Johan. de Trokelowe, præf. p. xvi. ) this appeal, as well
as this undertaking, is submitted. ' Nos (continues the same amiable
antiquary ) in studio veritatis ac antiquitatis horas collocemus, nobiscumque præclare agi putemus, si in hujusmodi nostris conatibus utile
quod sit invenerint eruditi .'
Kensington, Dec. 23, 1809.
* See page 222, ante, note.
" T. F. D."
282 PUBLICATIONS [Typographical .
friends. The distance of London (only two miles)
was no consideration in the way of declining the acceptance of invitations ; and the hospitable tables of
the rich and the eminent were not infrequently a
source of improvement as well as of venial pride. At
this moment, too, I was quietly planning the second
edition of the Bibliomania. My two dear boys
would be trundling their hoops, or playing at trap,
in the green fields of North End, and contiguous to
Gloucester Lodge, while I was seated upon a grass
hillock, " under the beechen shade, " with a volume
of Baillet in one hand and of Schelhórn in another.
Spizelius, Bauer, and De Bure * would sometimes
relieve guard with the foregoing instructive sentinels.
So flattering and so full of prospective comfort was
the opening of this memorable year.
It pleased, however, a gracious Providence to inflict upon me, about this time, a trial of the severest
description. At the latter end of the month of
January, my younger son-he who would be always
"making ancient MSS. " and manufacturing fanciful
title-pages-fell seriously ill. I carried him in my
within three weeks,
From being among
arms to his bed, from which,
he was borne down-a CORPSE.
the liveliest and most winning of his age, he sud-
* The reader will find the titles of the works of these authors,
together with an estimate of their respective merits, fully detailed in the
second part (" the Cabinet") of the second edition of the Bibliomania.
At present, I fear that they must be pronounced old-fashioned or obsolete ; but twenty-five or thirty years ago, their names were talismanic
in lifting a volume off a bookseller's shelf.
Antiquities. ]
PUBLICATIONS. 283
denly collapsed into insensibility-except that his
eye could not endure the light. The disease of
ydrokephalos (or water in the head) was evidently
making its fearful approaches. The usual remedies
were applied ; and the little sufferer, under torture
which I will not attempt to describe, but which can
never be forgotten, was sinking every day. Doctors Ainslie and Maton were in constant attendance,
but held out not the slightest hope of amendment...
and when they took their final leave, what agony
could exceed THAT which tore the hearts of both
parents asunder ! We may be said to have never
quitted his bedside ; and it was my destiny to be
hanging over him when his last breath escaped his
lips . He died... as he had lived ...with a SMILE !
His image needed not the aid of art * to be perpetuated in the memories of his parents ; and though
a deeper wound hath been more recently inflicted
upon them, yet the voice and the action of " Little
Tom" are still in their ears and before their eyes.
"QUALIS ES, SPES LOQUITUR ;
QUALIS ERAS, LACRYMÆ PARENTUM."
This inscription on his tombstone + was furnished
* The portrait which, however, it is our good fortune to possess of
him, was executed by my friend, Mr. Masquerier, from instructions
which my memory enabled me to impart. It is a faithful resemblance,
yet wanting that vigour and vivacity which the artist's eye only can
bestow when the ORIGINAL is fixed before him. It is a small head-andshoulders, in oil. A few years afterwards it was copied, in sapia, on a
yet smaller scale, by Mr. Behnes, the well-known sculptor. I shall have
occasion to mention this artist in a subsequent page.
+ He was buried on the west side of Kensington churchyard, by the
284 [Typographical PUBLICATIONS.
by my old and sympathising friend, the Rev. H. J.
Todd—a man, whose moral and social worth yet
transcends his literary attainments.
Entreating the kind indulgence of the reader to
endure this digression, I proceed with the detail of
" Reminiscences" more in consonance with the professed character of this work ; and resume the thread
of my present TYPOGRAPHICAL narrative.
I have observed that the first volume of these
side of a broad paved walk, with a flat stone upon his grave, denoting
him to have died on the 10th of February, when he wanted about three
months of completing his ninth year. I alone attended the funeral ;
little knowing what a part I should have to perform . I thought I must
have sunk into the grave with him ! I possess a small volume, put
together, of scraps which the deceased was in the habit of executing—
confirmative ofwhat is above said of " making ancient MSS. and manufacturing fanciful title-pages." He first exercised his pencil in his fifth
year, on the memorable election of Byng, Burdett, and Mellish . The
processions of the rival candidates used to pass our house on the Terrace,
affording an inspiring moment for a predisposed genius. The kindhearted reader need hardly be informed that I have uniformly considered this volume as the most precious of which I have ever been in
possession. A word only, to draw the curtain yet closer down upon
the departed. My friend, Sir Benjamin Brodie, opened the head, and
found all the symptoms of the disease of which he had died, abundantly
verified—a disease, which I understand yet baffles the power of skill ,
or which, if by chance removed, is likely to be succeeded by idiotcy.
Heaven in mercy allowed it to terminate, in my case, as it DID. Prolonged wretchedness is dying a thousand deaths. The sooner that
which " is sown a natural body" is " raised a spiritual body," the
better ; and if, after the inspiration of the preceding passage, I may
avail myself of an earthly authority, I would add, in the impassioned
language of ONE whose son sleeps not far distant from him whose loss
is thus deplored ...
66 Mount, kindred spirit, to thy DESTINED REST! "
That " One" was the late Mr. Canning-and the verse here quoted is
from his epitaph upon his eldest son.
Antiquities.]
PUBLICATIONS. 285
Typographical Antiquities was eminently successful.
It was, in fact, an attempt to awaken the love of the
literature of past days ; to set wealthy and well- educated men a- stirring to collect materials, which, but
for such occasional excitement, might, in the end,
moulder in oblivion. It had, undoubtedly, a very
considerable effect ; and the second edition of the
Bibliomania in the following year ( 1811 ) , helped to
give this feeling a more general and glowing spread.
In the year 1812, the second volume of these Antiquities appeared ; devoted almost exclusively to the
productions ofWynkyn DeWorde and Richard PynThis volume was sold at once to Mr. Miller
for two hundred guineas. In theyear 1816 appeared
son *.
* It also contains an account of the publications of the presses of LETTOU, MACHLINIA, and JULIAN NOTARY ; the latter profusely embellished with extraordinary, if not horror-striking, fac-similes. This
volume was printed at the Shakspeare Press, by the late Mr. Bulmer,
in a manner to be in all respects worthy of its precursor. I own it to
have been a proud day in the chequered calendar of my life, when I
saw a copy of these first two volumes, upon large paper, knocked down
at the price of THIRTY GUINEAS, at the sale of the late Mr. Towneley's
library, in 1814. The late Mr. Price of Bristol wrote me, that " Mr.
Barnes, his neighbour, was disposed to give any price for a large paper
copy, which I might think fit." These were BRAVE TIMES !
The conclusion of the Preface of this second volume (dated Kensington, Nov. 11 , 1811 , ) gave the first public intimation of my comparatively intimate acquaintance with the library of EARL SPENCER. It
had been preceded by a privately printed tract, entitled " Book Rarities." "The privilege of an easy access to the collection of Earl
Spencer enables me to promise the reader a more abundant account of
the treasures contained in it than will be found in the present volume.
Indeed, the Book Rarities ' of this magnificent library, especially in
works printed abroad, are reserved for a distinct publication." Behold
here, gentle reader, the dawn of the BIBLIOTHECA SPENCERIANA.
6
286 PUBLICATIONS. [Typographical
the third volume, containing a wider range of information, and embellished with yet more striking
fac-similes. Mr. Murray having succeeded Mr.
Miller, on his retirement from business, and having
removed his Penates from Fleet- street to Albemarlestreet, became the purchaser of this third volume on
the same terms as his predecessor had purchased the
last. I believe that I am justified in saying that he
did not repent his bargain ; although it was evident
that the general bibliomaniacal thirst was somewhat
abating * . Within three years afterwards, on my
return from the Continent, the fourth and last vo-
* Before the publication of this third volume, the work mentioned
at the close of the last note, had made its appearance before a most encouraging public. Such a work, in four ponderous and splendidly executed imperial octavo volumes, was no trifling parentheses between the
second and third volumes of these Typographical Antiquities. And yet
--so swiftly and hotly was the bibliomaniocal blood at this time rushing
through my veins—that I more than intimated the publication of my
Bibliographical Decameron before the appearance of the fourth volume !
Of this third volume, the leading features of its contents are thus delineated in the Preface :-"The volume now put forth will be found,
from its variety and richness, to possess a more general interest than
either of those which have preceded it. There is scarcely a department
in the whole range of early English literature, but what may be said to be
illustrated in the following pages. The Romances of the Coplands, the
Dramatic Pieces of the Rastells and others, the Poetry of Godfray,
Wyer, &c.; the Philology of Berthelet, the Law publications of Redman, and the valuable body of Theology published by Grafton and
Whitchurch, may render the present volume a valuable acquisition to
the curious : especially as, in each of these departments, much additional
matter has been introduced, and many corrections have been made.
The Embellishments, also, it is hoped, will be found to keep pace with
its intrinsic worth ; but of those which face pages 40 and 462, I may
confidently bespeak the warmest approbation of the skilful. Their accuracy and felicity of execution are alike admirable."
Antiquities. ]
PUBLICATIONS. 287
"
lume was published, on my own account, by the
house of Longman and Co. Alas ! this was the setting sun of the concern * . Whether nine years was
too long a period for keeping alive the public curiosity, or that fashion in books be as variable and
short-lived as in dress, certain it is, that this fourth
volume fell almost still-born from the press.
came out, however, with no lack of original splendour, and the copies on large paper towered as high,
and luxuriated as proudly, as their predecessors †.
It
Perhaps, on a calm and impartial retrospection,
the fault was my own. I might have watched and
counteracted the shiftings and turnings of public
taste. The experiment, which was innocently made
by me, upon its patience, seemed to be trifling with
the better feelings of well-disposed purchasers.
Of these " embellishments," one (traced by my own pencil) is a fac
simile of the frontispiece of Treveris's reprint of W. de Worde's edition
of the Polychronicon ; the other, of Henry VIII. and his Privy Council
in full assemblage, was executed by the late Ebenezer Byfield, and is
scarcely equalled for its united brilliancy and fidelity. It is taken from
the wood-cut at the end of Hall's Chronicle of 1548, printed by Grafton.
Surely, HANS HOLBEIN must have been the designer, and the group is
a collection of portraits?
* I lack present courage to attempt even the casting-up of the
ledger-page, but the impression on my mind strongly is, that the publication just squared its own expenses.
+ The remaining stock in hand of the large papers were sold to a
large house in the Row for somewhere about 17. 18. each. They had
hardly been sold, when my old friend, Mr. Snare, of Reading, the
bookseller, expressed a readiness to give 37. 13s. 6d. for one copy.
Will Fortune never cease to play her slippery tricks with one who has, at
least not abjectly, never yet courted her smiles, or dreaded her frowns?
She should more justly and honestly estimate an independent spirit.
288 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.
There might seem to be no end to the undertaking.
Meanwhile, death would be busy with his dart, and
representatives or executors might be indisposed to
complete the fabric of which the deceased had laid
the foundation. These are obvious and weighty
points, and are only to be answered by the confession,
that if they cannot be repelled, they may be softened :
that the Sysiphus-like toil of rolling a stone up a
hill only to recoil upon the roller, is evidently the
work of a man in the last extremity of mental imbecility that " the labourer is worthy of his hire ; "
and that, if profit and patronage be withdrawn, it is
a little too absurd to expect self-immolation in the
pursuit of it. I feel quite persuaded that an institution similar only to the " Royal Society of Literature" can successfully complete such a work as that
of the recent edition of THE TYPOGRAPHICAL ANTIQUITIES of GREAT BRITAIN. By whatever means
completed, it will be a repertory of valuable information.
I now revert to the second edition of the BIBLIOMANIA, which made its appearance in the spring of
1811. But the reader will not fail to observe, that,
about this time, the preceding work had been started,
and a third work (the Bibliotheca Spenceriana) was,
in fact, in contemplation. So that, just now, I seemed
to be imbued with the very spirit or essence of Bibliography. I cast this second edition of the Bibliomania in a new mould, calling it a BIBLIOGRAPHICAL
ROMANCE, in six parts ; and designated the Parts
Bibliomania.] PUBLICATIONS.
289
thus : 1. The Evening Walk. 2. The Cabinet.
3. The Auction Room. 4. The Library. 5. The
Drawing Room. 6. The Alcove * . The whole romance is conducted by certain Dramatis Personæ,
who are called Lysander, Philemon, and Lisardo, as
the male ; and Belinda and Almansa as the female
characters. Numerous other characters are incidentally noticed-of whom hereafter. I flew to the
execution or completion of this work, as to a refuge
for distress of mind on the loss of my younger son; to
which, indeed, a sufficiently pointed allusion is made
in the Preface t. It may be called in all respects
* There were also three INDEXES: Chronological, Bibliographical, and
General. Nineteen or twenty copies were printed upon large paper, at
107. 10s. per copy-the price of those of this PRESENT WORK. The large
paper copies of the Bibliomania have attained the price of thirty-five
guineas, and are yet I believe hovering about twenty-five. Let me hope
that they will have as lucrative companions in the " PRESENT." There
were also some few dozen copies of the small paper struck off with the
word " Bibliomania" in the title-page printed in red ink. These are
now classed among the Libri Rarissimi.
† In the following paragraph : " It remains only to add, that the
present work was undertaken to relieve in a great measure the anguish
of mind which arose from severe domestic affliction : and if the voice of
those whom we tenderly loved, whether parent or CHILD, could be heard
beyond the grave, I trust it would convey the sound of approbation for
thus having filled up a portion of that time, which every hour brings
nearer to those from whom we are separated." The immediately following and concluding passage contains an extract from Vogt. (Cat.
Libror. Rarior. ed. 1793, præf. p. ix. ) which may not altogether be deemed infelicitous. 66 Quis non AMABILEM eam laudabit INSANIAM,
quæ universæ rei literariæ non obfuit sed profuit ; historiæ literariæ doctrinam insigniter locupletavit ; ingentemque exercitum voluminum,
quibus aliàs aut in remotiora Bibliothecarum publicarum scrinia commigrandum erat, aut plane pereundum, a carceribus et interitu vindicavit,
exoptatissimæque luci et eruditorum usui multiplici feliciter restituit ?"
The preface is dated " Kensington, March 25, 1811."
U
290 PUBLICATIONS. [ Bibliomania.
The
an original work. It was carefully elaborated ; and
the notes, which are exceedingly full, may be fairly
said to abound with pleasing and curious information. From my earliest appearance as an author, I
loved " an honest pennyworth, " and thus resolved to
throw the greater portion of intelligence into a small
space. Yet the price of the volume ( 17.7s. ) alarmed
me on the day of publication ; as, comparatively with
the present work, on the score of paper, printing,
and embellishment, it is infinitely inferior in merit.
My application was as incessant as severe.
cool summer evenings of 1810 were in part devoted
to a reconsideration and correction of the labours of
the day. My little study, or boudoir, was rather
crammed than well stored with implements of work.
There was scarcely a reference but what I could
verify. Mr. Heber, at that time in the high and palmy
state of his celebrity, would be my frequent guest* ,
and his breakfasts were given in exchange for my
dinners. At one of these breakfasts I read to him the
character of ATTICUS †, intended for himself. I told
* And more than once, twice, or thrice, would I return with him, of
moonlight nights, to London ; and he go half back again with me to
Kensington, discussing many curious points or characters which a
fresh proof sheet might involve. I remember in particular the great
satisfaction expressed by him on my bringing forward Strype's splendid
eulogy upon Cranmer (Bibliomania, p. 328-9) . " I did not think
(said he) old Strype was up to such eloquence."
† That character is as follows. -It may now be read with a deeper interest than heretofore.
" LIS. I am quite impatient to see ATTICUS in this glorious group, of whom fame makes such loud report.
" Yonder see he comes, Lisardo ! ' Like arrow from the hunter's
Bibliomania.] PUBLICATIONS. 291
him, if he would have the courage to hear, I should
not lack the courage to read. " Go on," was his
bow' he darts into the hottest of the fight, and beats down all opposition. In vain Boscardo advances with his heavy artillery, sending
forth occasionally a forty-eight pounder ; in vain he shifts his mode of
attack-now with dagger, and now with broadsword, now in plated, and
now in quilted armour. Nought avails him. In every shape and at
every onset he is discomfited. Such a champion as Atticus has perhaps
never before appeared within the arena of book gladiators :
' Blest with talents, wealth, and taste,'
and gifted with no common powers of general scholarship, he can easily
master a knotty passage in Eschylus or Aristotle ; and quote Juvenal
and Horace as readily as the junior lads at Eton quote their As in
præsenti.' Moreover, he can enter, with equal ardour, into a minute
discussion about the romantic literature of the middle ages, and the dry
though useful philology of the German school during the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries. In the pursuit after rare, curious, and valuable
books, nothing daunts or depresses him. With a mental and bodily
constitution such as few possess, and with a perpetual succession of
new objects rising up before him, he seems hardly ever conscious of the
vicissitudes of the seasons, and equally indifferent to petty changes in
politics. The cutting blasts of Siberia, or the fainting heat of a Maltese
sirocco, would not make him halt or divert his course in the pursuit of
a favourite volume, whether in the Greek, Latin, Spanish, or Italian
language. But as all human efforts, however powerful, if carried on
without intermission, must have a period of cessation ; and as the most
active body cannot be at Thebes and at Athens' at the same moment ;
so it follows that Atticus cannot be at every auction, and carry away
every prize. His rivals narrowly watch, and his enemies closely waylay him ; and his victories are rarely bloodless in consequence. If,
like Darwin's whale, which swallows millions at a gulp,' Atticus
should at one auction purchase from two to seven hundred volumes, he
must retire, like the ' boa- constrictor,' for digestion : and accordingly
he does, for a short season , withdraw himself from the busy hum' of
sale rooms, to collate, methodize, and class his newly acquired treasures
-to repair what is defective, and to beautify what is deformed : thus
rendering them companions meet' for their brethren in the rural shades of H Hall ; where, in gay succession, stands many a row
heavily laden with rich and rare productions. In this rural retreat or
academic bower, Atticus spends a due portion of the autumnal season
6
U 2
292 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.
reply, " and fear nothing." I did so, unhesitatingly ;
and as I read with as much emphasis as might be,
of the year ; now that the busy scenes of book auctions in the metropolis have changed their character-and dreary silence, and stagnant
dirt, have succeeded to noise and flying particles of learned dust.
66 Here, in his ancestral abode, Atticus can happily exchange the microscopic investigation of books for the charms and manly exercises of
a rural life ; eclipsing in this particular the celebrity of Cæsar Antoninus,
who had not universality of talent sufficient to unite the love of hawking and hunting with the passion for book collecting. * The sky is no
sooner dappled o'er with the first morning sunbeams, than up starts
our distinguished bibliomaniac either to shoot or to hunt ; either to
realize all the fine things which Pope has written about ' lifting the
tube, and levelling the eye,' or to join the jolly troup while they chant
the hunting song of his poetical friend. †
66 Meanwhile, his house is not wanting in needful garniture to render
* This anecdote is given on the authority of Gesner's Pandects, fol.29 .
Αλλοι μὲν ἱππων (says the grave Antoninus) , άλλοι δε οςνέων, ἄλλοι θηρίων ἐρωσιν :
ἐμοί δέ Βιβλίων κτήσεως ἐκ παιδαιρίου δεινος εντετηκε πόθος .
† Waken, lords and ladies gay,
On the mountain dawns the day ;
All the jolly chase is here,
With hawk and horse and hunting spear :
Hounds are in their couples yelling,
Hawks are whistling, horns are knelling ;
Merrily, merrily, mingle they,
"Waken, lords and ladies gay."
Waken, lords and ladies gay,
The mist hath left the mountains gray ;
Springlets in the dawn are steaming,
Diamonds on the lake are gleaming,
And foresters have busy been,
To track the buck in thickest green :
Now we come to chant our lay,
"Waken, lords and ladies gay.'
""
WALTER SCOTT.
The remaining stanzas will be found in the Edinb. Annual Register,
vol. i. p. 11 , p. 28.
Bibliomania.] PUBLICATIONS.
293
his cheeks were occasionally mantled with a blush
-his frame a little agitated-and a " bravo ! " at its
a country residence most congenial. His cellars below vie with his
library above. Besides the brown October,' ' drawn from his dark
retreat of thirty years,' and the potent comforts of every species of
' barley broth,' there are the ruddier and more sparkling juices of the
grape, ' fresh of colour and of look lovely, smiling to the eyes of many,'
as Master Laneham hath it in his celebrated letter. Whearin part of
the entertainment unto the Queen Majesty at Killingworth Castle in
Warwickshire, &c. 1575, is signified, edit. 1784, p. 14. I shall leave
you to finish the picture, which such a sketch may suggest, by referring
you to your favourite Thomson.
" LIs. Your account of so extraordinary a bibliomaniac is quite
'amusing: but I suspect you exaggerate a little ?
" Nay, Lisardo, I speak nothing but the truth. In book reputation,
Atticus unites all the activity of De Witt and Lomenie with the retentiveness of Magliabechi and the learning of Le Long ; and yet he has
his peccant part.
" Lis. Speak, I am anxious to know.
He
"Yes, Lisardo ; although what Lechius hath said of the library attached to the senate-house of Leipsic be justly applicable to his own
extraordinary collection, † yet Atticus doth sometimes sadly err.
has now and then an ungovernable passion to possess more copies of a
book than there were ever parties to a deed or stamina to a plant. And
therefore I cannot call him a duplicate or triplicate collector. His best
friends scold-his most respectable rivals censure-and a whole ' mob
of gentlemen' who ' collect with ease, ' threaten vengeance against him
for this despotic spirit which he evinces ; and which I fear nothing can
stay or modify, but an act of parliament that no gentleman shall purchase more than two copies of a work ; one for his town, the other for
his country residence.
"PHIL. But does he atone for this sad error by being liberal in the
loan of his volumes ?
"Most completely so, Philemon. This is the parsmetior of every
+ Singularis eius ac propensi, in iuvandam eruditionem studii insigne
imprimis monumentum exstat, Bibliotheca instructissima, sacrarium
bonæ menti dicatum, in quo omne, quod transmitti ad posteritatem
meretur, copiose reconditum est. De Orig. et Increment. Typog. Lipsiens. Lips. An. Typog. sec. iii. sign 3.
294 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.
conclusion, told me that I had hit off my man successfully. There were numerous characters introduced into the work, under feigned names. Ofthese,
the major part are now at rest in their graves. The
veteran Bindley was designated as LEONTES * . Mr.
book-collector, and it is indeed the better part with Atticus. The
learned and curious, whether rich or poor, have always free access to
his library --:-
' His volumes, open as his heart,
Delight, amusement, science, art,
To every ear and eye impart.'
Marmion, Introduction.
His books therefore are not a stagnant reservoir of unprofitable water, as
are those of Pontenallos : but like a thousand rills which run down from
the lake on Snowden's summit, after a plentiful fall of rain, they serve
to fertilize and adorn every thing to which they extend. In consequence
he sees himself reflected in a thousand mirrors, and has a right to be
vain of the numerous dedications to him, and of the richly ornamented
robes in which he is attired by his grateful friends.”—P. 171 , &c.
* In reply to this delineation of his character, that venerable and respectable "Commissioner of Stamps " wrote to me in the following
playful strain :
"June 5th, 1811.
" LEONTES, duly sensible of the kindness of the author of the Bibliomania, in the very obliging mention he has been pleased to make of
him in the new and highly interesting edition of that work ; after a
contest between the fear of vanity in appropriating so pleasing a character as is there given of him ; and the imputation of inattention and
want of respect to the friendly though too partial intentions of the
writer ; trusts that his thanks may be thus indirectly conveyed, without
subjecting him to the charge of presumption ; a charge, however, which
he would more willingly incur than that of being thought deficient in a
due regard and proper sense of grateful acknowledgment for so unexpected a mark of Mr. Dibdin's favourable opinion of him ; an opinion,
which Leontes will be happy to improve by a more frequent intercourse
and more substantial services than he has yet had an opportunity of
affording ; and which he requests Mr. Dibdin to command, whenever
and in whatever manner they may be thought most likely to be of use.
Insanire doces certâ ratione modoque.'
6
Bibliomania. ] PUBLICATIONS. 295
Douce as PROSPERO, Mr. Rennie as ARCHIMEDES,
Mr. Baron Bolland as HORTENSIUS, Mr. G. Chalmers as AURELIUS, Dr. Gosset as LEPIDUS, Mr.
Haslewood as BERNARDO * . Malone was MARCELLUS. Orlando was meant for MICHAEL WOODHULL.
* On presenting my departed friend BERNARDO with a copy of the
first edition ofthe Bibliomania, in which so severe a sentence is passed
by me, on a certain volume of poetry mentioned therein, and also noticed
in more than one page of this present work—and on sundry allusions
in that same first edition to his collection of Chatterton's pieces, —I
received from him the following letter in reply. The Arabic numerals
at the beginning of certain lines relate to the same number of the page
in the first edition of the work.
" Dear Sir,
I hold like you, the deed of former times,
p. 10 Dabbling in verse, ' midst idling folly's crimes ;
Nor with Pindaric ode ( though thro' each age
Some Colley Cibber, creeping, spoils a page)
Chaunt thanks, or sing of Bibliomania's praise,
And join the general voice your name to raise.
Yet why forsake the muse, whose friendly sway
Aids your distress ? Return, and homage pay ;
For when old Hearne and Heber roughly rule,
p. 60 And both unite to ' push you from your stool ;'
She marks with scorn the half-inglorious feat,
Bids the ' boy bard' devise new magic cheat,
p. 65 And rivet you for ever to your seat.
"To acknowledge the receipt of your very amusing work, which there
is little doubt will not be confined to the black letter circle, and suggest
if you grant aid to the forthcoming Bibliographer† in the first number;
I could wish to have it about Tuesday or Wednesday. A wish to walk
into the world, sanctioned by a host of friends, is the reason for again
suggesting this by
"Yours very truly,
"J. HASLEWOOD. "
+ This was the British Bibliographer, of which the professed editor
was Sir S. Egerton Brydges, but the real staff of its support was held by
my deceased friend. The first number was published in June, 1810.
296 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.
Sir Walter Scott-at that time blazing into extraordinary reputation, and the author of two poems, " The
Lay ofthe Last Minstrel" and "Marmion," which
can perish only with our language—was designated
underthe character of SIR TRISTREM * . In MENALCAS
* He was thus delineated : " Hence SIR TRISTREM, imbosomed in his
forest retreat,
down the sleepy linn
That hems his little garden in,
I contributed towards it an account of a volume of some rare pieces of
poetry found in the Selden collection in the Bodleian library. I afterwards contributed a portion of a Catalogue Raisonné of Hearne's
Pieces. This latter was never completed. My materials are at any
gentleman's beck who will promise its completion.
On the publication of the second edition of the Bibliomania, I presented my friend with a choice copy of it, accompanied by a note, of
which the original remains, together with Mr. Haslewood's copy itself,
in the possession of my amiable and excellent friend G. H. Freeling, Esq.
I subjoin the answer of the Donee. The observing reader will notice
in it a smack" of that racy phraseology which, in after times, was so
peculiarly the writer's own.
66
" MY VERY GOOD FRIEND,
"June 5th, 1811 .
"Many apologies are due to you for my neglect to acknowledge your
distinguished favour in the Bibliomania, to which I certainly paid more
immediate respect by cutting every leaf within an hour after it came to
hand, to duly examine its legitimacy by external embellishments ; and
certainly pronounced, with all the authority of an ancient nurse, the babe
was well worthy of the father. Of the internal matter I must evade
giving an opinion at present. First, my name obtains more consequence than merit entitles it to, through your pages ; and, second, if you will
compile a valuable volume most absolutely crammed with abundance of
matter, you must have mercy on such a reader as myself, and give pa-.
tience until he gets out of the hands of three printers' devils visiting him
in daily succession, before he can duly scan your excellent materials,
and not expect that, under the slippery word ROMANCE, you are to entirely delude the time of
"Yours, very truly,
" J. HASLEWOOD.
Bibliomania. ] PUBLICATIONS.
297
and ULPIAN were identified some of the leading booktraits of myexcellent friends, the Rev. Henry Drury
and Edward Vernon Utterson, Esq., " good hearted
men and true" whose affections wane not with
waning fortunes. But I desist from further mention
of living names, as it is possible I may be walking
"per ignes
Suppositos cineri doloso,"
And yet, why not conclude these sketches with the
introduction of the author himself under the character of ROSICRUSIUS * ? Has its resemblance now
entirely faded away ?
is constantly increasing his stores of tales of genii, fairies, fays, ghosts,
hobgoblins, magicians, highwaymen, and desperadoes-and equally acceptable to him is a copy of Castalio's elegant version of Homer, or of
St. Dunstan's book, de Occulta Philosophia ; concerning which latter
Elias Ashmole is vehement in commendation. ( Theatr. Chem. sign. A 4.
rev. ). From all these, after melting them down in his own incomparable
poetical crucible, which hath charms as potent as the witch's cauldron
in Macbeth, he gives the world many a wondrous sweet song. Who
that has read those exquisite poems, of the fame of which all Britain
' rings from side to side, ' shall deny to such ancient legends a power to
to charm and instruct ? "-P. 179.
* It is for the knowing reader to compare the original, now, with this
representation of Him. TIME has doubtless cooled much of that ardour
which once might have led to the " breaking of doublets, cracking
elbows, and overflowing the room with a murmur," as described by
Tom Coryiate ; but, as long as he does not make the same incisions
upon the heart as upon the countenance-and as far as a laudable
enthusiasm yet impels that heart to beat-I am as keenly sensible
as ever of the charms of Caxtons, De Wordes, Hearnes, Guercinos,
and Albert Durers, &c. But for the character of Rosicrusius as it appeared twenty-five years ago
"Lis.-A truce to this moralising strain. Pass we on to a short gentleman, busily engaged yonder in looking at a number of volumes,
and occasionally conversing with two or three gentlemen, from five to
ten inches taller than himself. What is his name?
298 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.
But there were two characters, designated as
MUSTAPHA and QUISQUILIUS, to which a somewhat
" ROSICRUSIUS is his name ; and an ardent and indefatigable bookforager he is. Although just now busily engaged in antiquarian researches relating to British Typography, he fancies himself, nevertheless,
deeply interested in the discovery of every ancient book printed abroad.
Examine his little collection of books, and you will find that, as Pope
expresses it in his Dunciad,
'There Caxton sleeps, with Wynkyn at his side,
One clasp'd in wood, and one in strong cow-hide.'
(
and yet a beautiful volume, ' printed at Basil or Heidelberg, makes him
spinne ; and at seeing the word Frankfort or Venice, though but on the
title of a booke, he is readie to break doublet, cracke elbowes, and overflowe the room with his murmure.' (Coryate's Crudities, ed. 1776,
vol. i . sign. 1. 5. ) Bibliography is his darling delight, una voluptas
et meditatio assidua' (Le Long's Bibl. Sacra, ed. 1788, p. xx. ) ; and in
defence of the same, he would quote you a score of old-fashioned
authors, from Gesner to Harles, whose very names would excite scepticism about their existence. He is the author of various works, chiefly
bibliographical, upon which the voice of the public (if we except a little
wicked quizzing at his black-letter propensities in a celebrated North
Briton Review) has been generally favourable t. Although the oldmaidenish particularity of Tom Hearne's genius be not much calculated
to please a bibliomaniac of lively parts, yet Rosicrusius seems absolutely enamoured of that ancient wight, and to be in possession of the
cream of all his pieces, if we may judge from what he has already published, and promises to publish, concerning the same. He once had
the temerity to dabble in poetry ; but he never could raise his head
above the mists which infest the swampy ground at the foot of Parnassus. Still he loves the divine art' enthusiastically, and affects, forsooth, to have a taste in matters of engraving and painting ! Converse
with him about Guercino and Albert Durer, Berghem and Woollett,
and tell him that you wish to have his opinion about the erection of a
large library, and he will give tongue' to you from rise to set of sun.
Wishing him prosperity in his projected works, and all good fellows to
be his friends, proceed we in our descriptive survey.” —169, 170.
6
+ The " little wicked quizzing " here alluded to, related to the strictures which appeared in the Edinburgh Review upon my edition of More's Utopia.
Bibliomania.] PUBLICATIONS.
299
of
melancholy tale may be said to belong. And yet I
have ever doubted that a secret knowledge of the
latter, before the day of publication, hastened the
demise of Him for whom it was intended. Assuredly, that individual must have been composed
very tender or combustible materials, which could
have broken down, or caught fire and have been
consumed, from such a harmless strain of raillery
as that which marks the pages in question * ! I cannot believe it. As to Mustapha, he returned the
fire in right earnest, and shotted his guns to their
very mouth t. He survived the contest scarcely
three years. But peace to his Manes !
It is with feelings of a mixed, but not ungenial
description, that, in dwelling upon the immediate
results of the publication under consideration, I call
to mind the various flattering TESTIMONIES which I
received from the pens of eminent men, respecting its
*
By Quisquilius, a Mr. GEO. BAKER, a wholesale dealer in lace, in
St. Paul's Churchyard, was intended to be represented ; a worthy,
good sort of man in his way, but singularly thin-skinned and sensitive
-even to irateness-in his beloved pursuit after engravings and priced
catalogues, and crotchety copies of second-rate productions. His collection of Woolletts was, I believe, unrivalled ; but he was also eminently rich in Sharpes, Halls, and Browns. And who has not heard
of this TRIO?
I am free to confess, that it was not, perhaps, in the very best
taste to have revived this topic, as I have done, in the third volume of
the Bibliographical Decameron, pp. 9, 10. And yet, who shall read
the concluding paragraph, and view the sun (in the wood- cut) setting
upon Gardiner's tomb, and deny to its author at least the merit of
Christian sympathy ? I had "" no vengeance" to wreak ; and if I had
possessed it, it
"warred not with THE DEAD. "
300 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.
among
intrinsic worth, or its means of affording entertainment and instruction. I now regret that I did not
preserve the entire correspondence upon this subject ; for surely, what is more soothing in after-life
than the remembrance of such testimonies, coupled
with the conviction that nothing has been since done
to forfeit all claim to their continuance ? These are
the treasures which best adorn the cabinet
of a studious man. Pictures, books, busts, gems,
coins, engravings, may enrich the elongated corridor, or irradiate the well-proportioned diningroom. NARCOTTUS may enjoy all these to his heart's
content ; but it shall be the solace of ROSICRUSIUS,
to his dying hour, that, in the scrinia of his limited
reading-room, he possesses the " testimonies" of
such heads and hearts as those with which the
reader is about to be made acquainted. The imputation of vanity may be attached to their exhibition.
Be it so. I am proud of such vanity.
I will begin with the effusion of a very old friend,
attired in a poetical garb, to which the reader is not
altogether a stranger. It is that of the Rev. John
Horseman, rector of Heydon, near Royston, and
dated August 29, 1811 .
*
" D*** ,
" How many years have past,
Since at St. John's and Corpus last,
At Baliol and at Queen's we met,
A learned, philosophic set ?
Or, beauty smiling, danced with glee,
To tweedle dum and tweedle dee ?
Bibliomania.] PUBLICATIONS.
301
" Eccentric once, I'm now a staid one ;
Married, and Rector hight of Heydon :
Of Little Chishill also rector.
Double preferment ! I might hector.
No pluralist however ratedMy livings are consolidated.
"What changes both in men and things
Each quick revolving morning brings ?
Still I remain, and wish to be,
Addicted to philosophy.
Yet never cease to trust in God,
Though men and things seem often odd.
" I, BIBLIOMANICAL,
Fancy my stock of books too small ;
My desperate case I state with sorrow,
I cannot beg, nor steal, nor borrow ;
But Emma more than once has said,
I've books enough to turn my head.
Book-larning hereabouts is rarish :
I'm thought a schollard in my parish.
For in the village where I dwell,
Not one can read, and few can spell.
* *
6
*
If books you'll lend me, then your card
Direct in this way, By George Ward,
Catherine Wheel, Bishopsgate Street ; '
His cart is sure, though not so fleet :
And in a box, or in a sack,
Whate'er you lend, I'll send safe back.
And if at any time you'll come,
With Madam, to our humble home,
Mywife and I will try our best
To entertain so rare a guest.
But you must lay your wisdom by,
Or you will be "too much for I."
302 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.
Though I shall get up scraps of larning,
To suit a gemman so discarning ;
And talk as big as I am able,
When I've an author at my table *." "
A common college friend and contemporary, of
whose talents and reputation the preceding pages
have made no slight mention-I mean the present
Dean of St. Paul's and Bishop of Llandaff—was then
pleased to acknowledge the receipt of a copy sent to
him by way of the revival of an old acquaintanceship.
"DEAR SIR,
" Oriel College, 20th June, 1811 .
" My best thanks are due for the kind manner in which
you have called our former intercourse to remembrance,
and for the valuable present which has been conveyed to
me by the hands of your friend Mr. Heber. The subject
is a curious one, and I have already read enough of your
volume to promise myself much entertainment from it in a
season of greater leisure. Your notes are always interesting wherever I have examined them, and I was particularly
struck with your account of poor old A. Wood, whose zeal
and services certainly entitled him to a better fate. How
I wish you, or some one like you, could be prevailed on to
continue his HISTORY OF THE UNIVERSITY+. If some
* See two pleasing specimens from the same pen at pp. 99, 100.
+ It is not a little curious, that some eighteen years after this letter
was written, I issued " Proposals ” for publishing such a History of the
University as that to which the Bishop, in the above letter, calls my
attention, and about which the future pages of this work will disclose
somewhat. Meanwhile, it is but justice to the kind and honourable
feelings of the Bishop to annex a portion of his answer to my letter respecting the intended History of the University. It is dated Lansanfraed, Aug. 26, 1829. "My dear Sir-It will be a great misapprehension
Bibliomania. ] PUBLICATIONS.
303
one does not soon set about collecting for it, we shall know
less of the state of things in the beginning of the eighteenth
century than during many centuries before it.
" I remain, dear sir,
“ Your faithful and obliged servant,
"E. COPLESTON."
In the order of time, perhaps I ought to have previously noticed the following short note, written by
the late Colonel Johnes, the owner of Hafod, on receiving a copy of the first edition of the Bibliomania.
“ MY DEAR SIR,
"Wimpole-street, June 19, 1809.
" I beg you will accept of my best thanks for your kind
remembrance in sending me Bibliomania, and for the great
pleasure it has afforded me. It came to me late on Saturday night, and I could not resist breaking in on the
Sabbath to read it. You have treated us Maniacs very
J
of my motives if you should unfortunately think me deficient either in
due attachment to Oxford or in respect and regard for yourself, when I
say that I cannot appear in the character of PATRON to your projected
work, although I shall be happy to add my name to the list of 57. 58.
subscribers. In doing this, I go as far as I can with prudence, having
endless demands upon me in this poor diocese, and not being able to
meet them all to the extent I could wish. I wish you a continuance of
health, strength, and spirits to carry you through your arduous undertaking, and am, my dear sir, very truly yours, E. Llandaff."
should add, that a " PATRON" was a subscriber to the amount of 100%. on
certain conditions specified in the " Proposals." And I may also, as in
justice bound, remark, that my friend Dr. Bliss's edition of Anthony à
Wood's Athena Oxonienses is a most satisfactory record of the personal
history oflearned men up to the death of its original author. What I
have said of this work at the conclusion of the advertisement of the third
volume of the Typographical Antiquities, may be most conscientiously
repeated at this day. Will Dr. Bliss ever receive encouragement to continue that work to the close of the eighteenth century ? NEVER.
304 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.
tenderly indeed ; but if you can believe a collector, I HAVE
DONE. We set out this day s'ennight on our way northabout home, which I hope to reinhabit * in October, and
shall be very happy to have the pleasure of seeing you
there.
“ I am, my dear sir,
"Yours very truly,
1.Whines
As a brother bibliomanical writer, my courtesy or
chivalry necessarily induced me to send a copy of the
work to the distinguished individual ( Dr. Ferriar)
whose performance had been in a great measure the
cause of my own. His reply was as follows :—
" SIR,
" Manchester, May 30th, 1811 .
" I beg you to accept my grateful acknowledgments for
the present of your interesting work. It would be mere
affectation to say that I have not derived much information
from it, as far as I have had leisure to proceed ; indeed
your knowledge of bibliography has excited my surprise.
You must also allow me to thank you for your kind notice
of my slight poem, which was intended to touch a respectable foible with as much delicacy as possible.
“ I am, sir,
" Your faithful and obedient servant,
* The word " reinhabit" alludes to the destruction of the previous
building by fire.
Bibliomania. ] PUBLICATIONS. 305
The following, from the veteran and brother autobiographer, SIR S. EGERTON BRYDGES, is characteristic in very many respects of the temper and
frame of mind of its author. It is quite a con amore
production,
" MY DEAR SIR,
"January 16, 1812.
"Whatever discourages the passion for literature, is not
only a sin against taste, but, in my opinion, against morals.
There is no pleasure so pure in itself, nor so extensive in
its virtuous influence. Whenever I am withdrawn from it,
it is with regret and compunction. For my part, my passions are too much of tinder to find any thing but disquiet
and perturbation in the world ; and I fly to BOOKS as to
company, among which every delightful affection—love,
charity, content, and admiration-is cherished.
"The discovery of an old book always seems to me like
the revival of some forgotten being from the grave; and I take
it to be among the strongest traits of intellectual exertion,
to feel an interest in the past that predominates over the
present.
"Can wealth be more nobly employed than in collecting
food for the MIND ? And can erudition be more usefully
directed than in exciting and directing that employment?
" To me, life would be a paradise did my fate permit me
to pass my time at ease in the luxury of London literature,
unrestrained in my passion for seeing and collecting books ;
but I have been tossed and buffeted about upon the waves
of the world from the age of twenty-three.
" There is nothing which I hate like a cold, calculating,
dissecting talent, which is sometimes called philosophic.
We are not mere creatures of reason, we are intended also
to be creatures of sensation. It is only an union of heart
and head that come to right conclusions. Without the
light offancy, what are all the other faculties of the mind ?
X
306 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.
Your books are no dead letters -no mere dry transcripts ;
but while they furnish beautiful ornaments, set the senses
all in motion ; exhibit a happy talent of re-assembling and
new-combining your wide-sought and infinite materials.
To lead the dance of ideas, to race over such an immeasurable field of literature, can only be given to one ofthe
most elastic and vigorous powers.
"And, there is no doubt, you will have your reward.
You have it already in extended and honourable acquaintance in the doors and libraries that are opened to you ; in
esteem, respect, and admiration. Even I, humble as have
been my services to literature, have experienced some
small portion of these effects of late years.. Among the
friends I most prize, the consequence has acquired me
some I should not otherwise have had ; and I assure you, I
shall return yours of that number ; yet were it not querulous,
(an epithet which has been applied to me) , I could show
that the measure I have had altogether is somewhat of the
hardest."
Nor less gratifying in all its bearings, is the ensuing letter from the distinguished author of the
"Curiosities ofLiterature" - written in that amenity
of style, and with that occasional sparkling point,
which characterise the prompt and pleasant effusions
of his pen.
" MY DEAR SIR,
"Will you excuse an intrusion and an impertinence ?
My letter and my commendation ; but as I have not yet
recovered from the delightful delirium into which your
' Bibliomania' has completely thrown me, will you blame
me for having eaten of the insane root ?'
6
"Your book, to my taste, is one of the most extraordinary gratifications I have enjoyed for many years. You
have glued me down to two hundred pages at a sitting, and
Bibliomania.] PUBLICATIONS.
307
I can repeat the pleasure without losing it. It has exceeded even my hopes, which were not moderate, after
your former small tract. Your dialogue is always pleasant,
and is something better than a mere frame to hold your
canvass your plan is perfectly original, and has been wonderfully contrived to give cohesion and unity to such curious,
yet heterogeneous matter. You have done more, and of a
higher nature. You have infused your feelings into the
breast of your reader, who is in the slightest degree infected ; and while with the most exquisite inebriation he revels
among your Book- Bacche, you contrive to sober him by a
touch of the Thyrsus-which I take to be in this case a priced
catalogue.
" You will make me return with ardour to a favourite
bibliographical scheme, at which I have long been labouring : amidst the darkness and difficulties which occur in
such subterraneous pursuits, you have thrown a beam of
light in the mine.
"Believe me, with great esteem,
"My dear sir,
King's Road, Bedford-row,
May 27th, 1811.
"Yours truly,
" I. D'ISRAELI."
And here, let the effusions of a late common friend
of Mr. D'Israeli and myself tell their tale, in displaying their author's peculiar habits of thinking and
feeling. Who that reads these pages will not be glad
to peruse a letter or two from the pen of FRANCIS
DOUCE, the " Prospero" of the Bibliomania ?
"British Museum, June 19th, 1811 .
" MY DEAR SIR,
" You have put an additional ten per cent. on my gratitude for your friendship and kindness in all respects. I
wish all other taxes were as light and pleasant. You have
x 2
308 PUBLICATIONS [Bibliomania. .
given us another Moria Encomium, seasoned with a salt
which that work has not-with the united flavour of gaiety
and good humour. Yet I fear that you, like many other
doctors, will only make the disease worse. I have more to
tell you about the portrait of Pynson, that I trust will gratify you. I think you were kind enough to accede to my
wish, that you would take a literally family repast here
some day? I am vexatiously occupied this week ; but of
the ensuing one, you will greatly oblige me by choosing a
day for the above purpose.
" Ever yours, with great regard,
" F. DOUCE."
" Again : the description of reviewers, at p. 18, is admirable. They are the very bane of learning-the perverters of knowledge. The Catalogue raisonné of catalogues
is a most valuable article, and supplies a chasm in all the
bibliographical works ; but it will most certainly multiply
the number of Maniacs.
*
"There is nothing calculated to offend the most fastidiouss
critic, and I had almost said cursed be he who wags hi
tongue against it.' It will afford me inexhaustible amusement in the country. Whether it will perfect the cure of
my disease ( I mean that of the brain, not of the bronchia) ,
I know not. I say perfect ; for it had been almost cured
by that grand ministerial antidote, the income tax. Your
remedy, like many other people's, will, I fear, prove to
many ofthe patients rather inflammatory than sanative.
"Adieu, my good friend, may you always prosper,
QUOD " F. DOUCE."
"Your book has much amused me the last week, and
transported me to scenes of imaginary pleasure, which is all
I expect in this world, where there is very little in reality.
Bibliomania. ] PUBLICATIONS.
309
I fear you will think me too sparing of commendation in
the enclosed paper *, but you courted my censure ; and as
for my praise, take it in the wholesale ; and I think you
will receive it from the world-except from a few invidious
spirits ofthe Zoilus tribe.
"Go on in all your enterprises and prosper ;
"So wishes your affectionate friend,
" F. DOUCE."
My friend having retreated into the country,
wrote to me on his " concentration " (as he used to
call it, for he was a long time settling) in the following manner-characteristic, in all respects, of his
very singular modes of thinking and habits of life.
I should add, that the first part, referring to the
late Mr. Kerrich, related to my going to Cambridge
to collect materials for the second volume of the
Typographical Antiquities, " and for the portrait
of Dr. Askew in particular.
66
66
" MY DEAR FRIEND,
Hackbridge, 29th July, 1811 .
"You have herewith a certificate of your good behaviour
to pass you to KERRICH, who is a friendly and worthy man,
and likely to render you all the service you may need on
the subject of the portrait. He is himself very capable of
making a drawing of it, but as I know he does not now
like these jobs, from the state of his eyesight, I have not
ventured to ask him. Should he, however, in some happy
moment make you such an offer, do not scruple to accept
of it without hesitation, for he is accuracy itself.
" I am truly rejoiced to hear of the favourable reception
* Which contained two pages of Corrigenda et Addenda,
310 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.
of the Bibliomania ; which, in all respects, it most amply
deserves. It is a most happy combination of good-humour,
agreeable amusement, and solid information. There is an
omission that I hope will be very soon supplied in a new
edition. It is this-that the Auction Maniacs are very properly shut up, or rather out, during the very warm weather.
It would be impossible that in the dog-days, at least in such
as the present, Leigh's rooms could be approached with
any degree of safety. The rabies ( biblio- canina) would rage
to such an extent, that the poor madmen would not only
be snarling and barking, but absolutely biting each other,
and whomsoever they met, whilst the chagrin at their disappointments continued. It were well that at all times
Mr. Leigh had a tub of salt water wherein the bidders
should be dipped on their departure.
"For myself, though my bibliomania is pretty well cured,
thanks to Doctors Pitt, Perceval, and Co., I cannot say that
I am at present much better in other respects than when I
had the pleasure of seeing you. I begin to despair of ever
recovering the unimpaired use of my voice, which, if it be
better one day, is bad again on the least accession of cold
(rheum) , or after any exertion in talking. I am, moreover,
so excessively relaxed, that I cannot stir out when the sun
shines, nor can I at present keep myself cool indoors. I
was going to write at home-but I recollected that I have
no home. My cottage is but two stories high, and the upper
rooms are so heated by the solar rays in the day-time, that
even during the night I swelter with heat. I cry out with
the psalmist, O that I had wings like a dove !' and then
I would fly to the sea-coast-especially if I could meet you
there, and get a few of such pleasant walks as I had to
Dulwich College, opposite to which, at the old white wooden
house, my friend D'ISRAELI is now dwelling, and gleaning
the library for a new volume of ' Curiosities.'
6
" I am here a sad, solitary prisoner, almost without any
society. There is not, so far as I know, a book worth
Bibliomania.] PUBLICATIONS. 311
10s. 6d. in the whole parish-whose inhabitants are the most
illiterate of all others. I sent a very civil, humble, and modest
request to a very opulent man, whose grounds are near me,
that I might be indulged in the privilege of walking in a
shady walk during his absence. To this I had no answer,
and I sometime afterwards learned the reason, viz. that he
could not write. I took the liberty of observing to my informant that he might at least have used his tongue, though
he could not his pen. My neighbours, with the exception
of two friendly quaker bleachers of great opulence, are
generelly Saturday-to- Monday-men-gig fellows, that consume half their time of recreation on the road, and the rest
in soaking through the Sunday. There is, notwithstanding
all this misery, no moving from this spot for a considerable
time. I am spell-bound, and therefore I know not how to
get my Pynson to you. There is no getting to London
and back again on the same day, and I have at present no
habitation or home to contain me for a week—which I must,
however, spend in London before September ; and then I
will do what I can for you. It is quite impossible that
anybody can get at anything in my absence, as the rooms
are all locked against the besiegers and their scaling ladders.
In the mean time, I will answer your queries to the best of
my power.
6
" 1. Is it Pynson's edition of the Ship of Fools, 1509,
on vellum, in the Bibl. Imperiale ?" What I saw was, to
the best of my recollection, a quarto, and the edition by
W. de Worde, 1517, translated into prose by Watson * —
the same as my copy lent you in the last parcel. I should
be very positive about this, if you had not embarrassed me
by speaking of this imperial copy in Bibliomania, p . 90, as
* Mr. Douce was under a mistake ; as the copy upon vellum in the
Royal Library of France was of the date of 1509. Seethe Tour, vol. ii .
p. 103, second edition . His own copy, of 1517, is fully described in
the Typog. Antiq. , vol. ii . p. 216.
312 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.
printed by Pynson, 1509 ( i . e. the first folio). I am very
apt to confound Wynkyn de Worde and Pynson together
when trusting to memory ; but to be certain of the matter,
I must look at my Parisian notes, if I chance to have made
one ofthe said copy.
"2. My copy of Reynard the Fox, by Pynson, is very
imperfect. It was Herbert who supposed it the only specimen extant. But it is not unlikely that a keen hound
like yourself will unkennel such another. This you shall
see as soon as I can get at it.
" I have one vellum printed by Pynson.
" Did I shew you the beautiful ' Orcharde ofSyon ? ' ( I
think by Wynkyn, not Pynson) . I should like to go with
you to the Sion Dames, at Walworth, with this book in
our hands, and compare their crowns of thorns with the portrait of the abbess in the book. I have not many Pynsons, but they are all marked in my Herbert, which
will also want again.
you
" 3. I have two or three Julian Notarys. One, a fine
copy of the Golden Legend, afterwards made perfect in the
life of Thomas à Becket, that had, as usual, been cut out ;
also a Liber Festivalis.'
" It is well there are no other queries at present-as I
see that I have merely space left to say God bless you
heartily, and prosper you in all your undertakings.
"Most sincerely yours,
B.once
" P. S. ELLIS promised to come down here. I wish you
would come with him-giving a day's notice, that I may
not be absent. If either of you be a gig-man, it may be
very easily and pleasantly accomplished, being one and a
half hour's drive ; and remember that Tuesdays and Fridays
are always fish-days—not Elizabethan, with nothing besides ;
Ms
D.
Turner,
del.
W.H.Worthington
,SC.
FRANCIS DOUCE , ESQ . F. S. A.
Born 1762. Died1834.
London , Published 1925, by John Major, 71 , Great Russell St. Bloomsbury.
NOAT
BLIOTHEQUE
DE VILLE
LA BE
QUE
DE
LA
LYON TILLE
1832
Bibliomania.] PUBLICATIONS. 313
but in augmentation, not diminution. The Carshalton port
is very good. I could not get my own down, because when
I sent to the Permit Office they said, ' the gentleman's
butler (his footman won't do ! ) must come and swear the
duty is paid.' This is liberty with a vengeance ! I expect
we shall be obliged, by and by, to keep a librarian to swear
the duty is paid on our 1470's, before we can use them at
our country houses."
But few of these gratulatory epistles afforded me
a more lively pleasure than that from my friend the
Rev. H. I. Todd-who seems to have put all the
well-known warmth of his feelings into the following
" Impromptu. "
66 ᎠᎬᎪᎡ Ꭰ
"Grosvenor-square, Thursday Morning.
"I came to town yesterday afternoon, and brought up
with me (what herewith I return with sincere thanks) ,
"The pleasante, pithye, and delectable Romance of the renowmed knight of the Rosie Crosse ;" (Do you know him ?)
I say renowmed, which is the true reading ; not renowned, as
you applied the word to that mirror of literary knighthood,
R. Heber, in your note to me last week. I intended reproving you in your own house for not using gentle Master
Spenser's (and others) ' renowmed !' I am glad I did not ;
for time has softened my indignation. I made about halfa-dozen remarks on the romance, which I intended should
have accompanied this letter ; but I find I have left them
in my library. You shall have them, (if it be only to laugh
at me) next week, as I am to call on Beloe some morning early, and will knock at your door in my way.
As to
Mr. Douce's notes, they have been read by me in the true
spirit of sub-rosa ; so, good friend Rosi-crusius, fare thee
well.
"Yours ever faithfully,
" H. I. TODD."
314 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.
99
There was one communication which I received,
particularly agreeable to me, from the late Mr. HAMPER of Birmingham ; in which the writer noticed
the palpable errors that had crept into, and defaced,
the reprint of one of the most curious, original,
and amusing volumes of other times. I allude to
" Master Laneham's account of the Entertainment
given to Queen Elizabeth at Kenilworth Castle ;
volume, which has evidently supplied the late illustrious author of the Novel of Kenilworth, with many appropriate materials, and with many a characteristic
description. This curious book was first printed in
1575, and is introduced, in rather a lengthy note, at
p. 349 of the Bibliomania. Hear, gentle reader,
how the reprint of it, in 1784, is spoken of by one
very competent to pass judgment upon the same.
" Birmingham, September 17, 1811 .
6
a
" And now for a communication of great importance.
The ' perturbed spirit' of Dr. Farmer has been effectually
laid by your good humoured amende in the Gentleman's
Magazine ; but know ye that a certain sprightly figure,'
' clean trust, and gartered above the knee, and flourishing
with his ton sword, " is calling loudly on you for satisfaction ;
and being very cunning in fens,' I shall advise you to
appease the geniman without delay. His name is CAPTAIN
Cox, and he lives in pp. 349-50 of your Bibliomania. The
wrong he complains of, is, your representing him as possessor of only two more' ballads, besides Broom, broom on
hill, &c.; whereas, his friend Laneham rightly tells us that
they were a hundred more.' The fact, my good Sir, is,
that you have copied from the vile reprint of Laneham's
letter (Warwick, 1784) , one of the most incorrect publica6
Bibliomania. ] PUBLICATIONS.
315
tions that ever disgraced the press-where two is stupidly
printed instead of the numerals 100, though the original contains the word hundred at full length. I have recently had an
opportunity of correcting my copy by the first edition, a
( 12mo. of 87 pages) black letter, the title supplied in MS.
by the late Rev. Josh. Greene, M. A., rector of Welford,
county of Gloucester, formerly belonging to Mr. West,
which (that is to say, my corrected reprint) , shall be sent
for your examination, if you wish it ; and really I know not
how otherwise to give you an idea of the numberless variations which the blurred pages exhibit. Your extracts may
be corrected by it ; for instance, the "bye way to the Spitl
howse," happens to be " the hy wey *.”
In making some researches for the history of a neighbouring parish ( Aston juxta Birmingham) , I lately met with the
will of Roger Holden, dated June 4th, 1488, wherein he bequeathes to his curate ( i. e. the vicar of Aston) his ' BEST
BOOKS :' thus- y bequeath tho my curatt y best bookkes thaty
haue.' This information I have introduced, with the following remark, ( à la D—n) . ‘ Imagination readily pictures this
happy priest taking possession of his legacy, and hugging
the dear delightful volumes to his heart with the ardour of
a TRUE BIBLIOMANIAC ; then, hastening to his half-timbered
vicarage, and carefully depositing them in an iron-bound
oak chest, though not till he has looked them all over, and
selected one of the choicest for his amusement after vespers,'
"With every good wish for your health and success,
" I remain, dear sir,
"Your much obliged and obedient servant,
" WILLIAM HAMPER. "
* I presume this to be Robert Copeland's edition of the work in
question, of which a particular account may be seen in the Typographical
Antiquities, vol . iii . p. 122, &c.
316 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.
And, indeed, in reference to the quotation from
Laneham's book, my friend Mr. UTTERSON, at
that time occupied in fitting-up one of the most
beautiful book-boudoirs in London ( to which a reference had been made in the pages of my work) thus
wrote to me upon the occasion.
" June 17, 1811 .
"Many thanks for your acceptable present of the Bibliomania,' which being once entered on, compelled me to
become a borrower of the night for a dark hour or
twain ' to finish it. I can truly say, that I was much amused
and interested by it," &c.
Again : " From the Cabinet, ' ofwhich the stained glass
was furnished full two hundred and fifty years ago, ‘ with
other appropriate embellishments, when the evening sunbeams throw a chequered light throughout the room , ' tis
pleausant' to address thanks to a literary friend whose researches have informed, and whose lucubrations haveamused,
our thoughtful and our idle hours. Such, I maywith truth
assert, has been the effect of your Bibliomania'— of which
I have read as far as the note on ' CAPT. Cox.' Would to
heaven the Mason's stores could appear at our friend's
(Lochie's) in King-street !!! Even with Atticus I would
strive for the possession of some ( at least) of the Captain's
treasures. On such an occasion alone, I should say to him,
in the words of Tibullus, Vos quoque abesse procul jubeo.'
I spoke, a long time since, to the master of Dulwich College, and have procured you a welcome to their library.
" Adieu, yours sincerely,
6
" E. V. U."
My Harrowfriends, Messrs. DRURY, BUTLER, and
EDWARDS, were also prompt in their expressions of
congratulation on the appearance and certain suc-
Bibliomania. ] PUBLICATIONS.
317
cess of the work. The latter, an experienced judge
in such matters, " congratulated me on the growing
ardour of the public, as well as on the credit they
gave to me on displaying the Bibliomania. Ten
guineas for a large paper copy of an octavo volume
was beyond all former history of large paper octavos
at the first publication, and deserved to be recorded ! "
JAMES EDWARDS, Harrow Grove, 21 Nov. 1811 .
Yet one more, and the last. It is from the late WM.
FORD, a bookseller of Manchester, of unabating enthusiasm and diligence in his vocation : a man, whose
life had been chequered by many vicissitudes, and
whose heart I have understood to have been ultimately broken down by their pressure. I spoke of
him in my book as a sense of truth, justice, and obligation told me I ought to speak. Mr. Ford's letter
is as follows.
" Manchester, June 16, 1811 .
" I have to thank you for the handsome manner in which
you speak of me as a bookseller ; although it was my love
of books, not of lucre, which first induced me to become
one, and I was a collector many years before I was one of
the honourable fraternity. However, then I had not the
pleasure of knowing you, or we might have done each other
more mutual kindnesses than it is now in my power, or indeed consistent as making the book-trade my business. ***
The sale of the work I should think must be very great.
Pray give me some particulars, as well as of the characters
you have introduced into it, many of which I am at a loss
to make out.
" I have sold a good number of your Bibliomania' here ;
though, to my sorrow, the disease does not exist in any
great degree. But indeed it may be very readily accounted
318 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.
for, from the prevalence of a more fatal disease, which has
absorbed every other, and rages with a more extended influence than was ever known before ; I mean POVERTY—if
it may be allowable to call it a disease, and which no ranks
are free from. I assure you that I feel the effects of it most
lamentably ; but it is useless pining, therefore I will conclude, but not without assuring you that I am most sincerely your
“ Faithful and obliged humble servant,
" W. FORD. "
Such are a few of the commendatory epistles which
I received shortly after the publication of this original work * . I might easily increase their number ;
* I call it " original " simply as stating a very obvious truth. The
plan is carried on by " Dramatis Persona," of whom the author must
of necessity be one ; and therefore he may as well slip on the guise of
LYSANDER at once. Lorenzo was the late Sir M. M. Sykes, Bart. The
plan is slightly developed in the first three pages of the book. " It was
on a fine autumnal evening, when the sun was setting serenely behind a
thick copse upon a distant hill, and his warm tints were lighting up a
magnificent and widely extended landscape, that, sauntering midst the
fields, I was meditating upon the various methods of honourably filling
up the measure of our existence, when I discovered, towards my left,
a messenger running at full speed towards me. The abruptness of his
appearance, and the velocity of his step, somewhat disconcerted me ;
but on his near approach my apprehensions were dissipated.
"I knew him to be the servant of my old college friend, whom I
choose here to denominate LYSANDER. He came to inform me, in his
blunt and honest manner, that his master had just arrived with PHILEMON, our common friend ; and that, as they were too fatigued with their
journey to come out to me, they begged I would quickly enter the house
and, as usual, make them welcome. This intelligence afforded me the
liveliest satisfaction . In fifteen minutes, after a hearty shaking of
hands, I was seated with them in the parlour ; all of us admiring the
unusual splendour of the evening sky, and, in consequence, partaking
of the common topics of conversation with a greater flow of spirits.
' You are come, my friends,' said I, (in the course of conversation) ' to
make some stay with me : —indeed, I cannot suffer you to depart with-
Bibliomania. ] PUBLICATIONS.
319
but the present is a sufficient portion ofparainetical
extract. A more pleasing result followed, in the
out keeping you at least a week, in order, amongst other things, to view
the beauty of our neighbour LORENZO's grounds, the general splendour
of his house, and the magnificence of his Library.' ' In regard to
grounds and furniture,' replied Lysander, ' there is very little, in the
most beautiful and costly, which can long excite my attention ; but the
library'- ' Here,' exclaimed Philemon, here you have him in the
toils.' ' I will frankly confess ( rejoined Lysander) that I am an arrant
BIBLIOMANIAC-that I love books dearly-that the very sight, touch,
and more, the perusal '—' Hold, my friend, ( again exclaimed Philemon)
you have renounced your profession : you talk of reading books, —do
Bibliomaniacs ever read books ?' ' Nay (quoth Lysander) , you shall
not banter me thus with impunity. We will, if it please you, ' said he
(turning round to me) , ' make our abode with you for a few days ; and
after seeing the library of your neighbour, I will throw down the gauntlet to Philemon, challenging him to answer certain questions which you
may put to us, respecting the number, rarity, beauty, or utility of those
works which relate to the history and contiguities of our own country.
We shall then see who is able to return the readier answer.'
" Forgive (rejoined Philemon) my bantering strain. I revoke my
speech. You know that, with yourself, I heartily love books : more
from their contents than their appearance.' Lysander returned a gracious smirk, and the hectic of irritability on his cheek was dissipated in
an instant. The approach of night made us think of settling our plans.
My friends begged their horses might be turned into the field, and
that, while they stayed with me, the most simple fare and the plainest
accommodation might be their lot. They know how little able I was to
treat them as they were wont to be treated ; and therefore, ' taking the
will for the deed,' they resolved to be as happy as an humble roof could
make them."-Page 1—3.
But Lysander had something else to do than to indulge in mere
literary chit chat for the amusement of his guests. Dry and dusty authors were to be taken down and rummaged ; and I think that I speak
soberly when I say, that nearer three hundred than two hundred of such
authors were pretty carefully examined. Including the various works
of these authors consulted and referred to, not fewer than four hundred
must be considered as the number. In regard to MORHOF in particular
(him upon whom Johnson seems to lay a most emphatic stress) I might
at that time be said to have had his Polyhistor Literarius at my fingers'
end. Hard, dogged, fagging was the basis of all the vivacity of the
Bibliomania.
320 PUBLICATIONS. [ Bibliomania.
consolidation of old, and in the formation of new,
acquaintances and friendships. Among the former,
the names of GUTCH and ELLIS * are to be mentioned
66
* Mr. Gutch, who has of late years worked his way to such honourable distinction as the editor of one of the most flourishing provincial
newspapers in the kingdom, was then a bookseller of eminence at Bristol.
I knew him from early life ; and knew and respected his excellent father,
the late venerable Registrar of the University of Oxford. The son thus
wrote to me, on the third of June, 1811, scarcely a fortnight after the
publication of the work : May I now request, that if the large paper
copy have not left Longmans, you will desire them to send it off by the
first mail, without waiting for any parcel. I have this day made them
a remittance ( 107. 10s. ) to pay for it ; and I trust the precious book will
soon be in my possession. I have been devouring the contents of one
of the small paper copies, of which I have ordered ten to be immediately
forwarded-for I am sure it will take rapidly among my BIBLIOMANIACS
here." May I ask, where be those " Bibliomaniacs" NOW? Let me
add, that one of these identical “ ten ” copies, bound in yellow calf, with
gilt leaves, by Lewis, was afterwards sold for 67. 6s., the highest price
which the small paper ever reached. Mr. Lowndes is wrong in saying
it has brought 81. 88. Mr. John Davies, a bookseller at Shrewsbury,
now marks an uncut copy at 57. 15s. 6d. The original price was twentyseven shillings ! From Mr. (now Sir Henry) Ellis, the principal librarian
of the British Museum, I received many friendly suggestions, and much
valuable information , which I believe to be duly recorded . What days
were those, when the writer could commence thus ! —" Dear D., I have
taken a long sheet of paper, in hopes to obtain your pardon for such a
long neglect. My delay has been principally occasioned by my fruitless
searches after the memorandum of the French book blotted and blurred
by a princess. Where it is deposited, I cannot tell . H. E." Alas ! between ourselves, good Sir Henry, these " long sheet of paper " days are
irrevocably past. "Double, double toil and trouble," becomes the lot of
that man, placed, as my friend now is, at the head of a large and everlastingly visited Establishment !
But shall we never see a continuation of his delightful “ Letters, illustrative of English History ?" Have we for ever ceased to walk into
the boudoirs, banqueting rooms, and bedchambers of our illustrious
ancestors ?-to shake hands with the Henries, Elizabeths, Jameses, and
Charleses of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries ? Retrim your
lamp, most renowned protomagister, and let us dance another cabriolet
with Hatton, and smoke another pipe with Raleigh. Let us untie
Bibliomania.] PUBLICATIONS. 321
with no trifling gratification : among the latter,
those of the Right Hon. Thomas Grenville, Sir
Mark Masterman Sykes, Sir Walter Scott, Sir Francis Freeling, and the Rev. Henry Drury*. To these,
another state-packet from Cecil, and see how Clarendon dips his pencil
into the imperishable colours of his pallet. THIS, this is HISTORY—divested of sonorous periods and distorted views. Retrim the lamp.
Where, but in the British Museum, is there an inexhaustible supply of
proper sperm oil ? And then, my friend threads his pearls so prettily
and so dexterously ! Does he want more coaxing? He will find it in
the unanimous approbation of every intelligent reader, and of every
right headed and right hearted patriot. So, to the lamp again !
* It will be difficult-it will be impossible-for me ever to forget my
first, and indeed many subsequent, sensations of delight, on entering the
library, and examining the treasures of the distinguished individual
FIRST above named. And, since that time, how have these treasures,
both in number and intrinsic value, been increased ! What can I add to
the observations in the Introduction to the Classics and in the Bibliophobia respecting this most extraordinary library ? And how beautifully
placed and appropriately furnished ! This perhaps were common praise,
except that the OWNER of these treasures has a thorough acquaintance
with their contents. " Intus et in cute" are they understood and appreciated by him ; and I can conceive no more perfect catalogue of a
collection of books than that which, in a ponderous green- coated volume,
lies upon the table of its right honourable possessor, accompanied by the
notes, written on slips of paper, which are inserted in each book, Long
may that possessor YET retain his treasures, and long be in the occupa→
tion of his Adversaria !
I have said enough upon all occasions, in and out of print, to express
my entire and affectionate respect for Sir M. M. SYKES, when “ he was
among us ;" and now that he is "taken hence," I reiterate those expressions of unmitigated attachment to his memory. He has left behind such a memorial of his ardour in the collection of BOOKS and PRINTS, considered conjointly, as has not been equalled . The amount of both sales
was 36,4367.; add to these, his coins produced 1,4627. , and his pictures
and bronzes 5,9017. Never did the owner of such treasures more
thoroughly enjoy them ! Never was one more keen in their acquisition ! Sweynheym and Pannartz, and Hollar, were the gods of his
idolatry ! As to the THIRD individual above named, he wrote to me
thus, immediately on the receipt of a copy of the Bibliomania of which
Y
322 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.
too, let it be allowed me to add that of my late honoured and illustrious Patron, EARL SPENCER. The
I had begged his acceptance. "A thousand thanks, my dear sir, for
your lively satire, from which I expect no small amusement in my
northern journey, which I commence on Thursday.
Wishing you
every success in your laborious and useful undertakings, I remain,
dear sir, your obliged humble servant, WALTER SCOTT. Half- Moonstreet, Tuesday." This illustrious character will be more particularly
introduced to the reader in a subsequent page. Meanwhile, where is
his BIOGRAPHY by his Son-in-law ? Surely that intelligent writer is
duly impressed with the necessity of catching the attentions and fixing
the interests of the great mass of the public, before the nap of curiosity
is allowed to be rubbed off, or the subject to become weaned from memory by a succession of other objects ! "Oh, spring to life ! —auspicious
Book, be born ! "
· With what gratifying sensations do I dwell upon the name of Sir
FRANCIS FREELING, Bart. , the fourth individual above mentioned, when
I compare his brief note sent to me, at this time, with his innumerable
LETTERS since transmitted—letters, in which the good breeding of a
gentleman and the kind-heartedness of a friend have been equally and
uniformly evinced . Sir Francis, just after the publication, writes thus:
" I have been revelling for the last two days in the delights of your
new edition of the Bibliomania. ” And few readers could enjoy that
species of revelling better ; for its author was just now beginning to
lay the foundation of that curious and select library of which the following pages will afford delectable evidence. The fifth name, and one
of not the least calibre, above notified, is that of my excellent friend
the Rev. HENRY DRURY, of Harrow ; whose attachment has been unvarying, and whose friendship has ever shone with a polar-star-like
fidelity. I was indebted to the late Mr. Edwards, of Harrow, for my
introduction to this admirable scholar ; and the half pint of true classical
Falernian quaffed in his oblong cabinet was the commencement of our
66' taking sweet counsel together. " Shortly after this introduction,
having felt his pulse and exactly ascertained its bibliomaniacal pulsation,
I sent him a beautiful copy of the Sermons of St. Chrysostom, printed
in the Latin language by Laver, at Rome (see Bibl. Spencer, vol. i.
p. 192) , and was tempting him to do " a bold stroke of business " in
the way of collecting Hearne's pieces. Moreover, I apprised him of
my intention of introducing him in the auction -room of the Bibliomania,
under the character of MENALCAS. His reply, dated Nov. 16, 1810, is
Bibliomania. ] PUBLICATIONS. 323
visit paid to Althorp, as described in the Bibliographical Decameron, vol. iii . p. 388, took place
shortly after the publication of the Bibliomania.
My printer, Mr. Mc. Creery, partook of the general
joy diffused around ; and before the conclusion of his
labours, indulged in many whimsical effusions and
original conceits. Above all was he gratified at the
struggle to obtain a copy of it upon large paper.
think, upon the whole, I netted about 2007.; but
this was considered by me the least part of the
remuneration ; as in truth I had deserved it on the
score of " delving and digging" only * .
I
as follows :-" The glossiness of the Chrysostom is beyond all praise.
I am much obliged to you for the offer about the Hearnes : but though
I sometimes take a leap headlong, it is only when the shore is in view,
and Hearne is an interminable abyss. Besides, I am so very much
bitten, that nothing but the old genuine Hearnes would now suit me.
As for the apotheosis which you intend to give me in your auctionroom, I fear I shall appear very ridiculous ; not having sufficient confidence in me to think myself worthy to tie the latchet of Dr. Gosset's
shoe. Thanks, however, for the immortality you will confer. Whenever you, or you and Utterson, will come and see me, I will put on my
best coat and waistcoat, and order the cradle spit to the fire. Ever
truly yours, H. D." About a twelvemonth afterwards, on my having
presented the school library at Harrow with a copy of this mischievous
volume, my excellent friend writes thus :-" Nothing have I to plead in
defence of my not having answered your letter, but the idleness of a
busy man. I have read Bibliomania through most religiously, and
hope I have risen from the perusal ' a wiser and a better man.' There
are, however, still some wards of the key which I do not understand.
What pleases me much, Heber, though an enemy to large paper, has
described to me the 1. p. Ames, which I shall so soon possess ; and
B- -d's luck in being admitted to a copy.-H. D."
* See the conclusion of the note at page 272. John Mc. Creery was
the printer. A few typographical MACREERIANA may not be unY 2
324 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.
Its reception with the Literati (if the evidence of
Reviews may be depended upon) was most enacceptable, if it be only as a votive offering at the shrine of their author,
who was carried off in the cholera which raged at Paris about three years
ago. After some twenty sheets had been worked off, he estimated the
whole work at about 47. per sheet. The corrections had then reached
171. The next " missive " ran thus : a 66 fast day" have just preceded
its issuing.
" Fast and pray,"
Come in the way
Of Bibliomania :
No blame is mine
In the faulty line ;
The deed is thine.
H. swears he'll work
Like any Turk.
And in reply to the observations of a young and impatient author, he
writes thus : " I have done all in my power for the furtherance of your
work ; and if it were to prevent heaven and earth from coming together,
I cannot do more than I am doing. For mercy's sake, have a day's, or
at most an hour's patience, and all will be right. Your anxiety and
distrust only serve to throw us into confusion, without at all furthering
your work." His whole charge for a volume printed almost entirely in
nonpareil notes, and containing nearly 800 pages, was 2977., including
the large paper copies ; and he agreed to receive, and did receive, a
promissory note for the amount, at twelve months after the date of
bringing in his bill.
Poor Mc. Creery! Who now shall " turn his glass ? " See the Bibliog.
Decameron, vol. ii . p. 410. He commenced a splendid career by the
printing of the “ Life and Pontificate of Pope Leo X.” ( after the Biography of Lorenzo de Medici ) , in four quarto volumes, under the
auspices of its celebrated author, Mr. Roscoe, of Liverpool. He was a
pet amongst his provincial brethren ; and his movement to London was
probably a questionable step .
I have mentioned his anxiety about the large paper copies of the
Bibliomania. This was not confined to himself. Mr. Fry, a bookseller
ofBristol-author of Bibliographical Memoranda, 1816, 4to. , and much
attached to bibliomaniacal mysteries—not having been apprised of these
intended copies, wrote thus to me, in November, 1810, chiefly in consequence of being applied to by Mr. Elliston, the celebrated comedian, who
Bibliomania. ] PUBLICATIONS.
325
couraging. The Bibliomania was reviewed in the
Critical by ; in the British Critic, kindly and **
had fixed a son as a bookseller at Bristol. " Mr. Elliston informs meby
a letter received this day, that on application to Messrs. Longman for the
purpose of securing two large paper copies of the new edition of your
Bibliomania, he learnt that they were all engaged. Now this is most
unfortunate. When you informed me last August of its being about to
be reprinted, you mentioned nothing of the 1. p. copies ; and till I saw
the notice in the Gent. Mag. I was completely in the dark. Do, if it be
possible, save two for me ; if that be impracticable, one. " And Mr.
Elliston himself wrote as follows. " I will only add, that should you be
induced to depart from your original intention ( were it only to print
two copies more) , I hope you will consider the request of, dear sir,
yours, &c. "
I forget the issue ; but I perfectly remember that Rhadamanthus
himself could not have been more inexorable than I was, in not printing
two more copies to the nineteen resolved to be executed.
Mr. Lowndes observes that a copy of this work upon large paper has
reached the sum of 521. 108. I question this ; but I know it to have
attained 407. The portrait of myself in canonicals, prefixed to these
copies only, is of such rarity, that I doubt whether a stray impression of it
ever found its way into the author's portfolio . I never possessed one
but to give away. Let me close this note by an illustrating anecdote.
In the town of Islington there dwelt a worthy wight, WILLIAM TURNER
by name, a resident of Canonbury-square, within the said town. Of all
lovers ( I ought rather to say worshippers) of the Bibliomania, He was
the most ardent, the most constant, the most generous ; sparing nothing
wherewith to decorate her person, or to add to the treasures of her
wardrobe. Listen to his inventory :
“Bibliomania, small paper, in two parts, illustrated with 211 prints.
The same, bound by Lewis, not illustrated." The first copy was sold,
on the demise of its owner, to a Mr. Town, of New York, for sixty
guineas ; but I believe I have seen a similar copy, on large paper, marked
in a bookseller's catalogue at one hundred and twenty guineas. The
same wight thus pursued his illustrating propensities : -
"Decameron, large paper, 400 prints.
Tour, large paper, in six parts, 961 prints.
The same, small paper, 517 prints.
The same, large paper, boards, uncut.
326 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.
cleverly, by the late Mr. Beloe ; and in the Monthly,
smartly, saucily, elaborately, and, upon the whole,
satisfactorily, by a reverend poet and translator of
Juvenal. The general, concentrated effect of these,
and of other Magazines, Reviews, and Notices * ,
Biblioth. Spenceriana and Ædes Althorpianæ, large paper, 389 prints.
Library Companion, large paper, in four parts, 593 prints.
Now, casting-up the whole of these illustrations, we find that they
amount to three thousand and seventy-one in number !
O RARE WILLIAM TURNER !
To talk of seeing " his like again " is mere visionary prattle : —and yet,
in the Decameron he has been " beaten hollow !" Wait, gentle reader.
All things in due course.
* I must, however, be allowed to bring forward, in the first instance,
the correction of an hippopotamus error of which I was guilty at p. 565
of my work, in respect to the author of the " Essay upon Demoniacs."
This correction was conveyed to good old Sylvanus Urban in the following address : -
66 GOOD MR. URBAN, June 17, 1811.
"I hasten to acknowledge a most ' grievous and lamentable' error
which has crept into the recent edition of the Bibliomania : an error
which was detected immediately after the publication of the work, and
the frequent mention of which by my friends, induces me, through the
channel of your Magazine, to give its correction as much notoriety as
possible.
"At page 565 I have made Dr. RICHARD FARMER the author of an
Essay upon Demoniacs : and his perturbed spirit has not ceased to
attack me, in the shape of the night-mare, ever since the publication of
the volume. Be it known, therefore, sir, through the medium of your
Magazine, that HUGH FARMER (concerning whom there is a long
account in the 5th volume of the last edition of the Biog. Britan. ) was
the author of that heterodox, if ' ingenious,' essay. This public confession will, it is hoped, sooth the angry manes of the Doctor in particular, and compose the rising bile of reviewers in general. Moreover,
it is especially due to yourself, Mr. Urban ; for I have referred to your
Magazine, and indirectly censured it for the paucity of information it
contained respecting one of my favourite bibliomaniacal heroes. And
so I bid thee farewell ! Thine, with respect,
" T. F. D."
Bibliomania. ] PUBLICATIONS.
327
was, that I felt the earth firm and solid beneath my
feet the circumambient air was clear, buoyant, and
The account of JOHN RATCLIFFE, at p. 521 of the same work, was
thus enlarged by an unknown correspondent : —
66 MR. URBAN,
Feb. 12.
“ Mr. John Ratcliffe, who is noticed as a collector of scarce books in
page 55, was neither a man of science or learning. He lived in Eastlane, Bermondsey ; was a very corpulent man, and his legs were remarkably thick, probably from an anasarcous complaint. The writer
of this remembers him perfectly well ; he was a very stately man, and ,
when he walked, literally went a snail's pace. He was a Dissenter, and
every Sunday attended the meeting of Dr. Flaxman in the lower road
to Deptford. He generally wore a fine coat, either red or brown, with gold
lace buttons, and a fine silk embroidered waistcoat, of scarlet with gold
lace, and a large and well-powdered wig. With his hat in one hand and a
gold-headed cane in the other, he marched royally along, and not unfrequently followed by a parcel of children, wondering who the stately
man could be. A few years before his death, a fire happened in the
neighbourhood where he lived, and it became necessary to remove part
of his household furniture and books. He was incapable of assisting
himself; but he stood in the street lamenting and déploring the loss of
his Caxtons, when a sailor, who lived within a door or two of him,
attempted to console him : ' Bless you, sir, I have got them perfectly
safe !' While Ratcliffe was expressing his thanks, the sailor produced
two of his fine curled periwigs, which he had saved from the devouring
element, and who had no idea that Ratcliffe could make such a fuss
for a few books.
" G."
Mr. Surtees, the well-known and deeply-lamented author of the
"History of Durham, ” made the following communication to the same
authority :-
66 MR. URBAN, Mainsforth, Jan. 8.
"In the very amusing and instructive Bibliomania, mention is made,
as being in Mr. Heber's possession, of a volume of Eustace's Froissart, which, it is presumed, from the arms, inscribed HENRICUS Dux
RICHMUNDIÆ, has formerly belonged to Henry VII. May not this
rare volume have been rather the property of Henry Duke of Richmond, natural son to Henry VIII.? A reference to the arms will at
once determine the point ; as those of the duke ( viz . France and Eng-
328 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.
bracing ; the sky blue, bright, and exhilarating. My
"midnight watchings, " and nightly perambulations
in all seasons of the year, were forgotten. I had
attained the summit, for which, for seven successive
years I had unremittingly toiled ; and henceforward
gave my fancy an unlimited range, which led to those
productions to be now described in the chronological
order of their appearance. I turned a deaf ear to
all entreaties to reprint my book * , although the
land, a Bordure quartered Ermine and compony Arg. and Az. , a Batune
sinister of the 2d ; an inescutcheon quarterly, Gules and Varry, Or and
Vert, a Lion ramp. Arg.; on a chief Az. a Castle between two Bucks'
heads cabossed Argent) are very different from those of his royal grandfather either as earl or king.
"R. SURTEES."
* Mr. Laing, the late highly- respected and well-instructed bookseller
of Edinburgh, wrote me thus, in the April of 1813. " I wish you
would reprint the Bibliomania. I set a high value on this work, and
regret it is beyond the purchase of money. No library should want
it." A writer in the Gentleman's Magazine thus treats the subject in
a somewhat unceremonious, but on the whole sufficiently gratifying,
manner :-
66 MR. URBAN,
Dec. 2.
" In common with every lover of literature, I am willing to pay
Mr. Dibdin that tribute to which his meritorious exertions in its service
entitle him. The following remarks are dictated by the earnest desire
that those exertions should stand free from any appearance of vanity.
" The unexampled patronage which the present age bestows upon
the revival of ancient reliques has been acknowledged by all who have
been engaged in that pursuit. Of this, editors appear to me to have
taken an unfair advantage ; a number of copies are printed, but just
sufficient for those subscribers who may have been fortunate enough to
have transmitted their names to the publisher. The consequence of
this is, that the reprint frequently becomes almost as difficult to be procured as the original ; and the unlucky wight who shall have omitted
subscribing, must be prepared to pay an advanced price ; and even then
Bibliomania.] PUBLICATIONS.
329
tempting douceur of two hundred guineas was once
held out to me* . Aword, however, ere I enter upon
perhaps be unable to procure a copy. Aware as I am of the expenses
attendant on several undertakings of this nature, were but a small
addition made to the original number, the great prices of many books
might be reduced, and the cause of literature more effectually served.
"Mr. Dibdin mentions the little remuneration the labours of the
bibliographer receive : this, no doubt, is true ; but if Mr. Dibdin had
indulged the public with a new edition of his Bibliomania,' those who
are anxious to possess a copy of that entertaining work, would not be
compelled to pay the present exorbitant price demanded for a copy,
and the author would have received an additional recompense for his
labour.
" If you honour these observations with a place in your Magazine,
that author will, I hope, be able to refute a charge pretty generally
circulated, namely, that the plates of the above-mentioned production
were destroyed, by that means giving to the book a degree of scarcity
it could not otherwise have attained ; if this is the fact, it carries with
it a charge of vanity, which will require all the ingenuity of the learned
author to overcome. [ How so ?]
"We are informed, in your last Number, that there will be no second
edition of the ' Bibliotheca Spenceriana .' May I be permitted to inquire the reason of this ? I cannot understand why there should not,
if the success which it will most probably deserve demands a fresh
impression.
" These observations have arisen from the honest desire of seeing the
labours of bibliography divested of all affectation, and with the earnest
wish that Mr. Dibdin may continue to reap the reward due to his indefatigable diligence.
"AMATOR BIBLIOMANIÆ."
* It is, however, but due to truth to say, that some eight or ten years
ago, there was a setting-up of pages 166-7, by way of an experiment
as to bringing forth a new edition of the work in the same type as that
of the Decameron. But the thing never went beyond this. Some very
few impressions only of these pages were struck off, of which one was
in Mr. Haslewood's copy of the work, sold to G. H. Freeling, Esq. Not
one remains with myself.
But of all my reviewers, few " shewed me up" more gallantly, spiritedly, and kind-heartedly, than OLD SYLVANUS himself; who, when
he chose, could write a brisk and pungent article with admirable dexterity. HE, like the greater number of correspondents just mentioned,
IS GONE. I have essayed to embalm him in the “ Museum.” See post.
330 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.
a wide and new field. It is but due to the memory
ofONE, whose eyes have been but very recently closed
upon all earthly scenes, to make honourable mention
of the constant and valuable aid I received from him,
my near neighbour as well as affectionate friend,
during the whole progress of the work now under
consideration. ROBERT WATSON WADE was that
individual in question. He had seen other and
brighter days ; but in his secretaryship to the Stock
Exchange he found something like a comfortable
subsistence in his latter years, as well as an enlarged
circle of generous friends. His mornings were necessarily devoted to the mysteries of Cocker. His
evenings were as regularly devoted to Petrarch *,
and for a time to the proof sheets of the Bibliomania.
* His knowledge of the Italian language was, I have understood,
minute and critical ; and his attachment to Petrarch ardent and incessant. He was always at work upon the Sonnets ; and yet scarcely
ever satisfied with his translations, which were rhythmical. What he
aimed at was, the strictest literal version . In consequence, the original,
as is the case with Cowper's version of Homer, always appeared in a
cold, drab- coloured, Quaker-dress ; or it was the countenance of Petrarch without blood in his cheek or inspiration in his eye. And what
a Calligraphist was my friend ! How ingenious in perfecting copies, and
howready to render his services on such occasions. He once amused himself, and infinitely obliged me, by making perfect a miserably mutilated
copy of"Recreations for Ingenious Head Pieces, or a Pleasant Grove
for their Wits to walk in," 1667, 12mo. , a curious and mirthful volume,
from which may be seen some interesting extracts in More's Utopia,
vol. ii . 266, 273-6 ; and where I have observed that "perhaps there is
no clean copy of it in existence. " The first of the extracts here referred
to, contains a wood-cut of the morrice dancer, which marvellously
pleased my late friend Mr. Douce. My friend, Mr. Wade, ( who had
been the bosom friend of Italian WALKER, of Dublin, as he was called )
was also singularly happy in his fac- similes of the ornaments, love-knots,
capriccios, &c. of the curious little volume here referred to.
Bibliomania.] PUBLICATIONS.
331
But in the German language my friend was scarcely
less versed than in the Italian ; of which abundant
proof is afforded in the third volume of the Bibliotheca Spenceriana * . For thirty years our connexion was more or less strengthened ; and during
that period ( and it is no short one ) not one angry
expression ever fell from his lips or was recorded by
his pen. Old age (he was turned of eighty when
he died) had latterly enfeebled his carriage and indented his countenance ; but his heart's beat was
yet as affectionate, his intellectual ardour as keen,
and his judgment as unclouded as ever. His playful
fancy, not long after the publication of the Bibliomania, concocted the following jeu d'esprit, which
appeared in the pages of the Gentleman's Magazine,
for December, 1811 .
* See vol . iii. p. 348-377, in the description of a curious German
edition, with wood- cuts, of the HISTORY OF THE HOLY CROss, 1483,
4to. , where not fewer than sixty-three stanzas of the original ( rather
Dutch) text are metrically translated, line for line, and almost word for
word. Another equally surprising specimen of the literal version of
an old German colophon may be seen in the first volume of the work
above referred to, p. 98. Concerning this latter, my friend thus expressed himself in one of his characteristic notes : —
" MY DEAR D** Nov. 20, 1813. .
" I have done all I could with this abominable piece of stuff, but can
make nothing better of it than what you see, which, to say the truth , is
bad enough . Surely you do not mean to publish it ?—for heaven's
sake, if you do, don't mention my name, as I should be sorry to be
handed down to posterity as the writer of such nonsense. As I said
before, from morning till night, I but write, write, and write.
"Ever affectionately yours, R. W. W.
"You have the precious morceau enclosed.”
It was published without his name. My excellent friend fell as ripe
fruit from the tree of life ; passing into eternity, " in sure and certain
hope" of the life which is to come, without a bodily pang or a mental
reproof. " HAIL AND FAREWELL !"
332 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.
To my ryghte worthie Maister the Reuerende MAYSTER DYBDYN his trewe frende WYLLYM
CAXTON sendyth gretynge wysshyng him alle helthe
and prosperite.
FAYRE sonne grande mercy for the mickle paine
By the bestowed tauaunce my name
Whyche by the labour of thy pen shall gaine
Eternall recorde in the Boke of Fame
For folkis yet unborne enfourmd by the
Shall gaine a knowlege of my werkes and me.
Here in this happe region as I sitte
Fro alle my former yerthelye cares unbente
I ofte reuewe in myn entendemente
The daies yspente belowe, and reken it
To me grete laude and hyghe renoume that I
In Englonde fyrste the prynters arte dede trye.
The werkis whyche by me enpryntid wer
Whan I recal vnto my remembraunce
And wel consydre my smal suffisaunce
Moche doth it me astounde my utmoste care
Shuld in these dayes whan menne ben growne so nice
By them be ualewed at soe haute a pryse.
And moche I mervayle that my typis rude
And homelie pourtraictes whyche my bokes adourne
And paper by the mothe and worme ytorne
Swyche lengthe of tyme have theyr assautes withstode
I coulde nat hope soe manye yeres ypast
One parfyte boke of myne til now shulde laste.
But yet I heare (for sothlye here perchaunce
By Goddis grace some of my brethrene com
Thrugh Christis bloude redemyd fro the dome
Due to mannys sin and disobeisaunce)
Bibliomania.] PUBLICATIONS.
333
That in your londe one ATTICUS doth dwelle
Who pryseth moche my werkes as men me tell.
And others some ther ben who moche delyghte
Myne werkis to collect and keepe wyth care
Albeit thei ne fruytefulle ben ne rare
Ne fro tymes blemysshe fre ne yet parfyte
Yet to pourchase them alle theyr thoughtes they bend
Ne reke thei of the coyne whyche they therin dyspende.
Here as wyth WYNKYN, PYNSONne, Machlina
In sote comunyon I trewe plesure taste
Devysynge of oure yerthelye labeurs past
We cal to mynde the dayes of yore and saye
Ful lytell dede we thynke whylest yet on lyve
That these oure werkis shuld so longe survive.
Wherfore to hym and theym we mekely praye
That they accepte oure hartye thankye condygne
For theyr gode wylle to us whych soe doeth shine
And oure remercimentes they take in gre
For sothe to saye to them we ben moche bounden
For alle the faveur wee fro them haue founden.
And moche thi labeur do we take in gre
Whyche hath fro darke forgetfulnesse reskewde
Soe manie of oure auncyente werkis rude
And thus comendyd to posterite
Wherby oure fayre renome shal laste for
Ne blemyshde be ne neuer knowe decaye.
aye
Wyth these, here GUTENBERG and FUST unite
In thankye ryghte herty unto the oure frende
Besechynge me I theym to the commende
Prayen we alle that heven maye the requyte
For this thy trauaile and thy werke of loue
And that we may embrace the here aboue
Whan fro the lower worlde thou shalt remooue.
334 PUBLICATIONS. [Bibliomania.
3.S. Sonne of my loue I praye the thou forgeue
The wordes uncouthe in whyche to the E wryte
For coude E pet in beter style endyte
I wolde nat, to thentente thou mote parceive
And fully knowe and sykerly entende
By this myne auncyente speche thy beray frende,
W. C.
A few, and but a few, more straggling anecdotes
belong to this portion of the " Reminiscences." The
work under consideration produced a most bulky
Corpus Epistolographicum, from which I fear I
have selected too freely for the reader's patience to
endure a further specimen * : and yet I must be
indulged in one more extract. At page 293 of
that work, I made a sort of call upon the late Mr.
Roscoe to favour the public with a Life ofErasmus.
Some three years afterwards, on the establishment
of a correspondence between us, connected with
the Bibl. Spenceriana ( of which hereafter ), Mr.
Roscoe alluded to the circumstance thus :
" I am too well acquainted with your entertaining volume
of the Bibliomania to be ignorant of your recommendation
to me to undertake the Life of Erasmus. That such a work
is much wanted, I admit ; and I think it one of the finest
subjects that could be undertaken : but you do me too much
honour in thinking that I am competent to it. To execute
* Among those specimens previously published, the reader may consult some interesting extracts from the letters of my late friend, Mr.
Daniel Mc. Neille ( of Edmonstown, Ireland), which appear in the
Bibliog. Decameron, vol. iii . 376-388.
Bibliomania. ] PUBLICATIONS. 335
it properly, a knowledge of the German language and of
German literature, would be indispensable. Much, I believe, has been done in Germany in elucidating this important period of their literary history, and I trust it will
not be long before some of our countrymen, fully qualified,
will repair the defects of Knight and Jortin, and give us
such a view of the subject as may gratify reasonable expectation, &c. Believe me, with real attachment and respect,
May 6, 1814.
Dear Sir,
Most faithfully yours,
Roscos
There is one little circumstance connected with
this work, which has ever given me the sincerest
pleasure to think upon. It is, that of its having
been the first public channel of making known the
talents of a most ingenious and worthy family of the
name of BYFIELD, of whose performances (as Engravers on wood) I have been ever since in the
habit of availing myself. The present work yet bears
evidences of them ; but when I tell the reader that
the wood-cut fac- simile of the portrait of John Bale,
at page 327 of the BIBLIOMANIA, is the performance
of an artist of the age of sixteen *, he will scarcely
* It was, I believe, the sister, Mary Byfield, who executed this head ;
and in the second volume of the Typographical Antiquities will be seen
a fac-simile of a large wood- cut portrait of Richard Pynson, King's
printer, temp. Hen. VII . , executed when the artist was only seventeen
years of age. Ebenezer Byfield, who died many years ago, was the
336 PUBLICATIONS . [Bibliomania.
venture to question the propriety of encouraging a
family in which such merit was paramount. Since
that period, the art of wood engraving has wonderfully increased and flourished amongst us ; and
latterly the Penny and Saturday Magazines have
given birth to such specimens as, a few years back,
the most sanguine could scarcely have ventured to
anticipate * .
And now, with permission of the reader, we will
somewhat digress and recreate ourselves ; and yet it
can scarcely be called a digression. In the chronological order of these " Reminiscences," we are
brought to the period of the SALE OF THE ROxBURGHE LIBRARY ; and, with that, to the establishment of the ROXBURGHE CLUB. As there can be
no doubt of the publication just dwelt upon † having
been largely instrumental to the increase of the
prices of this sale-by having fevered the blood and
sharpened the weapons of the respective combatanteldest brother. The only remaining brother, John Byfield, is an artist,
whose gratitude is equal to his ability, and whose ability is strengthened
by his care and integrity. I owe chiefly to him and to his sister all the
wood embellishments in the Bibl. Spenceriana, and Tour; and the greater
part of those in the Decameron, and the whole of those in the present
work, are from the same quarter.
* A curious little history may be said to belong to the stupendous
undertakings here alluded to ; but not being quite sure of my ground,
I do not venture upon its occupation ; only that I learn that the wood cuts
to the work first above named are to be borrowed or hired for the production of a similar work at Paris. What trunk, or rather covered
cart, is large enough to contain them ?
This opinion is undisguisedly avowed in the Decameron, vol. iii . p. 50.
Bibliomania.] PUBLICATIONS. 337
purchasers- it may be as well to give an account
(however " a thrice- told tale ") of that important
event in the BIBLIOMANICAL WORLD-and thus diversify the dry detail of the " Publications " of the
author. And yet, one word only in regard to a
feature in the work just dismissed, which deserves
somewhat to be dwelt upon. It is, that of an interior view of the Library at Hafod, at page 648,
which was etched by the late Thomas Stothard, R.A.
I am not acquainted with any other specimen of the
burin of that incomparable artist. Yet it must be
deemed a failure. It wants solidity and distinctness.
It was etched for 5l. 5s.; and I believe the original
receipt to be now in the possession of G. H. Freeling,
Esq.
Z
338
POSTSCRIPT.
Behold me, gentle reader, at the close of the year 1811 ,
with no mention made of two privately circulated brochures :
the one called " Specimen Bibliothecæ Britannica," printed
in 1808-the other, "Specimen of an English De Bure,"
printed in 1810. Of these performances, the latter is unquestionably in all respects the better. About fifty copies
of each were printed ; of which the united expenses were
about 80%. They were distributed by me gratuitously, but
have averaged nearly 27. per copy at book-sales * . Such
was my zeal in THE CAUSE.
* I am free to confess that I had well nigh forgotten these slight
productions, and it is only at the " eleventh hour,” as it were, of this
chapter that they are introduced. They have brought, however, as
high prices as 31. 3s. each-containing only some fourscore pages. Of
the first, there were eight copies only struck off in a quarto form ; and
of these Mr. Pickering's last catalogue presents us with a very curious
copy. See No. 1062. Acopy of this sort brought 37. 108. at the sale of
Mr. Brockett's library.
Concerning the latter, and by much the preferable work (although
now rendered nearly useless by the Library Companion), I present the
reader with a not incurious letter by the late John Fry, bookseller, of
Bristol :-
" Rev. and dear Sir,
66 My thanks are due unto you for the elegant and excellent
' Specimen of an English De Bure,' which I perused with pleasure ;
it was a pleasure, however, mingled with much regret. Although I
cannot avoid acknowledging that such a work may be very useful, and
is doubtless much wanted, yet, Sir, does not it tend to make Bibliographic attainments too cheap? I myself am young in the science, and
might therefore wish to ascend the rock by an easy path ; but I must
ever think that knowledge too easily procured is sure to be the less permanent in the recollection : at any rate, if such a work must appear, the
nominal value of the books should never be mentioned. The ignorant
and undiscerning bibliopolist who chances to see your work will most
surely make the student smart ere he becomes possessed of a book
which may be registered therein. To strengthen my position, I can
assure you that one bookseller in particular, who has seen the specimen
POSTSCRIPT. 339
Mr. COLERIDGE. See page 257. Mention is here made
ofwhat is considered to be the most brilliant gems of the late
Mr. Coleridge's muse : the Ancient Mariner and Christabel :
and of these I am not sure whether the former be not the
more generally received favourite. The first appearance
(I ought to have said the Editio Princeps) of that wondrous
production came forth in 1798, in a small volume, entitled
"Lyrical Ballads, with afew other Poems." The publishers
were "John and Arthur Arch, Gracechurch-street : " and I
am not sure whether this tiny yet substantial volume be not
among the earliest of their publications. It is said in the
short preface prefixed ( it is presumed from the pen of Mr.
Coleridge) " THE RIME OF THE ANCYENT MARINERE was
professedly written in imitation of the style, as well as of
the spirit, of the elder poets ; but, with a few exceptions, the
author believes that the language adopted in it has been
equally intelligible for these three last centuries." The " Argument " is thus :-" How a ship, having passed the line,
was driven by storms to the cold country towards the South
Pole ; and how, from thence, she made her course to the
tropical latitude of the Great Pacific Ocean ; and of the
&c., has in consequence added to the price of his quarto Froissart
(Johnes's edit. ) several pounds ! whereby a friend of mine has been prevented from purchasing it, from the most enormous price asked.
"Quere. I presume the department of POETRY forms a portion of
your intended publication?
" Is the second volume of your splendid opus magnum' (Typog.
Antiq.) yet committed to the press ?-and when may we expect the
new edition of the Bibliomania?'
" I was sorry to see the last number of the Bibliographer did not
contain a continuation of your very useful Cat. Raisonné of ' honest
Tom Hearne's editions.' (See p. 296, ante. )
" I will now conclude my rambling letter with requesting you to
accept the assurances of my esteem,
"10, Gay-street, Bristol ;
"Sept. 19, 1810."
" And remain your obliged servant,
" JOHN FRY."
z 2
340 POSTSCRIPT.
strange things that befell ; and in what manner the Ancyent
Marinere came back to his own country." It occupies 46
pages ofthe volume.
The poem of CHRISTABEL was largely and fiercely, and
I will add unjustifiably, criticised in the Edinb. Review,
vol. xxvii. p. 58, by, it is said, a poet of no mean calibre,
and with most vivaciously fanciful powers. But there was
nothing in the poem to elicit that style of criticism, if quizzing
be deemed a style. Coleridge complained in a reply to it,
in his Biographia Literaria. The editor of the Review
joined issue ; adding, that He was not the reviewer : and so
the matter dropped. I know enough of the warm Irish
heart of the reviewer to affirm, that, " were the thing to
come over again," he would have reined in his prancing
steed ; divested himself of his spurs ; and used a band of
roses for a whip. Am I wrong in supposing that Coleridge
had a hand in a periodical ( octavo) publication called the
Watchman ? In this publication there were occasional
pieces of poetry, of which he had the credit of being the.
author.
Dr. JENNER. See page 109-202. When this brief account, and most inadequate tribute to the memory, of this
illustrious character was written, it did not occur to me
that I had drawn up a little memorial of him, on his death,
in The Museum of February, 1823. I do not know that
the recollection of that memorial would have done away the
necessity of writing what is said in the pages above referred
to ; but I feel persuaded that the addition of what follows
will not injure the effect of that which has preceded it, or
be considered altogether as superfluous.
" DEATH OF DR. JENNER.-It is not fitting that such a
man as JENNER should sink into the grave, without some
general attestation of his merits and worth. Whatever be
the feeling of the public, there is nothing which can, or
shall, prevent the writer of this brief memorial from an un-
POSTSCRIPT. 341
equivocal declaration of the virtues of the deceased. I hope
his country will show a sense of his claims to immortality,
by employing the chisel of Chantrey, or Westmacott, or
Bailey ; and that we may see the statue of JENNER in St.
Paul's Cathedral, by the side of that of Howard, and other
great benefactors to their country.
"When all the prejudices, clamors, misconceptions, and
absurdities, about the efficacy of VACCINATION shall cease,
then will the pre-eminent and undisputed merits of Jenner
be estimated as they ought to be. With a mind, the freest
possible from quackery and every thing bordering on
selfish views, he devoted the strength of that mind to an
accumulation of FACTS, carefully ascertained, and carefully
registered, from which he drew inferences, with all the confidence of an original and powerful intellect, that might
operate to the benefit of mankind. He always lost sight of
himself—of individual aggrandisement-in the prosecution
of his celebrated studies on vaccination. He matured every
thing-as far as his own experience enabled him-before
he gave it to the public ; and he thought exclusively of
that public good. He did not, as too many clever men
now living ( with a little dash of selfishness and quackery in
the composition of their character, nevertheless, ) have done,
think how soon and how widely his reputation might be
spread abroad ; but he thought, exclusively, how safely and
how permanently that reputation might be secured.
"Hence his very first publication on the Vaccine left
hardly any thing to be added. The system was scarcely
announced when it was perfected. His trials, his experience, his experiments, -all proved the mind and the hand
of a master : and he told the author of this memorial that,
on the night preceding his first trial of inoculating one
human being with the vaccine virus from another, the least
of the miseries he endured was the total privation of sleep.
It was to make or to mar his whole system : but his triumph
was complete. No one ever looked into nature, in all her
342 POSTSCRIPT.
varieties and subtleties of form-in all her changes, gradations, or maturities—with a keener or more original eye.
Naturally, Jenner loved seclusion, and a small circle of
friends. He was singularly cheerful among those to whom
he could freely unbosom himself; and was ' a very boy'
(like Wyndham) at the age of sixty. He was fond of music
—and when some one, in company with the writer of this
article, urged him to be favoured with a sight of the magnificent diamond ring, which the Emperor of Russia's late
mother had given him- Come, come,' replied Jenner, ' let
us take a stroll in the garden, and hear the drowsy hum '
of the beetle.' He did so, and played at the same time one
of his favourite airs on the flute-which he blew with a
singular felicity of embouchure. He was as philosophical an
ornithologist as Buffon. His essay (yet in MS. ) on the
music of the birds is perfectly original ; and his ‘ Dissertation on the Cuckoo' is one of the richest gems in the collection of the Philosophical Transactions.
6
" While you were conversing with him, or staying in
his house, you could not imagine that he was a MAN with
whose fame ' all Europe rang from side to side.' He never
talked of his success of his reputation-of his numerous
and great friends of his correspondence or encomiastic
letters ; but would much rather converse on the fruits of the
earth, or the properties of animals. He had the true test
ofgreatness of character-inasmuch as he was SIMPLE and
NATURAL.
" He died, somewhat suddenly, on the 25th of January,
and in the 74th year of his age ; leaving a son and a
daughter to inherit his name and fortune."
I had omitted to notice Dr. Jenner's passion for poetising;
for so he would designate it. He wrote a number of little
addresses, odes, and ballads ; and if I mistake not there is
ONE COPY in existence of these rare and original effusions,
printed under the superintendence of our late common
friend, the Rev. Thos. Pruen. I remember a very pretty
POSTSCRIPT. 343
poetical address by him to his cigar ; and his ballad of
Hannah Ball may be seen in the pages of the Museum,
vol. i. 255-6.
REPRINT OF THE BIBLIOMANIA, p. 328. It did not occur to me, at this place, to annex the following warmlypenned epistle from an unknown correspondent, upon the
subject of this Reprint. It is rarely that an anonymous
letter produces such satisfaction . The date is Dec. 3, 1832,
and the post-mark is that of Portsmouth.
" REV. SIR,
" When I state that I have passed very many happy
hours in the perusal and study of some of your interesting
writings, I trust you will excuse the liberty I have taken in
addressing you these few lines-which is, to ask one simple
question only-why is not the literary world favoured with
a new edition of your BIBLIOMANIA? From the frequent
references in your writings to that work, I am so beset
with the desire of obtaining or perusing it, that ( to use
an expression of your own) I am unable to rest quietly in
mybed.' When in London, a few months since, I made
enquiry from one end of the metropolis to the other, to endeavour to procure a copy at a moderate price ; but every
bookseller who had one (and they were but few) would not
part with it under 51. 5s. or 57. 15s. 6d., which was considerably beyond the strength of my purse. I believe it is
now several years since this work of yours was first published, and I cannot but think that a new edition would
prove highly acceptable to the literary world, and by no
means a bad speculation. At page 179, vol. iii. of the last
edition ofyour Bibliographical Tour, you say that you are
again haunted by a vision of publishing a third edition
of your Bibliomania ; ' and I am almost wicked enough to
pray that this vision may continue to haunt you-and allow
6
POSTSCRIPT.
344
you no rest by night or day until you have fulfilled its com- mands. I cannot for a moment suppose that you intend
your writings for the wealthy only-and as the number of
readers in all classes has increased of late years to so great
an extent, you would most assuredly be confering an essential service on hundreds of readers by a republication of
the work referred to. If printed uniform with the last edition of your Tour, and sold at the same price, I am perfectly
assured you would have no cause to complain.
" Trusting shortly to see this work announced in the
public literary journals,
" I am, sir, with much respect,
"Your humble servant,
"A BIBLIOPHILE."
Perhaps the only way to solve this momentous question,
or untie this knotty point, will be to call a " counsel of
elders ” of the bibliopolistic fraternity ; and to receive tenders in favour, or admonitions in disfavour, of the proposed
measure. At all events, it is my own property ; and trespassers shall be punished " as the law directs. " " Steel
traps and spring guns " are not wanting in the preservation
ofthe game.
A.
OTHE LA DEDEM VILLE LYOM QUE BLIOTHERDEL
LYON 1892)
00 O
O
O
0
0
O
이
ว
2
O
520
0000
6230 5003
O
C
O
C
O
O
Ο
O
O
O
10
O
FROM
BLEFROMAM.S. OF THE PSALTER, IN THE 11 CENTURY PRESERVED IN THE PUBLIC LIBRARY AT ROTEN
BBON VV
345
CHAPTER VII.
ROXBURGHIANA.
"let it be said that JOHN, DUKE OF ROXBURGHE, hath
deserved well of his country and of the Book- Cause."
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL Decameron, vol . iii . p. 69.
I MAKE no apology for availing myself of my own
property in the way of quotation ; simply because it
may be asserted with strict truth that in no work
does there appear so full and faithful an account of
the Sale, and of the Club, about to be noticed, than
in that to which a reference is above made. Yet I
shall retread, as little as possible, the ground before
trodden ; reserving myself chiefly for such matters
and anecdotes as are connected with those heroes
who fought in the book-fight, or regaled themselves
at the annual banquet. Of the guests at the first
of these " banquets, " more than ONE-THIRD (including very recently the illustrious President) have
paid the DEBT of nature.
And first comes the caterer of the first book- dish,
or the manufacturer of the Catalogue of the Roxburghe Library, the late Mr. GEORGE NICOL : bookseller to His Majesty George III. , and no trivial assistant in the formation of that Royal Library which
346 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
has been lately deposited within the walls of the
British Museum * . Mr. Nicol was a singular cha-
* The transportation of the library of George III. to the British
Museum, by the eldest son of the father who had made the collection,
struck the public with a mixed sensation of regret and admiration :
regret, that a library so extensive and so precious-the result of the
unwearied application of half a century in its formation-should leave
its old and natural quarters, and become merged in a collection already
filled to the brim ; and admiration, that a gift of such stupendous magnitude should be made from a sovereign to his people ! But the matter
resolves itself into a very simple point. Was there, or was there not,
space for the retention of that library within the alterations then projected at Buckingham Palace? Or was that space wanted for a different
object ? " That" seems to me to be "the question." But, under no
aspect, no view or consideration of the matter, should a volume of the
PATERNAL LIBRARY have been moved. Had I been King of England,
half ofmy EMPIRE should have been wrested from me ere I had parted
with a BOOK of my sire. Nor is this exactly a question of taste. Somehow or the other, a moral feeling seems to be mixed with it, of which
I shall not pretend either to determine the nature or to fix the amount.
The absurd reports of the day respecting the number of the volumes, were absolutely laughable. By some they were fixed at 150,000 ;
by others at 90,000. The truth was, and is, the number is about
60,000. A most sumptuous catalogue of the library, in nine folio
volumes, printed at the Shakspeare Press, accompanies the books. This
was executed in imitation of the catalogue of the Royal Library of
France. Surely, this plan might have been improved upon ? A more
inconvenient and uselessly extravagant one could not have been devised ; but it was doubtless REGAL. And yet, if fame be true (how
more frequently is it false?) there are SOME FEW PRECIOUS volumes
remaining, which have not taken flight with their brethren—and these
are the Psalter of 1457, the Hebrew Bible of 1488, the Æsop from
Caxton's press, and the Doctrinale Sacerdotum, from the same press,
upon vellum. As to the room itself where the royal library is now
placed, it is at once splendid and appropriate ; but I desiderate a statue
of the ROYAL COLLECTOR in the centre-and the placing of two ofthose
exquisite Scotch granite pillars at right angles with the sides, both for
the purpose of breaking the continuity of a long straight line, and of
giving the appearance at once of beauty and support on entering the
room. As these pillars are at present placed, they escape the eye till you
Sale.] ROXBURGHIANA. 347
racter, and his singularity is at once a theme of
commendation and regret. In his long and close
alliance with that Monarch, who, whatever were his
failings, has the glorious distinction of having collected the finest and largest library of any monarch
in Europe, he ( Mr. Nicol) might, in the exercise of
his vocation as a bookseller, have amassed what is
called a FORTUNE. Had the " dulcis odor lucri"
been as grateful to his nostrils as it was to sundry
other bibliopolists, he might have done anything
come close to them, and are so near the wall, that they seem unnecessary
as props to the ceiling. Why were not the capitals gilt ? What ! destroy
the identity of the pillar, which is composed of one unbroken block of
granite ? Even so. EFFECT is what you want in these matters. It is
not asked to knock off the capital. The uniquity of the column is untouched : and he who has seen the effect of gold ornament in the libraries
at Mölck and Vienna, need not shrink from its introduction here. The
gallery round this three hundred-feet-in-length room is delightful. I
cannot choose but smile at the manner in which the gift of this library
was noticed in the Museum, a weekly paper, of 1823, as thus-calling
on the reader to admit the verification of the plan about the National
Gallery. Of this notice I may as well confess myself the author. A
part runs thus :-"But what is to be done with the gift ? The sale of
duplicates implies the sale of some portion of collections already bequeathed or purchased. Will a Cracherode copy be allowed to quit its
hallowed precincts ? Should a Burney copy be permitted to leave its
receptacle-a copy, of which the margins may be probably charged with
precious MS. notes ? And, more imperative than either, can a Royal
copy be allowed to go astray, and thus break the charm of such a truly
regal donation? What, therefore, we would propose, with all due respect, is, that the Curators of the Museum should be permitted to select
every work from the Royal Collection of which there is no copy in the
Museum ; and that the residue should be sold by auction, in order to
furnish a fund for a NATIONAL GALLERY OF PICTURES, in the centre of
which a statue of his present Majesty should be placed ; and let the
MEWS be the site of this Gallery."
348 [Roxburghe ROXBURGHIANA.
and everything in the way of business, so as to
have realised a large capital. But his personal attachments led him to serve " two masters," and to
overlook his own individual interests. Although
his may be said to have been a divided allegiance
between the King and the Duke of Roxburghe, yet,
not only did he neglect neither, but won and secured
the attachment of both. He always seemed to me to
love his dusty retreat * better than his boudoir-shop ;
and I am not sure whether the securing of a Caxton
for his royal master, or a MS. volume of Old Ballad
Poetry, or Table Ronde adventure, for his ducal
master, were not more congenial to his feelings,
than even a lusty order for some of the magnificent
works of which he was the publisher +.
With the latter, Mr. Nicol may be well said to
have maintained the most familiar intercourse. The
Duke and his Bookseller " drolled it" very plea-
* Mr. Nicol had a sort of veneration for the DUST which had settled
round about him, and upon his books, in this quiet back-retreat. He
told me, he once caught the maid servant bringing in the whole apparatus for a resolute dusting bout : but enjoined her, on the penance of
'peine fort et dure," not only to retreat, but never to think of entering
the room again in her dusting accoutrements.
66
+ Among these works were the Shakspeare and Milton, in folio,
printed at the Shakspeare press by the late Mr. Bulmer. The latter is
probably the most beautifully executed volume of the British press.
Flinders's Terra Australis was also one of Mr. Nicol's publications ;
and he had more than a common share in the Voyages of Cook and
Hawkesworth. Had he taken all the advantages which his prominent
position might have enabled him to take, he had left a huge harvest of
golden guineas to his family. He was, in this instance, a very marked
exception to his northern fellow-countrymen.
Sale. ]
ROXBURGHIANA.
349
santly together in their purchases of rare and precious volumes : the former evincing throughout a
thorough-bred bibliomanical feeling—a right proper
tact the evidence of one who was ever " keen upon
the scent, " and wretched when off it. Thus, on
one occasion, the Duke writes as follows—in reference to a scarce old Romance, entitled Le Chevalier
Deliberé.
" This seems to be an allegorical Romance. I cannot
find it in the Valliere Catalogue ; but you will see it mentioned in Debure, No. 2993 ; also in Gaignat's Catalogue,
No. 1787, which was sold for 270 livres ; and No. 1788,
which sold for 50 livres. This copy, however, does not
seem to be either of those mentioned by Debure or in
Gaignat. Nevertheless, I should like to have it at a fair
price, provided it can be soon decided whether I am to have
it or not. If I can call on you to-morrow at any early hour
-I do not mean before you have eaten your breakfast, but
before you sit down to dinner-I will settle all business relating to Crevenna's sale. Looking over my memoranda,
I read the following : April 4, 1789, Hist. of Pr. Arthur
and his Knights of the Round Table, Lond. 4to. bl. lett.,
left with Mr. Geo. Nicol to be bound. I have found an
account of Buffon's Birds, which I will bring with me,
therefore you need not hunt among your papers to find it. ”
In the following note allusion is made to the
thundering price at which a copy of the first folio
Shakspeare had been obtained by Mr. Nicol for his
Noble Employer * . "After the pleasant trick you
* Of this celebrated purchase there are two versions extant ; both in
substance true, and both worthy of being again recorded ; for I know
350 ROXBURGHIANA, [ Roxburghe
served me with regard to Swinburne's Travels into
the Two Sicilies, I think that you cannot decently
of no achievement encircled by a brighter halo of BooK GLORY. The
first, which I received from the mouth of Mr. Nicol himself, is thus
described in the Bibliomania, p. 701 , note. " A singular story is extant
about the purchase of the late Duke of Roxburghe's copy of the first
edition of Shakspeare. A friend was bidding for Him in the sale room :
his Grace had retired to one end of the room, coolly to view the issue of
the contest. The biddings rose quickly to twenty guineas-a great sum
in former times ; but the Duke was not to be daunted or defeated. A
slip of paper was handed to him, upon which the propriety of continuing
the contest was suggested. His Grace took out his pencil, and with a
coolness which would have done credit to Prince Eugene, he wrote, on
the same slip of paper, by way of reply,
•
6
lay on, Macduff!
And d-d be he who first cries hold, enough !'
Such a spirit was irresistible, and bore down all opposition. The Duke
was of course declared victor, and marched off triumphantly with the volume under his arm."
Mr. Martin, in his Catalogue of Books privately printed, 1834, 8vo. ,
p. 460, thus describes the event in question. "The two following notes
to Mr. George Nicol, printed from the original, in the possession of Mr.
William Nicol (son of Mr. George Nicol) , evince the ardour and anxiety
ofthe Duke of Roxburghe as an indefatigable book-collector.
66 Having slept upon Shakspeare, I feel more determined to have the
two editions to be sold this day. If I am not present, I desire you will
be excessively bold. And if I should be present, your courage need not
fail you till you see me turn my back and walk out of the room."
Again : Pray, rise early to-morrow.
66 Reed's sale will be over a
little after two o'clock. I have seen the Shakespears.
• ' lay on, Macduff!
And damned be he that first cries hold, enough !'
I wish you could write to Paterson for the catalogues. I am really in
want of them. Yours, R."
I cannot charge my memory with the sum given by the Duke for
this copy when obtained, but probably not exceeding 351. At the sale
of his own library it produced 100%. , in opposition to a commission in
my own pocket to go as far as 80 guineas, for Sir M. Sykes. Yet it
was by no means a " first class copy." See the Decameron, vol. iii.
Sale. ]
ROXBURGHIANA.
351
avoid doing one of three things : viz. , either in person to attend the sale of books in the enclosed catalogue, on Saturday next, and purchase for me (not
at a Shakspearian price !) lot 102 ; or to depute
some trusty person to do it ; or to return the catalogue to me, saying, ' you are going out of town to
keep holyday :-' in which case, ' rest you mercy.'
No. 119, Hawkesworth : if the plates are bound by
themselves, I would not willingly miss it." Once
again, and for the last time.
"It is really wonderful how little some persons know of
their own business. You told me that you meant to attend
the first day's sale of books in the enclosed catalogue. I
take the liberty to inform you that it is the second day's sale
you are to be at. I have added some notes to the catalogue
well worth your reading. I wish you would let me know
if you purchased Amadis de Grece, No. 4280, on my account, at Pinelli's sale. If you did, I need not purchase a
which Edwards has sent to me. I wish, before you copy
p. 61 ; and Library Companion, edit. 1825, p. 819. It was purchased
by the Duke of Devonshire ; and it measures 13 inches in height, by
8 inches in width. Of ALL copies of this most estimable volume ( which
is supposed to have been published " at the cost of" ONE FOUND only),
that in the library of the Right Honourable Thomas Grenville is unquestionably the finest. What the shepherd says of Rome in Virgil's
first Bucolic may be applied to this Exemplar Grenvillianum :
“Verùm hæc tantùm alias inter caput extulit urbes,
Quantùm lenta solent inter viburna cupressi.”
But it was not obtained under the " thundering price " (vide supra)
of ONE HUNDRED and TwentY ONE POUNDS sixteen shillings. Suppose the copy to attain the height of thirteen inches and half, and the
width of eight inches and half, what THEN would be its cost ? Let the
Member for Newcastle, whose name begins with an M, answer this exceedingly difficult and important question.
352 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
go out, that you would answer this part of my letter, and I
will send for your answer when I am at St. James's ; or, if
you are at home (which, if it is a fine day, you had better
not be) , I will call as I come from court. "
Porturpe
It was to Mr. Nicol that his Majesty was in a
great measure indebted for the acquisition of the
PSALTER of 1457-the " cheval de bataille," as it
were, of the royal collection—and which I rejoice to
understand has not yet quitted head-quarters *. At
the sale of West's library in 1776, our bibliopolist
“ laid it on heavily" in the purchase of Caxtons for
his royal mastert, and as late as the year 1812
(thirty-six years afterwards) this concentration of
* Upon this identical volume, in the earlier period of my bibliographical career, I wrote an essay, which was embellished with a woodcut, in a monthly magazine called the Athenæum, vol. ii . p. 369–400.
Mr. Barnard, the librarian, took me to task for this essay, and for the
account of its binding. This was very natural ; for he had scarcely
"stirred one foot" himself in the composition of a catalogue of the collection under his care. The pith of this account, or essay, was republished, together with a fac-simile of the text of the Psalter, in the
Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. i. p. 107, &c.
" Mr. The fact is thus recorded in the Bibliomania, p. 508.
George Nicol, his majesty's bookseller, told me, with his usual pleasantry
and point, that he got abused in the public papers by Almon and others,
for having purchased nearly the whole of the Caxtonian volumes in this
[ West's] collection, for his majesty's library. It was said abroad that
a Scotchman had lavished away the king's money in buying old black- letter books."
ROXBURGHIANA. 353
affection possessed him as ardently as ever ; for he
thus wrote to me, just before the publication of the
second volume ofthe Typographical Antiquities : " I
hope you do not forget a large paper copy of your
magnificent work for myBELOVED MASTER'S LIBRARY,
which I will with pleasure pay for when required * "
Such, too, was his love of scarce and fine books, and
of the fascinating mysteries attached to the History of
Early Printing, that he maintained a strict alliance
and correspondence with Mr. Alexander Horn, the
* The whole of this letter may as well find its place at the foot of the
above extract, for it affords " proof positive " of the writer's thoroughbred bibliomanical taste and propensities.
66 DEAR SIR,
" Pall Mall; Nov. 11 , 1812.
" I can, without consulting the Royal Library, inform you that his
Majesty's copies of Ratdolt's Euclid, 1482, is UPON VELLUM, and that
the vellum is very beautiful. It came from the library of consul Smith
at Venice, which his Majesty purchased entire. I have at present a
beautiful copy of it upon paper, so large that some of the leaves are
uncut. It has been always a favourite book of mine, though not so
with the French connoisseurs. It is the most beautiful specimen of
the semigothic typography which I know. The beautiful capital letters
are a great ornament to the body ; and the diagrams, executed on the
margin of the book, are as useful as they are neat. I know of none
earlier-do you ?
"Considering what a good customer you was at the ROXBURGHE
SALE, I am quite ashamed you have not had a catalogue with the prices.
This neglect has arisen entirely from the multiplicity of things that go
through my miserable head ; but I now can tell you it is in the hands
of the bookbinder, and will of course be soon sent to you."
(Then follows the passage in the text).
" Believe me, my dear sir, with great regard, yours most sincerely,
Gergetiers
A A
354 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
celebrated book- explorer upon the Continent, until
the period of his death * . Personally, I have no
obligations to express to that bibliographer, who
was undoubtedly a man of no common calibre in his
way. Learned he was, most indisputably, in the
cognizance of ancient types, and especially of those
from the early German presses. He knew at first
glance a Ther-Hoernen from an Ulric Zel-a Bechtermuntze from a Gutenberg-and an Eggesteyn
from a Ketelaer and De Lempt; but he had no enthusiasm or rapture on a contemplation of the book
itself. He had done wonders in his way ; for to
him the late Mr. Edwards was indebted for many a
rare book-gem, and among others, for the first Virgil
of 1469, now in the Spencer library. Mr. Horn
* It was through Mr. Horn's instrumentality that Mr. Nicol was
enabled to place in Lord Spencer's library two of the very rarest, and
among the most desirable, book-treasures which that nobleman had
been so long anxious to possess. The one was the edition of the Turrecremata of 1467, so fully described with fac- similes in the Ædes Althorpianæ, vol. ii. p. 272-6 : the other, the early pieces of Cicero printed by
Ulric Han, and collected into one (contemporaneously bound) volume,
by the printer himself, and his own property-as the subscription at
the end ( of which a fac-simile appears in the Bibliographical Decameron
vol. i. p. 388) abundantly testifies. Lord Spencer gave two hundred
guineas for the first, ( but “ WHAT a copy !” ) and one hundred guineas
for the second volume, although he had previously possessed every
piece in the latter. But then, again, “ WHAT a copy !" It is thus that
a wise and a liberal collector should build a LIBRARY. Through the
same channel, and along with the old books of Mr. Nicol, sold by
auction in 1825, there appeared a copy of the Mazarine Bible of 1455,
printed UPON VELLUM, of transcendant beauty and dimensions, which
was purchased by Messrs. Arch, for Henry Perkins, Esq., for 5047. The
Hon. Mr. Grenville is also in possession of the Psalter of 1457 ( from the
same quarter) made perfect by the incomparable skill of Mr. Harris.
Sale.] ROXBURGHIANA.
355
always appeared to me to consider a scarce book as
a mere piece of goods or article for sale the sooner
got rid of the better. He never parted from it
reluctantly. He never struggled a moment for its
retention. No tear moistened his eye, no sigh
convulsed his bosom, as he took leave of it for
ever ! He was copious but dry in his details, and
would have described a Giulio Clovio and an Ulric
Han with the same methodised sang-froid. He
lived so long abroad, that his conversation and
writing were latterly affected by a foreign idiom ;
and, what is curious, although he knew himself to
be among the facile principes of living Bibliographers, he yet preferred discoursing upon politics
to belles lettres, and was always sputtering short and
tart tirades against Prince Metternich.
But what becomes of the ROXBURGHIANA all this
while ? Mr. Nicol is a fitter introduction than
Mr. Horn, and the latter is thus finally dismissed.
Sitting down at this comparatively remote period,
not only from the ROXBURGHE SALE itself, but from
the description of it in the third volume of the Decameron, I can scarcely refrain from the expression
that "the whole looks like a dream, "-" seeing that
is past as a watch in the night. " Were the same
library to be now resold, undoubtedly the same results would not follow. For thus it was. The public
appetite had not only been whetted for seven or
eight preceding years, by the knowledge of Mr.
Nicol's well- digested catalogue of the library, and a
A A 2
356 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
preface describing many of its more precious treasures, but the war was raging furiously upon the Continent, and there was no chance of getting such treasures from abroad. The stream of the Bibliomania
had been also strongly setting in for the eighteen
months preceding *. It was well, therefore, for the
interests of the property, and of all the parties concerned, that the lawsuit respecting the destination
of the library, ( and which had well nigh reached the
period of the length of "Troy's siege") terminated at
the moment that it did. Another circumstance is
worth especial notice. The Duke of Devonshire, the
most resolute, constant, and princely purchaser at the
sale, had just then come of age, and in possession
of a magnificent income. His book- propensities
had been scarcely developped to the public knowledge, but his more intimate acquaintance were well
aware of his zealous attachment to the pages of
Debure, Renouard, and Herbert. How frequently
he would turn his back upon the gaieties of the
"flaunting town, " and consume the midnight oil in
* I must repeat that my own humble work, so designated, had materially contributed to the book-effervescence. If I am asked to what
extent, the answer must be necessarily vague ; but I am uttering what
I conceive to be only a sober truth in asserting that I believe the sale
to have been benefited to the amount of 5000l. by the publication here
alluded to. A year or so before, the late Mr. Payne had purchased a
very pretty collection, chiefly topographical, of a gentleman whose name
I have forgotten. At the Roxburghe sale my person was pointed out to
that gentleman. " Hang him, (he observed) why did he not publish
his book in the year 1810? My books would have brought double the
prices." This was amusing—but not to him.
Sale.]
ROXBURGHIANA.
357
making himself acquainted with such libri desiderati
as might at once add to the splendour and value of
the library left him by his ancestors ! Upon so great
a scale were his purchases at this sale, that it was at
first surmised that Mr. Nornanville, ( the bookseller
whobid for him) was the deputed agent ofBonaparte;
and that the clusters of Caxtons which were knocked
down in the name of the former, were, in fact, to be
shipped off for the imperial library at Paris. Nothing could exceed the dexterity and success of the
concealment of the Duke's name on the occasion *.
But it was also well known that other bookchampions were sharpening their weapons for the
expected contest. Lord Spencer and the Duke of
Marlborough (then Marquis of Blandford) were the
avowed rivals for the Boccaccio of 1471t. Sir Mark
Masterman Sykes was sure to be a large purchaser
* The result of these purchases —or the mode of revealing the fact of
their belonging to the Duke-is told in the Bibl. Decameron, vol. iii. p. 68.
† Of all EXTRAORDINARY RESULTS, what could exceed that of the
Boccaccio of 1471 coming eventually into the possession of the former
nobleman, at a price less than one HALF of that for which he had
originally contended with the latter, who had become its first purchaser
at the above sale ? Such, however, is the FACT. At the sale of the
Marquis of Blandford's library in 1819, this volume was purchased by
the house of Longman and Co. for 9187., it having cost the Marquis
22601. Lord Spencer was present at the sale, and bade frequently. Mr.
Watson Taylor had a strong inclination to put in a bidding ; but as he told me, "from respect to Lord Spencer, he desisted." On its being
knocked down to " the House in the Row," amazement seized the bystanders. A new GIANT was supposed to be starting up in the country,
for the book was professedly bought "for a gentleman in the country."
It is only necessary to add that, in a few days, the precious volume
became Lord Spencer's property for the very sum at which it was
knocked down ; and on the day of its acquisition, he carried it with
358 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
of the old English poetry and ancient classics ; and
who could stand in the way of Mr. Heber in these
and other departments * ? Nothing more strongly
proves the unexpected turn which the biddings took,
than that the exertions of the latter bidder were absolutely paralised at the first effort. His fire not
only slackened, but was silenced -at the sale of
the early English Romances. The noise of such a
coming- on sale would necessarily spread far and
wide ; and thus other unknown combatants would, in
all probability, be desirous of some share in the booty,
and thus add to the fierce collision of the whole. A
race of giants seemed to spring from the earth on
the occasion.
As to the sale itself, I have no desire-because
it would be wholly a work of supererogation-to
enter upon further particulars. The reader will find
it so elaborately and faithfully (and I hope spiritedly)
him triumphantly to a large dinner party at Mr. George Hibbert's,
where the volume and its owner were received with acclamation. His
Lordship afterwards clothed the book in a magnificent manner, by the
skill of Charles Lewis-having the arms of the Duke of Roxburghe
within, and his own without, the dark green morocco in which it is
coated. For a particular account of the edition, see the Supplement to
the Bibl. Spencer. p. 53, &c. , published with the Ædes Althorpianæ.
* Sir Mark Sykes might have purchased to the amount of a thousand
guineas. For one book, the first edition of the Epistles of Cicero to
Atticus, printed by Sweynheym and Pannartz, in 1470, I gave for him
1787. 108. ! One day, on returning home in a hackney-coach, with some
purchases to the amount of about 2007. for the same amiable baronet, I
was apprehensive of having lost the Pastyme of Pleasure, printed by
W. de Worde in 1517, in a small quarto volume, for which I had
given 187. ! On that same day I held between my extended middle
finger and thumb, about 4007. worth of SLIM QUARTOS !
Sale.] ROXBURGHIANA.
359
detailed in a previous work, that I have only to refer
to its pages for a lounge, I should hope, to his
heart's content. One thing is most remarkable.
When Mr. Nicol invited me, the year preceding, to
have a long morning's gossip with him in the library
of the Duke*, to examine some of the " Book Rarities " in the collection, and when he shewed me the
inkstand which the Duke used the table on which
he read, wrote, and dined—and the bed in which he
breathed his last-every thing seemed to me to be
so simple, retired, and unobtruding, that I could not
help feeling something like astonishment at the
limited circle in which a Knight, at once of the
Garter and of the Thistle, chose to move ; and that
all his " migrations," like those of the Vicar of
Wakefield, seemed to be only " from the blue room
to the brown. " I could not help afterwards com-
* Mr. Nicol's note, in my possession, is dated July 6, 1810. It is in acknowledgment of a copy of the Bibliomania, of which I had begged
his acceptance. He says in it, that he " professes himself a Bibliomaniac-promising himself much pleasure in the perusal of it, which
his endless avocations have not yet permitted him to enjoy." This first
visit to the ROXBURGHE SHRINE was followed up by several more : and
it may be said to have supplied the materials, or rather furnished the
hints, of what appeared in the Decameron. But it was also carried to
something like a substantial account, in the very minute and extended
description of the Boccaccio which appeared in the brochure of the Book
RARITIES (of which only thirty-six copies were printed), and which was
reprinted in the Bibl. Spenceriana, vol. iv. p. 75-79. The late Earl
Spencer was at one of these visits, and he paid a most marked attention
to this Boccaccio-taking elaborate notes. That seemed to Him, naturally enough, to be the great absorbing object of the Collection . Little
could he anticipate the being one day, in the manner in which he has
been, its POSSESSOR.
360 ROXBURGHIANA. [ Roxburghe
paring and contrasting the tranquillity then reigning
around me, with the bustle and din which afterwards prevailed in the same apartment and how
perfectly opposite to each other had been the mode
of collecting and of dispersing such a library. Not
an individual but Mr. Nicol, and perhaps the King,
seemed to have known the former-not a town in
Europe but what, more or less, has had a knowledge
of the latter.
Every man pretending to some information about
books, was set a-hunting for the Valdarfer Boccaccio *. From the half-ruined mansion on the summits of the Vosges to the castellated heights along
the Rhine, a search for this indescribably rich treasure was immediately instituted. It might be even
supposed to be the tenant of a Swiss cottage-and
Berne, Basle, and Zurich, were examined with the
sedulous pertinacity of an excise-officer. Italy was
ransacked for this same jewel. All the towns where
the art of printing had been exercised in its earlier
stages, were explored. A stray copy might be still
lurking in the Soubiaco monastery. Perugia, Brescia, and Bologna-places of comparatively rare visitation—were minutely examined, in vain. The copies
in the Magliabechi and Vatican libraries t, were
* Some curious anecdotes connected with this subject are related in
the Bibl. Decameron, vol. iii . p. 75, note.
+ I speak hesitatingly of these copies ; but that in the Royal Library
at Paris, wanting one leaf, has been described in my Tour; and of that
in the Blenheim Collection, wanting five leaves, a good description is
furnished by the Reverend Vaughan Thomas, as it appears in Mr.
Sale.] ROXBURGHIANA. 361
public property, and could not be removed. The
Book Knight sighed as he gazed upon them-and
with a heavy heart turned his horse's head in a different direction. The Valdarfer Boccaccio, in a
perfect state, is doubtless a most rare book ; but the
edition of 1472, in the same state, by Adam de
Michaelibus, is, I think, a rarer one * .
From my
own individual, as well as from national, feelings, I
should have preferred the acquisition of the old
Ballad Poetry, in three folio volumes †, in the Roxburghe Collection, to all the Boccaccios in the world !
It cannot be denied that the Duke of Roxburghe
well merited the possession of such a library. His
exertions, although silent, were incessant. He knew
how to estimate all the treasures over which his eye
was in the constant habit of roving. His passion
evinced all the warmth of a lover, and all the fidelity
Martin's beautifully executed Catalogue ofBooks privately printed, 1834,
8vo. p. 405. Mons. Van Pract wrote me word " there were several
copies besides that in the Royal Library at Paris. " But WHERE ?
* There is no perfect copy of it in England, unless it be that in the
Blenheim Collection. Will my friend Mr. Thomas exercise his skill by
a comparison of that copy with my account of the perfect one at Paris ?
But what a MARVELLOUS COPY of this marvellously rare edition is that
in the public library at Nuremberg ! An anecdote of some little interest,
touching this latter copy, may be seen in the Tour, vol. iii. p. 431,
second edition.
† The volumes to which I allude are designated in No. 3210 of the
catalogue, as being "A curious Collection ofsome Thousand Ancient
Ballads, bound in three large volumes." They produced the sum of
4777. 15s. at the sale. Oftheir present destination I am ignorant. Add
to these, the two yet more extraordinary volumes, of like character,
which were sold at the sale of Mr. Heber's library in 1834, and of
which the contents of one volume are so delectably set forth in the
Bibl. Heber, pt. iv. No. 200 —and you have an entertainment of its
kind through a score of wintry months.
362 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
of a husband. But, had he risen from his grave on
the conclusion of the sale, and peeped over Mr.
Evans's shoulder to examine the amount of its produce, he would scarcely have believed the evidence
of his senses.
·
Many things, in addition to those before noticed,
have operated to render it extremely improbable
that there should ever again be that state of public
feeling which should lead to such a result as that
which marked the Sale of the ROXBURGHE LIBRARY.
The English public were, within four years afterwards, glutted with book- sales *. Collectors no
sooner started up, than they seated themselves down
-satiated in the chace. But the example of the
Duke of Devonshire is one of the most singular and
splendid upon record. His Grace was the largest
purchaser at the Roxburghe sale, in regard to the
amount of purchases. These volumes were hardly
arranged upon his shelves, when the Bishop of Ely
(DR. DAMPIER) died, and he became the PURCHASER
OF THE LIBRARY OF THE DECEASED ; a library, which
had long been distinguished, from the skill, learning,
and enthusiastic bibliomaniacism, of its collector.
This purchase was made for a sum little short of
£ 10,000. Lord Spencer was a competitor with his
nephew, the Duke, for this prize . So closely was
the race run, that the breath of one antagonist
might be said to be felt upon the shoulders of the
* I allude to the Stanley, Alchorne, Willet, Towneley, Edwards,
Duke of Grafton, and Macarthy sales ; to say nothing of many othersand those of Talleyrand, Dent, Hibbert, North, and Sykes.
Sale. ]
ROXBURGHIANA.
363
other. Twenty-four hours' hesitation on the part
of the duke would have carried the BIBLIOTHECA
DAMPIERIANA to Spencer House * ·
* I speak on good authority. Lord Spencer's note to me, of the
date of the 19th June, 1812, runs thus : "I am much obliged to you
for your letter, and the kind anxiety you express on the subject of the
Bishop of Ely's library, under the suggestion of its coming into my
hands. I should have had little hesitation in agreeing to the terms
which you hint at, but the duke wrote to me yesterday evening to say
that he had determined to accept the offer." At this period I cannot
take upon me to specify the particular articles of which his lordship
stood in need ; but I can safely vouch that there was not a dozen which
he and Count Reviczky used to designate as " de première nécessité."
Ofits COLLECTOR, another word may be here allowed me-plentiful
as has been the notice of him in the Biographical Decameron, vol. iii.
p. 345-353. As my acquaintance ripened into intimacy, the Bishop
would show me his earlier memoranda books, when the PASSION was
beginning to take fast hold of him, and he begged my acceptance of one
(still in my possession ), in which I find the following valuation of his
Library, in his own hand, of the date of June, 1781 -amounting, in the
whole, to 14557. 7s. —no mean collection for an Etonian Master, as the
Bishop was at that time.
Theologia
Poet. Gr.
•
·
£ S d.
173 0 o Biographia .
136 1 O
96 4 0
•
Libri. Misc. Lat.
Miscell. English
34 9 6. Geograph.
60 9 0 Epistolæ
14 18 0
·
8 0 6 Bibliograph..
£ s. d. 48
28 4 0
• 14 8 0
· 18 18 6
23 19 6
2 14 6
40 9 6
20 8 0
29 10
32 6 0
2 16 0
5 2 0
Critici
•
72 1 0 Botany
62 3 0 Livres Franç.
• • 164 19 6 Libri Ital.
30 5 0 Emblemata
· 46 10 6 Physic, Law, &c. • . 15 4 6
71 8 0
• 51 9 0
De Re Typog. , &c.
Lexicons, &c.
· 23 13 0
• 69 1 0
• 106 14 0
Poet. Lat.
Poet. Lat. Mod.
Poet. Mod. •
De Re Poet. Mythol.
Hist. Univ. Chronol.
Hist. Lib. Misc. Gr.
Hist. Lat.
Hist. Britann.
Hist. Mod. •
Orator. Gr. & Lat.
Philosoph. Gr. Lat. &c.
Voyages, Travels .
Antiquitates ..
This memorandum book is a curiosity of its kind, bearing evident marks
of what its owner was pleased to say (see p. 206, ante) of my first edition
of the Introduction to the Classics. It shews a keen curiosity, and a
364 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
Then came the sale of Colonel Stanley's books,
in which, for one article alone -the De Bry Voyages
-the Duke of Devonshire gave five hundred guineas.
Who could resist the force of such a competitor ?
patient spirit of enquiry in its first possessor. There are lists of various
books in various collections ; and among them, one of the “ Editiones
Primaria," in the library of the EARL of PEMBROKE, in which family
the Bishop had been once a tutor. This catalogue will be given in a
subsequent page. There is also a very minutely written list of such
books as are considered rare in the obsolete work of Vogt ; but the
Bishop wisely stopped when he reached the article " Bartamantinus !"
I find, too, an account of the spurious ( Corsellis) first Pliny Junior ; of
which Dr. Askew's copy was offered to the Bishop for 21. 28 .; but he
says "the forgery was so very manifest, that he would not purchase it."
Osborne had marked this book at 15l. 158. I also find lists of the
Bishop's books, valued, on large paper, in which one now smiles to find
the folio Hesiod of Robinson marked by him at 157. 15s. —about onesixth of its present value !
A concluding word touching these DAMPIERIANA. On the first visit,
after my first residence at Exning Vicarage, which I paid to the Cathedral at Ely, I met a short gentleman, habited as a clergyman, and well
advanced in years, approaching the western entrance. We saluted each
other ; when, taking a key out of his pocket, he offered to conduct me
through the cathedral. I thanked him ; and the first place which we
stopped at was the LIBRARY. " Perhaps ( says he) you are fond of
books ?" I replied, " Rather so." " Let us enter," said he. On
casting a quick eye over the shelves, I observed, " Here are not exactly
the kind of books which the learned in these matters-the helluones
Librorum—seek after. Ah, sir ! you once had a Bishop who knewthese
matters as well, if not better, than any man in England ; and his name
was DAMPIER." My guide stood still : the tears gathered into his eyes;
and, squeezing my hand, he exclaimed, “ Sir, HIS BROTHER is before
you." And, indeed, the resemblance was sufficiently manifest. Our
colloquy then became brisk and confidential ; and I told him, as indeed
he knew, what was said of that brother in the Bibliographical Decameron.
He invited me to meet an élite clerical party (with the Bishop at its
head) of sixteen, at dinner ; and on a subsequent visit, he had precisely
the same party in kind and in number : but I could accept neither invitation. Mr. Dampier was a Prebendary of Ely, and died about seven
years ago.
Sale.] ROXBURGHIANA.
365
Who could not fail to admire such courage and
well-applied zeal ? And this, too, at a period of life,
in the purchaser, when the passions are in full sway
to be worked upon by every artifice to which high
rank and great wealth in this country are always
exposed . Not many years afterwards the library of
his uncle, the illustrious CAVENDISH, was bequeathed
to him ; and Chatsworth at this day is the only rival
of Althorpt. There isis great delight in recording
these things. These are among the evidences of
TRUE NOBILITY. I have selected perhaps an ex-
* It should, however, be remembered, that, as by these repeated
purchases the Duke would necessarily possess himself of Duplicates of great value, so it would behove him to part with the same ;
in order that the cistern might be regularly supplied by the water running in at the top as it ran out at the bottom. Accordingly, in the year
1815, his Grace had a sale of duplicates, many of them being in the
finest condition, and fetching large prices : prices which, I fear, during
the present generation of human beings, will never again be brought.
The reader will see a plentiful sprinkling of these prices in the Bibliographical Decameron, vol. iii . p. 127-131 .
+ The whole of the SPENCER LIBRARY is now at Althorp, measuring,
I should think, " from stem to stern," about 250 feet. A Shetland
pony might be conveniently kept, in ready caparison, to carry the more
delicate visitor from one extremity to the other. It is a little journey
of its kind. The whole of the DEVONSHIRE LIBRARY (with the exception ofthe Drama) is now concentrated at Chatsworth ; and it is not
a little singular that two first cousins should take the lead ofthe nobility
of the land as possessors of fine libraries. The reserved dramatic portion of the Duke, in London, comprises the entire library of the late
John Philip Kemble, Esq. , the celebrated tragedian. It has also one
volume of a most extraordinary character and rarity ( the Hamlet of
1603) , about which the reader may disport himself at his convenience,
in the second edition of the Library Companion, p. 813. It may be
doubted whether the dramatic portion of the MALONE COLLECTION, at
Oxford, equals that of His Grace, who has lately materially enriched it
by some purchases made at the Caldecot Sale.
366 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
treme case in the illustration of my position ; but
this very selection proves the general truth, by
proving that there were Rivals and Competitors in
the field. Add to this, the never- ceasing influx of
rare and precious volumes from abroad ; the emulation among booksellers to put forth elaborate and
well garnished catalogues ; to say nothing of subsequent book sales—and we can easily account for the
present state of torpor and satiety in the BOOKTRADE. Not fewer than eighty thousand volumes
have been recently circulated by the seven different
sales of the late Mr. Heber's library :-and more
are to follow *. In dismissing the notice of the Roxburghe Sale, it may be only necessary further to remark, that its total produce amounted to 23,000%. t.
* The Hodnet Library and the Manuscripts ( among the latter, some
of a very choice and tempting description) are to be sold in the ensuing
year. Of the seven parts already sold, consuming 144 days, the number
of articles in each, with the amounts of the respectivesales, stands thus :
Gross Amount.
Part I.
II.
No. ofArticles.
III.
IV.
V.
VI.
VII.
•
· 7486 · · £5615
6590 5958
5055 2116
3067 7248
· 5693 2623
4666 6771
6797 4035
39,354 £34,366
Of all these " parts " separately considered, the fourth is doubtless the
most attractive-both from the character of the books (chiefly poetry)
and the copiousness of their description.
+ There were copies of the Catalogue of the Roxburghe Library
upon large paper. Of these I possessed one, PRICED, with the purchasers' names, by a young friend, in a manner so entirely beautiful and
Club.]
ROXBURGHIANA.
367
It had not cost its owner one fourth of that sum.
The cause or causes of such a surprising result
have been sufficiently stated.
The
I am now to touch upon the second branch or
division of these Roxburghiana, namely, the RoxBURGHE CLUB. Bear with me, ye uninitiated ! And
be present, " spirits of the departed ! "-for the
theme is neither ignoble nor uninstructive.
origin of this Club, or rather Symposium, has been´
already before the public *, and may be repeated in
few words. On the evening before the sale of the
Boccaccio of 1471, which took place on the 17th of
June, 1812, a few enthusiastic and resolute Bibliomatchless, as to have brought, at the sale of my own books, in 1822, the
sum of 97. 108. If it be asked how I could have parted with such a
treasure, I fear it must be answered, that, in " the pride and the naughtiness of my heart,” I consented so to do, in order that my collection might
not be deprived of one of its most attractive ornaments. It was purchased
at the sale by the late Mr. North of Acton ; at the sale of whose library
in 1819, it became the property of Lord Granville, for 117. I had left
a stiff commission in order to become its owner again-for it had no
ordinary claims upon my affectionate respect. Its calligraphy, manifest
and surpassing as it was, was a secondary cause of my regard for it. It
had been the performance of female hands, attached to a heart as warm
and tender as could beat in the human breast. It was the gift of ONE
who always found a ready and cordial reception in the bosom of my
family ; whose worth was always duly estimated, and whose memory
will be always embalmed in the tenderest recollections. Some twelve
years agone, she passed to her " long account-" of which she need not
fear the delivery into the hands of a merciful Judge. A sweeter spirit,
united to a more cultivated understanding, could not pass from earth
to HEAVEN ! All that was left for her survivors to do, hath been done ;
and I may with truth say, that every sod of her grave has been
moistened by a MOTHER'S and a SISTER's tears.
* See the Bibliog. Decameron, vol. iii. p. 69-74, and Martin's Catalogue of Books, privately printed, p. 462, &c.
368 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
maniacs (in the number of whom was the writer of
these pages) dined with Mr. ( nowMr. Baron) Bolland,
at his house in the Adelphi Terrace. All was joyaunce, and as became possessors of fine copies of
Robinson's Auncient Order, Societie, and Unitie
ofPrince Arthur and the Knightly Armoury ofthe
Round Table, printed in 1583, 4to.: a book, which
takes undisputed precedence of all the quartos
upon this momentous subject. Among the guests,
was my especial good friend, the late George Isted ,
Esq. who once had the temerity to dispute with
me the PARENTAGE of the Clubt. After dinner we
*
* Perhaps the finest ( ought I not always to say one of the finest ?)
copy of this rare and curious book in existence belongs to myfriend Sir
Francis Freeling, Bart. In the preceding year was published another
work by Robinson, called the " True Assertion of the Life of Prince
Arthur, &c." Of both these works a very full and particular account
appears in the British Bibliographer, vol. i. p. 109-135, from the pen
of the late Mr. Haslewood. Never were the convexities and concavities
of genealogical research and disquisition more strikingly exhibited than
in these curious volumes ; of which I have known a copy of the second
sell for 157. 158. in smart trim. Of course, as I am not forgetful of, so
am I not insensible to, the celebrated quarto of our old friend Arthur's
feats, of the date of 1634 ; of which the finest copy I have ever seen
was that in the library of the late Colonel Stanley, bound by Roger
Payne in russia leather. It produced, I think, 137. at the sale.
† Mr. GEORGE ISTED was originally a bencher of the Inner Temple,
and died a bachelor. In later life he became a tenant of Earl Spencer,
in St. James's Place. His intimacy with that nobleman, and more
especially with Mr. Roger Wilbraham, was considerable. He was the
younger brother of the late Samuel Isted , Esq. , of Ecton Hall, in Northamptonshire ; and at one time—in the “ olden days" -it has been said,
that the TWO BROTHERS had such influence at Boodles' club, that a candidate ran some risk of being black-balled if not previously introduced
to, or recommended by, this par nobile fratrum. To me, uniformly,
Mr. George Isted was kind and communicative ; and both at Althorp
Sale. ]
ROXBURGHIANA.
369
discoursed upon the eventful business of the morrow,
for the Boccaccio was not the only article of " pith
and moment " to be disposed of. It might be said
to be embedded in a dense stratum of romantic lore.
As each day's sale was usually protracted to a late
hour-owing to the vigour and pertinacity of the
bidders and as the Boccaccio was among the later
lots of the day, it was resolved, at my suggestion,
that, after witnessing the knocking down of that
magical article, we should dine together, by way of
commemoration of the event, at a neighbouring
tavern, and the St. Alban tavern, on the site of the
first Athenæum Club-house, was selected as the spot.
Whereupon Mr. Baron Bolland ordered his butler
to extricate an elongated bottle of burgundy from
dank saw dust and cobwebs, in order therewith to
celebrate the glories of the coming day. The time,
and Ecton we have passed many a pleasant day together. He rather
dabbled with, than took lustily to, the black-letter craft. He buzzed
about, rather than settled upon, the object of his choice-the favourite
flower in the book-parterre. He did me a kind service in negotiating
with his late sister-in-law for the loan of the celebrated MS. of old
ballads, and in the possession of that lady's father, the Bishop of Dromore : concerning which there may be " enough and more than enough
said," in the Decameron, vol. iii . p. 336. Will no inducement withdraw it from its present retreat, for the benefit of the lovers of genuine
old ballad poetry ?
A great number of the romances which were sold on the memorable BOCCACCIO DAY are specified in pages 66-68 of the third volume
ofthe Bibliographical Decameron just referred to. It has been said that
the amount of that one day's sale equalled what had been given for the
ENTIRE COLLECTION.
B B
370 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
doubtless, was short, for the increase of our numbers ; but I was not only fortunate enough to procure
the attendance of several other choice bibliomanical
spirits, but to find Lord Spencer disengaged, and
disposed, at our united entreaty, to take the head
of the table, and become President on the occasion.
That day-that important day-from its commencement to its close, is now fully before me.
I have a
vivid recollection of all its material features. I was
pretty well aware of the probable result of the Boccaccio bidding ; for the Marquis of Blandford, now
the Duke of Marlborough, meeting me in St. James'sstreet on the day preceding, asked me " if I thought
four thousandpounds would fetch it ? "-to which I
answered, unpremeditatedly, "half." A prophetic
reply. It has been said that the Duke intended to
have given only sixteen hundred pounds if Lord
Spencer had not personally opposed him. It was
also said that the Duke of Devonshire meant to
have gone as far as fifteen hundred pounds * . I believe there is no truth in either report.
* In the Gentleman's Magazine of the day appeared the following
skit-not undeserving of repetition here—in reference to the two highest-priced volumes sold at the Roxburghe sale. I have forgotten the
name of the author : -" Will my friend, Mr. Dibdin, allow me to hint
the surprise of many of his readers, at his expressions in your last regarding the Roxburghe sale ? we expected that he, whom we all saw a
little while ago carrying a torch to the pyre, would have continued, by
his good-humoured irony, to have fanned the flame, which he now
seems so desirous to damp. I suppose, Mr. Urban, I am an incurable
maniac, for I really can see nothing but GOOD to literature in this extra-
Sale. ] ROXBURGHIANA.
371
The morning lowered,
And heavily with clouds came on the day
Big with the fate of
the respective combatants. I had prevailed upon a
few friends to breakfast with me, that we might talk
over " the coming event, " which seemed to “ cast its
shadow before." Mr. Lang of Portland-place was
one of them a gentleman, loving books, and possessing them in great store. His West India concerns usually took him daily into the city, but on
such an occassion he "threw his bonnet into the
air " and resolved to give himself a holiday or two *.
vagance ! What if a book, which for a century has been the mark of
all the bibliographers of Europe, has fetched upwards of 2,000l. ! I cannot bring my mind quite to think that it will ruin the Marlborough fortune. I suppose if such a sum had been given for a race-horse, with a
great many heavy engagements upon him besides, that fell lame the
next hour, it would have been NOTHING ! And what if Devonshire
House or Chatsworth is to be adorned with Queen Elizabeth's Woodville's own splendid copy of Caxton's earliest and most interesting work
at the price of 10607. ! Is it quite frightful for the princely property of
Cavendish ? -Away with these puling complaints of a generous emulation, which exalts the national character, and makes the fruits of intellectual industry the noble contest of the rich !
66 Yours, &c.
" A BIBLIOMANIAC."
you;
* His letter, now in the possession of his son-in-law, Mr. Freeling,
runs thus : " I shall with much pleasure breakfast with you on Wednesday next, at ten o'clock, or any other hour that suits and we
can fix that when we meet, which no doubt we shall, in St. James'ssquare, on Monday and Tuesday. I shall keep myself disengaged on
Tuesday and Wednesday from all business but the speculations in St.
James's-square. Perhaps it will suit you to breakfast with us on Tuesday, at ten o'clock, and look over my books ? —for when I get you and
my friends together at a more serious time of the day, for eating and
drinking, looking over the books, as we have experienced, is quite out
BB 2
372 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
Sir Egerton Brydges and Mr. Freeling the younger
(the latter just then beginning to open his biblioof the case." I have always unfeigned pleasure in dwelling upon the
memory of the writer of the above letter. "Would to heaven (says
one intimately acquainted with him) that I had the ability to do justice
to the memory of that good man. There was a simplicity and singleness of character about him such as I have never fallen in with, in any
man mixing so largely with the world as himself. His mental powers
were of the highest order, and to an extent beyond that for which credit
was usually given him ; and this, for the most part, from a natural indolence which prevented him from claiming that weight to which he
was justly entitled, and which I have often seen arrogated to themselves
by men immeasurably his inferiors in every respect, save presumption.
Those only who knew him as I did, could justly appreciate him. He
was a gentleman, in its most extended sense ; and the blank which his
loss has occasioned to me, never has been, and never can be, supplied."
Mr. Lang had not only one of the most curious and beautiful libraries
in the kingdom-thoroughly sui generis—but he was intimately conversant with their contents. He mastered with facility the old French,
whether in print or in manuscript ; and he would chuckle with delight
over his unique Mystery of ST. CHRISTOPHER.
Mr. Lang's earlier French poetry was matchless in quality and condition ; and it is no small commendation of their owner to say, that
Mr. Douce affirmed he had a more intimate knowledge of early French literature than any individual (not even excepting himself) with whom
he was acquainted. Many of the volumes were as brilliantly clean as if
they had just issued from the press : and Charles Lewis vehemently delighted in giving them a good suit of clothes. I purchased for him the
Ysaie, at the Roxburghe sale, for 157. 158.. It was printed by Galliot du
Pré. He was the MELIADUS of my Decameron : and what a manuscript
romance, so ENTITLED, (from the Roxburghe collection ) did he possess !
What variety, what splendour of embellishment ! -Damosels, knights,
heralds, kings, queens ! —and a world of thronging courtiers, prancing
steeds, hawks, hounds, pages, and pursuivants ! How often has the
golden glow of his " well-trimmed argand lamps " ( see Decameron, vol.
iii. p. 86) streamed upon the ivory-tinted vellum of this incomparable
tome ! —which is now the property of his Son-in-law, to whom it was
bequeathed. His beautiful house and beautiful book-cases have witnessed many a scene of delightful conviviality, when the choicest wines
had only a secondary flavour-in a society more especially formed to place
Sale.] ROXBURGHIANA.
373
manical petals) met him. Mr. Utterson bewailed
that as it was the last day of term, it would prevent
his attendance at the breakfast. The carriage of
Sir Egerton conveyed us to the scene of action,
which need not be again described as the pages of
the Bibliographical Decameron have probably furnished a description to satiety.
I may, however, briefly recapitulate, that my own
purchase at this memorable sale scarcely exceeded
261., while those for my friends amounted to 6401.
Of this sum 470l. was furnished from the treasury of
Sir M. M. Sykes *. That amiable baronet was of
all men among the most sensitive and anxious about
his book acquisitions. Some of his notes to me are
yet in existence ; and they breathe of true bibliomanical ardour. The first is marked with a delicacy
peculiar to himselft. The ROXBURGHE CLUB met,
Verard above Johannisberg, and Michel Le Noir beyond Champagne.
What happy hours—yea, days and nights -were spent by many a Roxburgher under the hospitable roof of MELIADUS ! Never were the
"domus et placens Uxor" more thoroughly calculated to delight the
understanding and to charm the heart of every visitor ! Mr. Lang's
library was sold by auction, by Mr. Evans, in 1828, and produced the
sum of 28371. The more intrinsically precious and curious articles were
purchased for the Royal Library at Paris. There is a private print—a
portrait of him-of the most surprising resemblance. Would it might
have faced this page of the " Reminiscences ! "
* See page 321, ante. Sir Mark's purchases might in the whole have
reached the sum of a thousand guineas. For Lord Spencer I had purchased two books of the united amount of 831. 4s. 6d.. For Mr. Baron
Bolland, the Thomas of Reading ( the Baron was educated at Dr. Valpy's
school) for 5l. 15s. 6d.; for my late friend Mr. Neunberg, about 137.
worth ; for Mr. Gutch to the amount of 35l.; and for others about 301.
One of his earlier notes, evincing his great anxiety about a rare
374 ROXBURGHIANA. Roxburghe
for the first time, at the St. Albans' Tavern, on
Wednesday, the 17th June, 1812, composed of the
following membersEARL SPENCER, K. G.
Earl Gower, now Duke of
Sutherland,
Mr. Baron Bolland,
Sir S. E. Brydges, Bart.
Sir F. Freeling, Bart.
Edw. Vernon Utterson, Esq.
John Delafield Phelps, Esq.
William Bentham, Esq.
George Henry Freeling, Esq.
Sir M. M. Sykes, Bart.
Roger Wilbraham, Esq.
Richard Heber, Esq.
George Isted, Esq.
John Dent, Esq.
Robert Lang, Esq.
Rev. T. C. Heber,
Joseph Haslewood, Esq.
classical volume, is as follows :-" My dear Sir,-I was in hopes to have
found you at home yesterday. I have sent my servant for the books.
Perhaps you will send me the Aldus to look at, and if I already possess
the volume I will return it. I am going amongst the lawyers this
morning, but if possible I will call upon you on Thursday. I fear Lord
Spencer was my opponent for the Atticus ( Epistolæ ad Atticum, 1470),
but it was such an object to me, I could not give way, though it always
grieves me to oppose his lordship." My friend need not have been thus
anxious, for Lord Spencer was in possession of the volume, though not of
so fine a copy of it ; and at the sale of the Macarthy library he became
the purchaser of it UPON VELLUM. In some of his subsequent notes to
me, Sir Mark betrayed all the agony of a man keen upon the scent.
He says, "The Paradise of Dainty Devises and the Pastyme ofPleasure I would not lose at ANY PRICE." Perhaps he was not singular in
this avowal. Again : “the two Spensers ( earliest editions of the minor
poems) I would on no account lose ; and for Shakspeare's Sonnets go
as high as 201." The third note (they were all written from his country
house, at Sledmere) runs thus :- "As I have not heard from you, I
fear you have not been successful. May I thank you to purchase for
me the first folio edition of Shakspeare ? I would go as far as 70 or 80
guineas for it. I hope the day will be more propitious to you, and that`
you will have purchased for me the few articles I have SET MY HEART
UPON. ( Sic ! ) I am happy to find by a note from Lord Spencer this
-
Club.] ROXBURGHIANA.
375
with myself at the bottom of the table, as Vicepresident. Those members, with the names to the
right, printed in the italic letter, have CEASED TO
BE. To these may be added our illustrious President : by which it will appear that death hath
robbed us of the better half of those who sat down
to the first symposium. Our object in this meeting was not so much for convivial, as for belleslettres, or, if the reader pleases, bibliomanical, purposes. Most of the members were in possession of
fine libraries ; and the TOASTS * , which seemed as
hieroglyphical characters to the public, were all
understood and cordially greeted both by those who
gave, and those who received, them. The δι πολλοι
morning, that the book arrived safe, and was the one which he wanted.
Pray let me hear the event of Wednesday-the sale of the Boccaccio."
Sir Mark obtained all the articles which he wanted, with the exception
of the folio Shakspeare, in which he was distanced by the Duke of
Devonshire. See page 351. But the prices at which they were obtained
was something frightful, as it is now, to think upon. The year following
this memorable sale I visited him, at his earnest and repeated request, at
Stedmore, and there renewed my acquaintance with the Roxburghe
gems, and rioted and revelled for awhile in Faithhornes, Hollars, and
Woolletts. See the Decameron, vol. iii. 405, &c.
* The toasts are usually as follow : 1. The immortal memory of
Christopher Valdarfer, printer of the Boccaccio of 1471. 2. The immortal memory of John Duke of Roxburghe. 3. The same of Gutenberg, Fust, and Schoiffher, fathers of the art of printing. 4. The same of William Caxton, founder of the British press. 5. Of Dame Juliana
Barnes and the St. Albans' press. 6. Of Messrs. Wynkyn De Worde,
Pynson, and Notary, the successors of Caxton. 7. The Aldine family
at Venice. 8. The Giunti family at Florence. 9. The Society of the
Bibliophiles Français at Paris. 10. The prosperity of the Roxburghe
Club : and, in all cases, as the last toast, THE CAUSE OF BIBLIOMANIA ALL OVER THE WORLD.
376 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
had nothing to do with our " sittings " whether they
were short or protracted. The indulgence of a
social feeling, and of pleasant conversation respecting rare and curious and valuable books, might
surely have escaped the severest inquisitorial visitation, and set both ridicule and censure, at defiance.
On our second meeting, or first anniversary dinner, the Club was enlarged to the number of twentyfour members ; and the Duke of Devonshire, the
Marquis of Blandford (now Duke of Marlborough),
Lord Morpeth (now Earl of Carlisle), Thomas Ponton, Esq. , Peregrine Towneley, Esq., and James
Heywood Markland, Esq. , constituted the additional
members. On the third annual meeting* a further
* By this time the public journals had " caught hold" of us ; and
specimens of their mode of handling us may be seen in the Decameron :
but among them, none was so full and veracious as that in the Gentleman's Magazine, signed TEMPLARIUS, which is also reprinted in the
authority here first mentioned. I cannot, however, resist finding a place
for the following original and humorous effusion in the Gentleman's
Magazine for December, 1813, which has ever since been embedded in
a huge pile of papers and memoranda touching these ROXBURGHIANA.
I am ignorant of the author.
"To Bibliomaniacks in general, and to their Lordships and Worships
the Members of the ROXBURGHE CLUB in particular.
" P- on't,' quoth Time to Thomas Hearne,
'Whatever I forget, you learn ;'
How blest the BIBLIOMANIAC's lot !
He learns what even Hearne forgot.
66 MY LORDS AND GENTLEMEN,
"Permit me, without loss of time in ceremonious preface, to lay before
your Honours my pretensions, my services, and my misfortunes. I am
descended from a very ancient family. My ancestors of both sexes
have, from the carliest ages of literature ( even long before the invention
· Club.]
ROXBURGHIANA. 377
increase took place by the addition of Lord Althorp
(now Earl Spencer), Mr. Justice Littledale, Edward
of the art of printing) been renowned in every magnificent library for
their attachment to books ; and numbers of our race have greatly distinguished themselves, so lately as within these last hundred years, by
their assiduous and truly indefatigable labours in all kinds of works on
the abstruser parts of general science, in ponderous folios, bulky quartos,
and solid octavos, on Polemical Divinity, the Mathematicks, Algebraic
computations, the Hebrew, and the higher order of Greek and Roman,
of French, Italian, Spanish, German, and English classics. Their
critical acumen in numberless tomes of grave controversial treatises, has,
at all times, been publicly acknowledged and attested ; although never
adequately rewarded. And yet it cannot be denied by their bitterest
adversaries, that their silent toil-like the powerful ' still small voice ' of
Truth itself-has conduced more to suppress dull Tracts, and to compel
new editions of good ones, than all the Edinburgh and Quarterly Reviews put together.
' Sed genus, et proavos, et quæ non fecimus ipsi,'
my Lords and Gentlemen, I beg leave to assure you, in the words of a
Grecian warrior, —translated into blank verse by Ovid for the amusement ofschool-boys- ' vix ea nostra voco.'
"I, too, am a Critic ! To my strong powers of argumentation, far
more than to the reasonings of any Bishop on or off the Reverend Bench,
is imputable the hopeless state of oblivion into which Priestly, Tom
Paine, Horne Tooke, Brothers, Huntingdon, and Joanna Southcott,
have fallen. I have fairly EATEN them out ofthe field, and out ofhouse
and home in any valuable Library. Such are among my services and
pretensions. Let me, now, alas ! turn to my misfortunes.
" How shall I begin ? As a certain trusty Trojan is by Virgil made
beautifully to sing or say, ' Quis talia fando' . ... ah ! my tears ! my
tears ! temperet a lacrymis ?' Cruel, barbarous ' Bibliomania !'
"Ever since the Rev. Thomas Frognall Dibdin's elegant publication
under this all-imposing title has appeared, like a Comet, blazing and
illuminating the regions of occult studies, my hopes are sunk, my occupation's gone ! Had I a thousand mouths, arrayed with ten thousand
double and single teeth, I could not regain the ' spolia opima ' that
gentleman (with a head under his hat) has triumphantly taken from me and mine, for ever !!!
" The British Museum,
"Attic Story.
" A BOOK-WORM,
" W. B** R."
378 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
Littledale, Esq., the Rev. William Holwell Carr,
James Boswell, Esq., and the Rev. James William
Dodd. This acquisition fixed the number of members, irrevocably, at THIRTY- ONE. There have been
many attempts to enlarge it, but unsuccessfully.
These three Symposia were held at the St. Albans'
tavern ( chiefly, it was thought, from an affectionate
respect to the memory of the ST. ALBANS' PRESS * ),
and Mr. Richolds, the master of the hotel, always
filled up his printed circular by inviting us " to dine
with the Roxburghe dinner+."
* When resident in the neighbourhood of St. Alban's, in 1833, I
strove in all ways to satisfy myself about the probable identity of the
spot, in this once magnificent abbey, where THE PRESS might have been
erected ; but could come to no satisfactory conclusion . Doubtless, I
should say, within a side chapel, or the monastery itself-more probably
the latter. Of the books which have issued from the early St. Albans
press, a particular description will be found in the Bibl. Spenceriana,
vol. iv. p. 368-382. Ofthese the Chronicles of England ( 1483), and
the Book of Hawking and Hunting ( 1486) , are considered the " great
guns." The latter is so excessively rare, that I know but ONE PERFECT
copy of it, which is in the Spencer Library. That copy was purchased
at the sale of the library of George Mason, the poet, in 1796, for 751.—
an astounding sum in those days : but had it been purchased by the
Duke of Roxburghe, and sold at the sale of his library, it MUST have
brought 500/. I say this deliberately. There is one thing which strikes
me about these early St. Albans' books, which may be worth slightly
noticing. I have doubts of the Rhetorica Nova of my old friend Laurentius Guilelmus de Saona, of 1480, being printed in or at the Abbey;
and for three reasons. -1 . The type (though of the same family) is
so much more beautifully cur and printed.-2. The colophon says,
"apud Villam Sancti Albani. -3. The distance of time between the
date of this book and that of Juliana Barnes's upon Hawking and
Hunting. But then, where in the village was it printed ? It is a puzzle.
+ Asort of pardonable pleonasm on the part of the master of the
hotel, which has given occasion to an anonymous writer in the Athenæum
Club.] ROXBURGHIANA.
379
At this third meeting, Mr. Baron Bolland produced the first Roxburghe Club Boke, it being a
reprint of Lord Surrey's poetical version of the
second Book of the Eneid : a book, which has
almost the scarcity of a manuscript. In the prefix,
the names of the members were alphabetically
printed ; and that of the individual, to whom the copy
belonged, was uniformly printed in red ink :-so that
his identical copy was immediately ascertained :-
an ingenious thought, which has been always since
acted upon. In this first Roxburghe publication,
the names of the members stood thus :
EARL SPENCER, K. G. PRESIDENT.
The Duke of Devonshire,
The Marquis of Blandford,
Earl Gower,
Viscount Morpeth,
Viscount Althorp,
Sir M. Masterman Sykes, Bt.
Sir Egerton Brydges, Bart.
William Bentham, Esq.
William Bolland, Esq.
James Boswell, Esq.
Rev. William H. Carr,
John Dent, Esq.
Rev. T. F. Dibdin, V. P.
Rev. James William Dodd,
Rev. Henry Drury,
Sir Francis Freeling,
George H. Freeling, Esq.
Joseph Haslewood, Esq.
Richard Heber, Esq.
George Hibbert, Esq.
George Isted, Esq.
Robert Lang, Esq.
Joseph Littledale, Esq,
Edward Littledale, Esq.
James H. Markland, Esq.
John Delafield Phelps, Esq.
Thomas Pouton, Jun. Esq.
Peregrine Towneley, Esq.
Edward Vernon Utterson, Esq.
Roger Wilbraham, Esq.
(of whom in due course) to flounder in certain mirthful vagaries, and
to fasten it upon the late Mr. Haslewood, who was as innocent of it
as the writer himself. Poor Haslewood ! -he need not have this
“sin ” heaped upon the mountain of those which that cold-blooded and
trenchant writer has piled upon his grave.
380 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
The first vacancy in the club was occasioned by
the death of the Rev. Thomas Cuthbert Heber,
whose place was filled by that "right singular, and
much approved good" member, GEORGE HIBBERT,
Esq. This vacancy occurred before the fourth
anniversary meeting. The next vacancy occasioned
by the death of the Rev. Mr. Dodd, a " right merrie, ”
but somewhat heterodox member, who once took it
into his head to carol Robin Hood " ballades " at a
late hour of the meeting, when the wine had done
either its best or its worst. * This midnight chaunting has never been repeated.
As death continued to thin our ranks, the gaps
made by his unerring dart were regularly filled up
by those who were in all respects worthy, from situation, talent, and taste, to fill them effectually. But
one wide gap, made by the deaths of two brothersand to be filled at the same time-merits more than
a passing notice. I speak of the Two BOSWELLSSir Alexander and James. It is but too well known
* The Rev. Mr. Dodd was one of the Masters of Westminster School,
and son of the celebrated actor of that name, who had amassed a very
curious dramatic collection, of which mention is made in the Bibliomania, p. 536 ; and where we learn that " Mr. George Nicol (for the
Duke of Roxburghe) kept up a tremendous fire at this sale." Mr. Dodd
was well versed in the " Robin-Hood Garland," and I was once privy to
a brisk " set-to" between him and the late Mr. Haslewood, touching
the mysterious lore connected with this Nottingham outlaw. Haslewood
was right in his premises, but his adversary drew a conclusion which
appeared to foil him sadly, and which indeed was radically fallacious,
It is one thing to have a well-stored armoury, and another to possess
the knowledge or art of using your weapons dexterously.
Club.] ROXBURGHIANA.
381
how the former found his end. Political heat had
got the ascendancy of bibliomanical fervour. Sir
Alexander, with all his passion for, and love of,
literature, books, and printing * , happened to be an
* Sufficient evidence of the deceased's attachment to these objects
will be found in the Decameron, vol. iii . p. 453, &c. , where may be
seen a copper-plate vignette of his press-the Auchinleck Press-in
Ayrshire, where his privately printed books were executed . Sir Alexander's
own account of it may be also seen in a letter addressed to me, of the
date of 1817. By the favour of my friend, Mr. Markland, I am enabled
here to add another letter, from the same quarter, of the date of Feb.
20, 1822, within a very short period of the writer's premature decease,
written at Auchinleck. The conclusion of it refers to his meditated
contribution to the Roxburghe Club.
" MY DEAR SIR,
* * * * * *
"As to agriculture, there is no spot in his majesty's dominions more
distressed than this county, as it has been the will of Providence that
we should have three successive failures of crop, with all the common
evils of low prices. The " transition from war to peace" had its effect,
but that was quadrupled by the importation. Farming stock in this
country fell above 50 per cent. Then the bullionists at a most happy
moment had their triumph, and all obligations were by their own shewing raised 30 per cent. , and the source from which they were to have
been liquidated was reduced as much.
" In short, there is, comparatively speaking, now neither capital nor
credit. I see some men, whom I have seen going to church at the head
of their families in decent attire-comfortable sort of people-breaking
stones in the high roads. And you know we are political economists
enough to have no rates to help them.
"I expect no relief from parliament-the disease is beyond their skill.
Although the time was ill chosen for the cash payment resumption, we
cannot retrace our steps. It could only do evil, and no good. The
efforts of the humane society could not revive our drowned men.
The
prospect is for another generation. I am waiting with curiosity, but
without hope, for Lord Castlereagh's motion. There is a rumour of a
loan to the agriculturists : who would borrow that could avoid it ? —and
what must be the amount to give such a relief? It is too absurd to be
true. Prospectively, something may be done, by rendering the present
corn-bill more secure in its operation. The present system of exclusion,
382 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
"out and out" Tory ; and was one of those who
helped to establish a most determined Tory paper,
called The Warder. This paper was to Scotland as
the John Bull is to England. It should seem to be
with politics, as with gastronomy ; that there are
some palates which can never endure any but hot
and high-seasoned dishes. Kyan and capsicum only
for them ! A wise man, be he Whig, or be he
Tory, will prefer a cooler regimen ; for in a few
years this Apician lava * will destroy every duct and
up to a given point, and a fraction more the signal for inundation, and
coupled with the warehousing system, which renders it an object to
overtop at considerable apparent loss the flood mark may surely be
amended. I, situated as I am, would wish a more strict surveillance on
Ireland ; for I am almost converted to the belief that we receive more
grain than Ireland can afford. We had capital oats- the food of man
in Scotland, in England of horses '—from Ireland last year to an immense amount, at twelve shillings per quarter.
" If, under all this pressure, I must go to press, my respected friends
of the ROXBURGHE must accept of a composition of a shilling in the
pound of the debt I owe, and one per cent. of my inclination.
" I am, my dear Sir,
"Your's sincerely,
" ALEXANDER BOSWELL."
The roofs of their mouths
The gentle reader will turn
* The Ancients peppered everything.
were doubtless in due course " fire proof."
his eye for one minute towards as peppery a specimen as need be
selected ; from the editio princeps of APICIUS in Re Coquinaria-as
given in the Bibli Spencer, vol. i . p. 244 : or rather from the second
edition of that fiery author. It is doubtless in every edition. But the
marked difference between natural and artificial (whether political or
polemical) pepper, is, that the former preys only upon the Individual
himself: the latter may fire thousands.
Dulce et decorum est pro PATRIA mori.
But let us keep to our 66 Country:" nor
... to party give up what was meant for mankind.
Club. ]
ROXBURGHIANA.
383
integument of the abdomen. So fares it with the
mind-from party excitement. To such an extent
had this paramount feeling prevailed with our deceased Baronet, that, perhaps unwittingly to himself, and with the best possible dispositions towards
his native country, he was giving vent to his feelings
by personal vituperation. He was in fact unconsciously sitting upon a barrel of gunpowder, and
igniting the fuse which was to blow him up into the
air. Wife-little ones-property-all seem to have
been lost sight of! He had unquestionably insulted
an individual who " called him out : " and although,
as it is said, that individual had never before pulled
the trigger of a pistol, yet death winged the
bullet. *
I shall never cease to think that his Brother, my
more particular friend, James Boswell, was carried
off from sheer neglect in timely application for medical assistance, and yet more from improper nursing or rather, from no nursing at all. He lived
and died in chambers, surrounded by the library of
his late friend Malone.t His illness, which was an
* I have heard that, on being struck, Sir Alexander turned quite
round with a frightful velocity. The ball struck and shattered the
shoulder, and afterwards lodged in the spine. He died within twentyfour hours.
+ This library was bequeathed to the Bodleian on the death of Mr
James Boswell. What it must be, may be judged from an analisis of
some of its treasures in the Library Companion, p. 791 , &c. ( second
edition) furnished me by my friend the Rev. Dr. Bliss. What it is,
the public vehemently desire to know; as seven years have run their
course since it was deposited on the Bodleian shelves. Good Dr. Ban-
384 ROXBURGHIANA. [ Roxburghe
ulcerated sore throat, was short, but severe. My friend
Mr. Markland tells me, that, after making an effort to
spring from his bed and shut the outer door of his
chamber, he retreated precipitately, and burying
his head within his pillow, expired. He lived to
see his edition of his friend Malone's Shakspeare
rising gradually into distinction ; but was always
a little peevish at no notice being taken of it in
either of the two leading Reviews. If you spoke
to him of any criticism upon it in the other reviews,
or in magazines, he used to say-" Ay! but what
are they about in the Quarterly?" He seemed to
have always had a presentiment that " some mischief was brewing in that quarter,"-such was his
very expression. The fact was, the late Mr. Gifford, its Editor, was his personal friend ; but Mr.
Malone, the editor of Shakspeare, happened not to
be the personal friend of Mr. Gifford ; who, in his
very able and almost perfect edition of Ben Jonson's
Works, seems to have travelled out of his way in
order to bestow castigation upon Malone for every
dinel will doubtless soon give motion to the machinery whereby all
good and true Bibliomaniacs may revel in a knowledge of such
treasures. Only judge-gentle reader -from the tone of my friend
Dr. Bliss's letter, just referred to, and now before me ! " I feared
tiring you or your Readers, or I could have sent double the quantity.
As to the Poetry, I dared not touch it-or every other collection you
have noticed must have been thrown into the back ground. When I
came to look through them, I was perfectly astonished . There is hardly
a single poem printed in the reigns of Elizabeth and James, not to be
found here : and the Greens, Nashs, Dekkers, Richs, Braithwaits,
Rowlands, and Bretons, exceed belief ! "
Club.]
ROXBURGHIANA.
385
trifling slip and venial error. Gifford's jealousy of
every one who presumed to measure the height of
Old Ben, by instituting comparisons between him
and Shakspeare, assumed at last quite a frantic air ;
and Boswell's reply, in which he nobly vindicated the
memory of his departed friend, was to the full as
able as the attack * . His death in all probability
prevented a meditated explosion ; for it was under-
* It is thus-" But since his death, a work has come forth of such acknowledged excellence in other respects, and proceeding from a writer of
such literary eminence, containing remarks ofsuch a nature, that I cannot
feel myselfjustified in passing them over in total silence. Mr. Malone
entertained a very high regard for Mr. Gifford, he admired his talents,
but he respected him still more for the principles congenial with his
own, which directed him in their application : it was with singular satisfaction, that he availed himself of an opportunity of affording him
literary assistance, when he had certainly no reason to complain of the
terms in which his courtesy was acknowledged ; and during his intercourse with that Gentleman, I knowhe flattered himself that they viewed
each other with sentiments of mutual esteem. How then would he
have been mortified and chagrined, if he had lived to peruse the last
edition of Ben Jonson, in which not only his critical opinions are frequently treated with contempt, but even language ( I trust hastily) employed, which might seem to cast an imputation on his moral character.
It is to this point I speak : and Mr. Gifford, who, himself knows no cold
medium in his attachments, would probably despise me, I should certainly despise myself, if I did not come forward, and attempt, at least,
to show that such charges are altogether unfounded."-xxx-i. p. 30, &c.
If there be any one passage in his own writings to which, more than
any other, he can look back with unmingled delight, I will venture to
point out his high, but not more high than merited, eulogium on the
present very excellent DEAN OF WESTMINSTER. Let him recall to his
recollection the feelings with which that tribute was penned, and he
will know what I also must feel in defending the character of ONE,
whom I have loved and honoured from my infancy-MINE OWN and MY
FATHER'S FRIEND.
C C
386 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
stood that the late Mr. Octavius Gilchrist was regularly furnishing the Editor of the Review with
ball-cartridges, whereby to render the explosion more
terrible and deadly * .
I pass " to the order of the day:" in other words, to
the Roxburghe Club OBITUARY. And yet it is precisely in " the order ofthe day" to make some mention
(which in strict chronological order ought to have
been earlier) of the MONUMENT TO THE MEMORY OF
CAXTON, which the Club caused to be erected within
the church of St. Margaret's, Westminster. The original intention was to have fixed it within the Abbey,
from the fact of Caxton having erected the FIRST
* The late Mr. Octavius Gilchrist, of Stamford, in Lincolnshire, was
doubtless, considering his education and limited society, a very extraordinary literary character. He was a Grocer, on a large scale of
business, and always appeared to me to love books very much better than the material of his trade. He had a good library, and some
curious volumes. Among the latter, was Caxton's edition of Lydgate's
wretched metrical " Life of our Lady"-of which I was instrumental
to its being placed in Lord Spencer's library for the sum of 100%. Mr.
Gilchrist was a great ally of Mr. Gifford's, whom he appeared to me at
once to fear and to respect. He had furnished materials, if he did not
concoct entire articles for the Quarterly Review—although at total
variance with that publication in political principles. He was a quick,
sharp sighted, critic-with a real love of poetry ; and, if I remember,
contributed an article to, if he were not the Editor of, a periodical Magazine called the Registrar-in which there was a brilliant comparison
between Thomson and Cowper as delineators of rural scenery and country life. Mr. Gilchrist's fault lay in an affectation of classical knowledge-in an ambition of quoting Greek where its introduction was
manifestly inapposite. But his " great horse" to ride upon, was Shakspeare ; and I had good reason to know that he was sedulously em- ployed in furnishing the raw material " for Mr. Gifford's intended
review of Boswell's edition of Malone's Shakspeare.
Club.]
ROXBURGHIANA.
387
PRESS in ENGLAND within those walls. At a meeting
convened on the occasion, Mr. Markland, and one
other Member (whose name I have forgotten), with
myself, were deputed to look out, and to fix upon,
an unoccupied spot within the abbey, for the purpose of such erection. We found the dead not only
thickly bestowed below us, but their monuments so
closely elbowing each other above, that, to the best
of my recollection, no space whatever presented itself
except in the immediate vicinity of the monument of
Mrs. Pritchard and the grave of Geoffrey Chaucer.
Our venerable friend, William Caxton, could not
have disliked such neighbours ; but we found the
fees of admission for our humble mural monument
within the Abbey so heavy, that it amounted to an
inhibition to have it placed there : and accordingly
we looked out for an eligible situation within St.
Margaret's church, where, in fact, Caxton and his
relations were buried. Very much to the honour of
the Vicar and Churchwardens of that parish, the
monument was admitted to be erected FREE of all
charges. All that I choose further to say upon this
subject is, that if any monument might have been
allowed a gratuitous entrance within the walls of
the Abbey, it was surely that of the Father of tHE
BRITISH PRESS-who first exercised his art there.
There could be but ONE Caxton.
A neat vignette wood-cut engraving of this monument, inclosing the inscription, will be found within
Mr. Martin's Catalogue of Privately Printed Books,
C C 2
388 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
together with the inscription itself. The latter is as
follows :
TO THE MEMORY OF
WILLIAM CAXTON,
WHO FIRST INTRODUCED INTO GREAT BRITAIN
THE ART OF PRINTING,
AND WHO, A. D. 1477, OR EARLIER,
EXERCISED THAT ART
IN THE ABBEY OF WESTMINSTER,
THIS TABLET
IN REMEMBRANCE OF ONE
TO WHOM
THE LITERATURE OF HIS COUNTRY
IS SO LARGELY INDEBTED
WAS RAISED
ANNO DOMINI MDCCCXX,
BY THE ROXBURGHE CLUB.
EARL SPENCER, K. G. PRESIDENT.
The idea of the thing itself, and the execution of
the monument, doubtless did credit to the Club. It
was executed by the younger Westmacott, of Vauxhall Road ; and was exhibited at one of our dinners
at the Clarendon Hotel, previously to its erection.
The circumstance is probably unique of the introduction of a monument to give zest to a convivial
meeting ; but so it was. Poor Boswell (the younger)
was not a little happy in his jests and gibes upon
occasion *.
the
* The younger Boswell had a happy vein of the broadest humour ;
in which, to the best of my recollection, nothing like vilipending ever
Club. ]
ROXBURGHIANA.
389
The gap occasioned in our society by this double
stroke of death, in the demise of the two Boswells,
mingled itself. He was a fair good classical scholar—and was usually
smart and happy in his repartees. He loved good society, and he kept
it : and for a man who was constantly embedded in the magical tomes
of Malones' library, he must perforce become a BIBLIOMANIAC. I refer
the reader to a well-penned account of him, by one who was equally his
neighbour and his friend, in the first part of the Gentleman's Magazine for 1822. Here, by permission of the author of that memoir, I
am empowered to present the reader with the LAST NOTE ever penned by
him, and only two days before his death ; written in fact, as my friend
says, upon the bed of sickness and of death." It related to a meeting to be held at the Clarendon Hotel on the 23d February, 1822, to
elect a new member on the demise of Mr. George Isted-when George
Watson Taylor Esq. , M. P., was chosen. The note is as follows-premising, that under the word " Polyglot," is designated George Hibbert,
Esq., who had purchased the Complutensian " Polyglot," UPON VELLUM,
at the sale of the Macarthy Library, for sixteen thousand one hundred
francs-a price comparatively less than that given for it at the sale of
the Pinelli library. But for the note :-
66
66 MY DEAR MARKLAND,
-
"Make my apology at the Roxburghe to-morrow, as I am so ill with a
sore throat I cannot go out. Shew the accompanying book with its
frontispiece† to POLYGLOT. I had a query from Cohen, which I cannot,
at least at present, answer. Let me know the Roxburghe result.
" J. BOSWELL."
But the harmless sportiveness of Boswell's fancy, as connected with
our Club, was best evinced in a pretty little volume, by way of jeu
d'esprit, which he presented to each member, and in which was exemplified the Boswellian love of a generous glass and a social feeling.
It bears for title A ROXBURGHE GARLAND, and was printed by Bensley
in 1817. Three fourths of it (and the whole are but sixteen pages) are
+ Viz.-The frontispiece to an Edition of Joe Miller's Jests of the
Oxonian, who has metamorphozed himself into the Countryman's Ass.
Mr. B., when here referring to it, alludes to the " Tales of The Cordelier metamorphozed ;" translated by Mr. Hibbert, and presented by
that Gentleman to his friends in a beautiful 4to. vol. with plates.
M.
I may add, that I believe, in this rare volume, the extraordinary
graphic powers of CRUIKSHANK were first developed.
390 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
was filled up by the election of two members who
were in all respects worthy to be the successors of
extracts ; one, entitled “ A Pleasant Pint of Poeticall Sherry,” from
Pasquins' Palinodia, of which poem I possess the entire transcript. The
other, the Coronation of Canary, from Jordan's Fancy's Festivals. His
OWN contribution is as follows-entitled
L'ENVOY.
To Boccacio in Heaven, as he chatted one day,
With Chaucer and Caxton, and two or three more,
The news of our Meeting went up, as they say,
And it set the Celestial Bard in a roar :
Says he, " well I wean When these fellows convene,
My laurels look fresher, more lively their green ;
So myself from this hour, I exultingly dub,
The Patron and friend of the ROXBURGHE CLUB.
But since they of me as their origin boast,
I shall storm, like King ' Herode,' as drawn by Ihan Parfre* ;
Unless, as their first Anniversary toast,
They drink in a bumper, my printer Valdarfer : "
Quoth Wynken de Worde,
"Twill be vastly absurd,
Unless Caxton's their second, and I am their third ;
Then the whole will go smoothly, unchecked by a rub,
And we all shall be pleased at the ROXBURGHE CLUB.
Let the poor plodding pedant our revels despise,
Who would cover this dulness with gravity's cloak ;
Cui bono? What brings them together ? he cries—
Why to eat and to drink, and to laugh, and to joke:
With thejoys of old wine
From France or the Rhine,
Old friends, and old books, at our wassail combine;
While the butterfly fop, and the miserly grub,
Are excluded alike from the ROXBURGHE CLUB.
That our social enjoyment of rational mirth,
Is an evening well spent, e'en a cynick might own ;
+ See Candlemas Day; or, the Killing of the Children of Israel, by Ihan Parfre.
Club. ]
ROXBURGHIANA.
391
the deceased : I mean, the venerable Archdeacon
Wrangham and John Arthur Lloyd, Esq. The
former was proposed by the present Earl of Carlisle,
and the latter by his tutor, the Rev. Henry Drury
of Harrow. Of the former, the preceding pages
have borne testimony to talents of no ordinary
calibre. That notice of them was confined rather
to the earlier effusions of his manhood. It is pleasant to observe a certain gaiety of heart and elasticity of spirits still accompanying his later lucuIf Diogenes' self could revisit the earth,
He would soften his manners, and alter his tone:
Alexander the Great
He contemned, and his State ;
But on D****** I'm sure he would civilly wait ;
And beg that he'd try to make room for his Tub.
As he longed for a frisk † with the ROXBURGHE CLUB.
But it is not alone, that good humourd and hearty
Mirths Goddess admits us to join in her crew;
That we shine, both distinguished Mercurio et Marte,
To our Chief and our Founder the honor is due :
Old SPENCER, a name
That for ever shall claim
The loftiest place in the Temple of Fame ;
And MARLBOROUGH, who France could , like Wellington, drub,
Are emblazoned at once in the ROXBURGHE CLUB.
June 17, 1817.
From your humble Servant,
A MEMBER.
Is it necessary for me to add, that both the Boswells were Sons of THE Boswell ? And will the reader allow me to recommend him to a
perusal of the Review of the Biography of Johnson by the Father, in
a number of the Edinburgh Review of 1833 ? of which Mr. Macauley is the reputed author ?—a review, which abounds with all the
strength, daring, originality, and power of thought and expression of that extraordinary writer.
+ You dogs, " I'll have afrisk with you." -JOHNSON.
See Boswell's Life.
392 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
brations ; for there is, methinks, an enviable youthfulness of mind, as well as of body, as we approach
life's extremer confines. The Archdeacon yet continues to woo his muse * in his miscellaneous and
* "Ecce Signum: " premising, that the first of these specimens is taken
from his poems published in 1795. It is as chaste as it is beautiful ;
and in both languages his skill is equally felicitous.
SONG.
In times so long past ( though I still am but young)
That I scarcely their transports can trace,
Enraptured I caught the soft lisp of thy tongue,
And totter'd-for then I but totter'd-along,
To clasp thee in childish embrace.
As we grew up together, each day I beheld,
With feelings unkindled before,
Thy yesterday's beauties by new ones excell'd ;
For, boy as I was, from these beauties withheld
My heart :-could I offer thee more ?
Even now, when the fever of youth is gone by,
And I glow with more temperate fire,
Delighted I dwell on thy soul-beaming eye ;
And, heaving perhaps still too ardent a sigh,
Survey thee with chasten'd desire.
Oh ! come then and give me, dear maiden, thy charms ;
For life is, alas ! on the wing :
Our summer ere long will be fled ; in these arms
Let me shield thee, my Fair One, from winter's alarms ;
Oh! listen to love, while ' tis spring.
IDEM LATINE REDDITUM.
Sim modò adhuc juvenis, vix vix tamen ipse recordor
Quæ lux prima mihi te, mea Mira, deditInfantem infanti : at, memini, te verba trahentem
Dulce audire, ulnis dulce tenere fuit.
Utque unà sensìm concrevimus, et tibi pinxit
Gratia quotidie pulcrior ora, genas ;
Cor totum tibi ego-potui quid plura ? —vovebam:
Scilicet et parvos parvulus urit amor.
Club. ]
ROXBURGHIANA.
393
wide-spreading library. He is yet as rapturous as
ever over the charms of BIBLIOMANIA ; and stretchAtqui ardor nimius, defervescente juveutâ,
Fugit, et Ineendit mitior ossa calor : —
Sed tamen usque tuis nimis hæres tractus ocellis !
Suspiro temerè sed tamen usque nimis!
Ah ! tandem, mea Mira, veni ! properantibus alis
Vitæ mox æstas est abitura ; simul
Bruma aderit. Possunt, en ! quæ defendere frigus
Brachia ! Dum floret ver, mea Mira, veni !
With a Muse so pliant, Mr. Wrangham needed not have recourse to
the poetical effusions of others : but since he has lately thought fit so
to do, I subjoin two beautiful specimens-the first, of his powers of
translation, from Thomas Haynes Bayley, Esq.; the other from the
classical pen of the Archdeacon himself.
SONNET ON ECHO AND SILENCE.
In eddying course when leaves began to fly,
And Autumn in her lap the stores to strew,
As ' mid wild scenes I chanc'd the Muse to woo
Thro' glens untrod and woods that frown'd on high ;
Two sleeping nymphs, with wonder mute, I spy : -
And lo ; she's gone-in robe of dark-green hue,
'Twas ECHO from her sister SILENCE flew,
For quick the hunter's horn resounded to the sky :
In shade affrighted SILENCE melts away,
Not so her Sister-hark ! For onward still
With far-heard step she takes her hasty way,
Bounding from rock to rock, and hill to hill—
Ah ! mark the merry maid, in mockful play
With thousand mimic tones the laughing forest fill.
SIR S. E. BRYDGES.
Translation.
ECHO ET TACITURNITAS.
Hàc arborum atque illàc ferebantur comæ
Autumnus et fruges sinu collegerat :
394 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
ing himselfat length in his Elizabethan chair, in the
midst of his Plantins and Elzevirs-as he sees the
Sylvestribus Musam in locis per devios
Calles vagus nemorumque noctem dum sequor,
Somno graves Nymphas stupens video duasEnque avolavit !—viridi amicta tegmine,
ECHO soror TACITURNITATEM deserit :
Venantium namque ivit ad cœlum fragor,
Umbrisque territa liquefit TACITURNITAS—
Secùs ac soror, properantibus quæ saltibus
Rupesque per collesque pernix emicat,
Audita longè, celere præcipitans iter.
Jocosa jamque virgo voces millies
Imitata lætum replicat, audin' ? per nemus.
THE ROSE.
F. W.
Round my own pretty Rose I have hover'd all day ;
I have seen its sweet leaves, one by one fall away :
They are gone-they are gone-but I go not with them
No, I linger to weep o'er the desolate stem.
They say-" If I rove to the South, I shall meet
With hundreds of Roses more fair and more sweet :
"9
But my heart, when I'm tempted to wander, replies ;
"Here my first love-my last love-my only love lies .”
When I sprang from the home where my plumage was nurst,
'Twas my own pretty Rose that attracted me first.
We have loved all the summer; and now that the chill
Of the winter comes o'er us, I'm true to thee still.
When the last leaf is wither'd, and falls to the earth,
The false one to southerly climes may fly forth :
But Truth cannot fly from his sorrow; he dies,
Where his FIRST LOVE-E—his LAST LOVE his ONLY LOVE lies.
T. H. BAYLEY.
IDEM LATINI REDDITUM.
Bellulam meam rosam circumvolito
Totum diem, et folia sparsa gemo :
Abiêre-abiêre-ast ego non unà ;
Flens cauli nudato assideo :-" Eia,
Club.] ROXBURGHIANA. 395
last glimmer of day tipping the Cheviot-hill-topshe exclaims, with his beloved Horace,
" Sit BONA LIBRORUM et provisæ frugis in annum
COPIA, ne fluitem dubiæ spe pendulus horæ."
He must not, however, pass off the disk of my
"Ad austrum volitato ; ibì pulcriores 66 Rosasque, et roseta centena cernes : -'
Incassùm monentibus cor respondet,
" Hic amata prima, ultima, sola jacet."
Creverunt ubi nascenti mî alæ,
Percussit ibì mea bellula me :
Vidit æstas amantes ; nunc bruma riget,
At haud meus amor brumalè friget.
Sparsis foliis, fugax amasiæ
Ad austrum volitàrit oblitus suæFides mea vel moribunda quæret,
Ubi amata prima, ultima, sola jacet.
One more, and the last.
وو
F. W.
ON A VERY TINY ANGLE ENCLOSED AND PLANTED WITH SHRUBS.
This little garden little Jowett made,
And fenced it with a little palisade.
A little taste hath little Dr. Jowett:
This little garden doth a little shew it.
Exiguum hunc hortum fecit Jowettulus iste
Exiguus, vallo et muriit exiguo:
Exiguo hoc horto forsan Jowettulus iste
Exiguus mentem prodidit exiguam.
But a word at parting. The Archdeacon hath graver achievements
to boast of. "Non omnes arbusta juvant humilesque myrice." He
has republished Langhorne's translation of Plutarch's Lives, with notes
and corrections. If he will not undertake the Life of Erasmus (" Ille
si quis alius," see page 139) , now that Mr. Roscoe has gone from us, let
him give us a BRITISH PLUTARCH-although there be a work with that
title extant-upon a comprehensive scale, and involving sound con-
396 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
mirror without receiving something like a smart admonition. His contribution to the Club (“ The
Garden Plot") was unworthy of the " Elizabethan
chair " and its adjuncts.
The " hiatus valde deflendus " occasioned (as
before intimated) by the death of James Boswell,
was filled up by the election of JOHN ARTHUR
LLOYD, Esq. , of Leaton Knolles, near Shrewsbury * ;
a gentleman in all respects qualified by his scholarship and attainments—and, above all, by his unwarped and unwarpable attachment to the Bibliomania-to fill the seat which he occupies at the
Clarendonian Anniversary. I scarcely know, for its
limits, so choice and so enviable a collectiont as his ;
stitutional principles. What work, to BRITISH YOUTH, could be at once
more attractive and beneficial? Only conceive what a portion of fiction
—ad captandum vulgus- ' is mixed up in the pages of Plutarch ! —
while we positively HAVE our Solons, Miltiades, Scipios, and Cæsars.
The mighty wand of Niebührh as disenchanted the first four centuries of
the Roman History of all its previously received FICTIONS for-facts !
* The mansion of Mr. Lloyd, recently erected on his own plan (for
he is his own Vitruvius), and situated some three miles distant from
Shrewsbury, overlooks the rushing Severn, which may be said to wash
its base. It has a Tusculum-like look, which accords well with the
possessor of it ; who considers his Elzevir Cicero as among the finest
set of volumes of that description in his library.
✦ These are not idle or merely complimentary words. They are based
upon truth : for thus stands the account. Mr. Lloyd may well boast of
the following, among other, scarce and precious books. The Mazarine
Latin Bible, 1455-Larcher's copy. The Bible of 1642, upon vellum :
made up out of two copies by the late Mr. Edwards. The Aldine Bible
of 1518, thick paper. The Constitutions of Pope Clement V. 1467,
upon vellum. The first Homer of 1488, large, in original boards and
clasps ; with two leaves of the Odyssey upon vellum. The Lactantius of
1465. The Apollonius Rhodius of 1496. The Thomas Aquinas of
Club.] ROXBURGHIANA.
397
and when theday lowers, and the outlines of the distant Merionethshire mountains become more and
more dim and indistinct and at length the rain
falls, and all is damp and misty without -then
trimmeth Mr. Lloyd his wood fire...
"ligna super loco
Large reponens !"
and regaleth and revelleth one hour midst his bibles,
another midst his Aldine classics, and a third midst
his Table Ronde lore. That Prince " ARTHUR"
should hold the first place in his chivalrous affections, is exceedingly natural.
Mr. Lloyd's book-contribution to the Club was a
somewhatquaintly devised volume ; entitled as below* .
I am now to record a very singular event. The
death of one of our members, and among the most
amiable of men and splendid of Bibliomaniacs ( Sir
M. M. Sykes, Bart. ), caused a vacancy which was
filled up by the election of the most distinguished
writer and author of his day, and in Europe. It
1467. And the Aldine Editiones Principes of Herodotus; Thucydides,
and Pausanius : to which add, the Aldine Theocritus of 1495. But
enough : I will continue the ALDINE THEME in a future page.
* " The Cuck-Queans and Cukolds Errants ; or, The bearing down
the Inne, a Comedy. The Faery Pastorall, or Forrest ofElms, by
W. P. Esq. From a manuscript folio volume containing six dramatic
pieces ; formerly in the library of the Duke of Roxburghe. The author
is supposed to have been William Percy, third son of Henry the eighth
Earl of Northumberland, who died 1648. Thirty- seven copies were
printed, of which two were UPON VELLUM. The reprint was superintended by Mr. Haslewood, in whose possession the manuscript latterly
was-and which was sold at the sale of his library in 1834.
398 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
will be supposed that I can allude to no other person
than SIR WALTER SCOTT, Bart. —who, albeit, was not
to be elected in his own name, but under the cognomen ofthe AUTHOR OF WAVERLEY. The circumstances are few and simple which led to this election.
In the month of February, 1823, at my own
suggestion, but with the concurrence of our Noble
President, and of several influential Members, I
wrote to Sir Walter Scott to know if he would make
known our electioneering wishes to the Author of
Waverley? This was not the first time I had adopted
the same ruse. I had done so on the publication
of my Tour in the preceding year. I had sent him
a copy of that work, expressly to place it, " with the
author's respects, " on the shelves of that unknown
Gentleman's library. His answer to myletter (which
will be found in the ensuing pages) is perhaps one
of the most curious on record. I now resumed my
correspondence on something like the same basis, by
requesting Sir Walter to tell me whether he thought
the Author of Waverley would like to become a
Member of the Roxburghe Club? His answer was
as follows :-
" MY DEAR SIR,
" I was duly favoured with your letter, which proves one
point against the Unknown Author of Waverley, namelý,
that he is certainly a Scotsman, since no other nation pretends to the advantage of the Second Sight. Be He who
or where he may, he must certainly feel the very high
honour which has selected him (Nominis Umbra) to a situation so worthy of envy.
Club. ]
ROXBURGHIANA.
399
" As his personal appearance in the fraternity is not like
to be a speedy event, one may presume he may be desirous
of offering some test of his gratitude in the shape of a reprint, or such like kickshaw; and for that purpose you had
better send him the Statutes of your learned body which I
will engage shall reach him in safety.
a
" It will follow as a characteristic circumstance, that the
Table ofthe Roxburghe like that of King Arthur will have
a vacant chair like that of Banquo at MacBeths Banquet.
But if this author who hath fern-seed and walketh invisible' should not appear to claim it before I come to London,
(should I ever be there again) with permission of the Club,
I, who have something of adventure in me although
knight like Sir Andrew Aguecheek dubbd with unhackd
rapier and on carpet consideration would, rather than lose
the chance of a dinner with the Roxburghe Club, take upon
methe adventure of the siege perilous, and reap some amends
for perils and scandals into which the Invisible champion
has drawn me by being his Locum tenens on so distinguishd an occasion.
" It will be not uninteresting to you to know that a
fraternity is about to be established here something on the
plan of the Roxburghe Club but having Scottish antiquities chiefly in view. It is to be called the Bannatyne Club
from the celebrated Antiquary George Bannatyne who
compiled by far the greatest manuscript record of old
Scottish poetry. Their first meeting is to be held on
Thursday, when the health of the Roxburghe Club will not
fail to be drank
" I am always my dear Sir,
" Your most faithful humble Servant
" Edin . 25 Feby. 1823" " WALTER SCOTT"
Accordingly, on the 19th of April, in the same
year, the election of the Author of Waverly took
place ; and as Vice- President, and a previous Cor-
400 ROXBURGHIANA. [ Roxburghe
respondent upon the subject, I considered myself
"in duty bound" to apprise Sir Walter of the result.
His answer is sufficiently characteristic.
" MY DEAR SIR,
" I am duly honoured with your very interesting and
flattering communication. Our highlanders have a proverbial saying founded on the traditional renown of Fingal's dog. If it is not Bran' they say it is Bran's brother. Now this is always taken as a compliment of the
first class, whether applied to an actual cur or parabolically
to a biped, and upon the same principle it is with no small
pride and gratification that the Roxburghe Club have been
so very flatteringly disposed to accept me as a locum tenens
for the unknown author whom they have made the child of
their adoption. As sponsor I will play my part as well as
I can ; and should the Real Simon Pure make his appearance, to push me from my stool, why I shall have at least the
satisfaction of having enjoyed it.
They cannot say but what I had the crown.
Besides, I hope the Devil does not owe me such a shame.
Mad Tom tells us that the Prince of Darkness is a gentleman, and this mysterious personage will I hope partake as
much of his honourable feelings as of his invisibility, and
resuming his incognito permit me to enjoy in his stead an
honour which I value more than I do that which has been
bestowed on me by the credit of having written any of
his novels.
" I regret deeply I cannot soon avail myself of my new
privileges, but Courts which I am under the necessity of
attending officially set down in a few days and hei mihi do
not arise for vacation until July. But I hope to be in Town
next Spring, and certainly I have one strong additional
reason for a London Journey furnished by the pleasure of
meeting the Roxburghe Club. Make my most respectful
Club. ] ROXBURGHIANA. 401
compliments to the Members at their next merry meeting
and express in the warmest manner my sense of obligation .
" I am always, my dear Sir,
"Very much your most obedient Servant
" WALTER SCOTT.
66 Abbotsford, 1st May, 1823
" Rev. Dr. Dibdin, Kensington, London."
It will be seen that the worthy Baronet, as in the
preface to his Quentin Durward, has doctored me ;
at a time when I had not the slightest possible notion
of-because there was no reasonable ground forsuch a distinction. On our first meeting at the Club
in 1828, which he never afterwards attended, Sir
Walter observed to me, " You see, I had the gift of
second sight." In regard to these Letters, an
anonymous writer in a weekly Journal infers that
"one fell to the lot " of the late Mr. Haslewood, and
the other to myself. I hardly know what is meant by
this inference ; but I do know that both letters were
rightfully my property, as being addressed to, and
received by, myself : -and as such, that I had the
rightful disposal of them. One was given by me to
Mr. Haslewood-not for the dishonourable purpose
to which that writer has thought fit to apply it ;
and the other was placed by me in a quarter whence
I am sure it can never be withdrawn from any
sinister or mercenary motive. A copy of this second
letter was, I think, taken by Mr. Haslewood-and
hencefound its way into his too memorable " Revels. "
Sir Walter Scott's book- contribution as a member of
the Club is, strangely enough, among the least inD D
402 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
teresting and valuable in our GARLAND * . It may be
as well to add, as the concluding sentence connected
with Sir Walter Scott's admission into our Club,
that in the preface to his Peveril of the Peak-and
after he had thrown off the mask of his disguisehe says, that " he has pride in recording, that he
had the honour of being elected a Member of the
Roxburghe Club merely as the author of Waverley,
without any other designation ; and it was an additional inducement to throw off the mask of an
anonymous author, when it gave him a right to occupy
the vacant seat at that festive board." In his bookcontribution, his own name first appears in the list
of members: before it was inserted as " the Author
of Waverley." On his death in 1833, Benjamin
Barnard, Esq. , was elected as his successor.
•
As the work of death went on amongst our Roxburghers, it was necessarily the wish of the surviving members to fill up vacancies by the election
of fitting successors. The demise of Mr. LANG is
the next to be recorded ; and as I have devoted
some space to the mention of his worth in a preceding paget, it may be here only necessary to add,
* What I mean by the word " GARLAND," is the Collection of the
Roxburghe Pieces -or of the Book-Contributions of the respective
Members. Sir Walter Scott's contribution was entitled , " Proceedings
in the Court Martial held upon John Master, of Sinclair, Captain- Lieutenant in Preston's Regiment, for the Murder of Ensign Schaw of the
same regiment, and Captain Schaw of the Royals, 17th October, 1708.
With Correspondence respecting that Transaction." 1828. 4to.
† See page 371 .
Club.] ROXBURGHIANA.
403
that his book-contribution to the Club was Le Livre
du Faulcon ; reprinted from a scarce black letter
tract in his own library, originally printed by Verard. This contribution was hardly in accordance
with the calibre of his library, and a better thing
might perhaps have been expected from him. The
vacancy occasioned by his death was filled by the
election of VISCOUNT CLIVE, the heir apparent of
the Earl of Powis. Lord Clive, putting his rank
apart, was in all respects worthy of our choice.
His amiable manners, and his quick Aldine sensibility, pointed him out to be " tali dignus honore ; "
and this feeling, upon the recent death of our incomparable President, has led to his succeeding to
Earl Spencer's chair. Lord Clive is the rural
neighbour and the intimate friend of Mr. Lloyd ;
and these Roxburghers, in their castellated retreats,
compare copies, and revel over their rival Alduses
with a sort of enthusiasm which none but thoroughbred Roxburghers can comprehend or appreciate.
One thing may be considered as somewhat remarkable. It has been only in this present year—
seven years after his election-that Lord Clive has
favoured the Club with his book-contribution. It
is, however, a most valuable and curious one, being
English metrical Lives of the Saints, by a Monk
of Clare, in Suffolk, written in 1443-and first
printed from a MS. in the British Museum. It
has been edited with great care, and is doubtless a
substantial acquisition.
DD 2
404 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
I am next to record the demise of no common
member of the Club-the late ROGER WILBRAHAM,
Esq. Mr. Wilbraham (as will be seen) was among
our earliest as he was among our most constant
associates. He loved books-and with reason ; for
not only had he a very curious and valuable library,
but he was a good scholar-and " understood what
he read." In the Italian language, few Englishmen
went before him ; and what rare and capricious, but
instructive and valuable volumes, did he possess in
that department of literature ! Mazzuchelli and
Tiraboschi were considered by him, and rightly
considered, as sheet anchors of bibliographical erudition. Not that he despised Haym, or disdained
Paitoni. He was the SEMPRONIUS of my Decameron ; and the character and complexion of his
well- stored library, together with the mention of his
hospitality, will be more than once found in the
pages of that work* . I have met society at Mr.
Wilbraham's table, such as I cannot hope to meet
again ; and Sir Joseph Banks, Sir Harry Englefield,
Mr. Payne Knight, Richard Heber, and Foscolo,
were of the number. The latter was the petted and
spoilt marmozet of the upper circles in London.
He had undoubted genius, but he had as undoubted
vanity which at times bordered on insolence. I have
seen him return a rude Yaes or No to a question very
civilly put to him, from one, to whom, in the earlier
-
* Seethe note, vol. ii. 530 ; and vol. iii. 38.
Club.] ROXBURGHIANA.
405
part of his sojourn amongst us, he exhausted the
eloquence of his native tongue in expressions of the
deepest gratitude ; while, upon others, I have seen
him turn his back, and scarcely vouchsafe an answer, as he was complacently contemplating his physiognomy in the glass, and elongating his fiery
whiskers *. Dandled by Duchesses, and caressed
by Countesses, he at last became giddy, and lost both
his balance and position in society. I fear he added
ingratitude to his other more than peccadillos t.
It is time to return to my departed friend. To
* His personal vanity was intense and immeasurable. His portrait
to the Letters of Ortiz (a very strange and wild publication-put forth
under that assumed name, but in reality Foscolo's), was a very flattering
resemblance-but the Original could not endure it.
+ The example of Foscolo, if any such were wanting, is another
proof of that prompt and generous credulity in the English to bestow
lavish patronage upon a foreigner, when native talents, to the full as
obvious and commanding, are pining at the outer gate, and demanding
only the shelter of the vestibule-where the foreigner is regaling himself
upon the ottomans of the interior. It was the fashion to make much
of Foscolo. His very oddities, which in a native are sometimes hardly
endured, were considered tests of originality and genius. His
brusquerie, and I will add, his gaucherie, were even set down to the account
of superior talents. Of the interior of the man, few took the pains to
examine for themselves, or to inquire of others. A general acquaintance
is easily obtained in London. No one thinks of perforating the cuticle
of character. The same facility which secures a young man with a
decent exterior, smart dress, and fluent prattle, into half the drawingrooms of " distinguished fashionables," will secure a lettered foreigner
into circles of a graver import. And thus it was with Foscolo ; but
happening to be trod upon, he turned his tail upwards , and that tail
proved to be armed with a penetrating sting. His contributions to the
Edinburgh and Quarterly Reviews-upon the early Italian Poets and
Writers—were doubtless masterpieces of their kind, and cannot be too
frequently read, and too gravely reflected upon. O si sic omnia !
406 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
few literary characters was Mr. Wilbraham more
attached than to our common friend, Mr. Douce ;
and at no other table than his (except three or four
times at my own) was I in the habit of meeting the
latter. The connecting book- link between them was
lexicography-in which department of a library our
Roxburgher was as eminently rich as he was confessedly learned. It was pleasant to see these two
champions, each sensitive, and at times rough of
speech , battling it away over Palgrave's Eclaircissemens de la Langue Française, 1535, folio ; a
book, as remarkable for its intrinsic worth as for its
* And indeed so were Mr. Wilbraham and Foscolo. I once witnessed a skirmish between these resolute champions of Italian literature,
which had well nigh ended in a pitched battle-when the former observed, with admirable presence of mind, and good breeding, " Mr.
Foscolo, this is my house. I cannot insult any one while he is in it ; but
to-morrow we may speak our minds a little more freely without it.
Meanwhile, be pleased to fill your glass, and pass the bottle. " Foscolo
sulkily pushed on the bottle without filling his glass. "Why (says
Mr. Wilbraham) , I thought you were fond of this wine? It is my best
Burgundy. At any rate, you will allow me to drink your health in it ?”
Instead of brimming his glass -which a warm-hearted and well-bred
gentleman would have done-the Italian sloped himself into an inclined
plane posture-twirled his whiskers-gave one grunt, and afterwards
maintained a dogged silence. I never saw the eye of " mine host"
light up with a more kindling fire. It emitted scintillations ! And yet,
within twenty minutes Foscolo had risen from the table (leaving the
other guests sitting), stood with his back to the fire, and seemed to treat
the company as if they were only so many drivers of viterines. All
that the host said the next day, when I called upon him, was, " Foscolo
is an extraordinary man-but he sadly wants judgment ; nor is he overburdened with courage." " I hope you have not heard from him, Sir ? ”
"Poh-poh-Fcscolo knows me and himself too well to risk a duel.
Our combats must be confined to Dante and Machiavelli dissertations."
Club. ] ROXBURGHIANA.
407
extreme rarity * . But II should say that the strength
of Mr. Wilbraham's library lay in his Voyages and
Travels. In these he had some very rare pieces ;
and upon the Geography of Berlinghieri I have seen
him hold forth as a lecturer, while a forest of green
bottles and glasses, upon his thoroughly hospitable
table, were suffered to be immoveable for some
twenty or twenty-five minutes. There was one
thing eminently distinguishable about him. He was,
in his general bearing, the gentleman of the old
school-to every guest at his tablet. The humblest
* A very particular account of it, with copious specimens, will be
seen in the fourth volume of the Typographical Antiquities. I do not
pretend to know its present pecuniary value ; but no good library can
be perfect without it. I think I have seen nearly a dozen copies of it
-and all in good condition. What is rather extraordinary, the printer
of it (Henry Hawkins) is not yet known to have executed any other work.
+ Especially at his country house at Twickenham-of which I remember the first taking—about twenty-three years ago. Here the most
constant inmate was my old friend the late George Isted, Esq. , of whom
see page 368. But Mr. Wilbraham had a keen relish in Horticultural
pursuits. I see him at this moment in his broad straw hat, with his
spud in his hand, now superintending the management of a cranberry
bed, and now the pruning of a pear tree. His dinners, which always
bore evidence of a culinary artiste, were usually succeeded by a tasteful
desert ; in which he liked to outvie his neighbours in the size, fineness,
and flavour of his fruits -and while the table was richly garnished with
pears, plums, peaches, and nectarines. I have heard him " discourse
most eloquently" in praise of the first named fruit-urging his guests
to partake of it. His guests did not quarrel either with the premises
or conclusion of his speech ; but regularly left the pears untouched,
and reduced the numbers of the peaches and nectarines, which generally
were indeed of extraordinary size and flavour. He loved society, and
kept much. His constitution was that of adamant. In the pleasures
of the table he was temperate ; in those of social colloquy, and generous
408 ROXBURGHIANA, [Roxburghe
99
or comparatively unknown, received as much attention from him as the most distinguished. No star
pleased him more than that of rising genius. Mr.
Wilbraham, in early life , had been a member of
parliament, and the associate and friend of Mr. Fox.
As he approached his " threescore years and ten,'
his political excitements cooled, and Dante and
Ariosto made him forget the Regency and the French
revolution. His admiration, however, of his old
leader, continued unabated to the last. He died a
bachelor, at his house in Stratton-street, in the
eighty-seventh year of his age ; being, with the exception of the late Rev. Mr. Norris, the oldest member of Trinity College, Cambridge. He left his
library to his nephew, his brother's eldest son, one
of the present members of Cheshire ; who, with his
uncle's fine fortune, inherits his unadulterated principles of whiggism.
The successor to Mr. Wilbraham in our Club,
was the EARL CAWDOR : a nobleman of high taste
and literary attainments, and a member who soon
entertainment, he was liberal to excess. He was the kindest and most
generous of masters. His servants, indeed, " had a fine time of it ;"
for his establishment was liberal, and his hours, when in the country,
were almost primitive. A portion of his library was sold by auction by Mr.
Evans in 1829, and produced 1000l. It may be as well to add, that his
book-contribution to the Roxburghe Club, was called DAIPHANTUs, or
the Passions of Love ; being a reprint from an original which could not
have been published before 1604, as an allusion is made in it to Shakspeare's Hamlet-of which the first legitimate edition was of that date.
What led a half- way Septuagenarian and Octogenarian to the production of such a work as 66 Daiphantus," it were difficult to conjecture,
નવા
J. Posselwhite, sc.
ROGER WILBRAHAM, ESQBE
Iondon, Published 1835 , by John Major 71 , Great Russell St Bloomsbury.
wwwwwww
બાયો
ડોળ
だ
ABLIOTHE SHOTHEQUE
LYON THE DELAVILLE DE LYON 3771 ! #1892
Club.] ROXBURGHIANA. 409
gave substantial proof of his zeal in " the cause,'
by the contribution of a Boke called William and
the Werwolf—it being an ancient English Romance,
from an unique MS. in the library of King's College,
Cambridge ; and put forth under the editorial care
of Mr. (now Sir Frederick ) Madden, of the British
Museum. It is printed with singular fidelity to the
original text ; and the able Introduction by Sir
Frederick is succeeded by two letters upon the subject of Werwolves, written by the Hon. Augustus
Herbert. The subject is indeed inexhaustible ; for
a Werwolf is a Man-wolf; one, who will break down
fences and destroy property where the quadruped is
unable to make an entrance. The death of Mr.
Dent followed that of Mr. Wilbraham ; and the
Hon. and Rev. NEVIL GRENVILLE became his successor *. Mr. Grenville's contribution was an heroic
* The library of Mr. Dent (the BAROCIO of the Bibliomania and the
Decameron) was sold by Mr. Evans in 1827, and produced the sum of
15,040%. The GREAT GUN in the library was the first Livy of
1469, upon vellum—which had been successively in the libraries of
Mr. Edwards and Sir Mark Sykes-and when the hammerfell upon that
book, how fell its price too ! It had been obtained by Mr. Dent at the
sale of Sir Mark's library for about the half of its original cost to that
Baronet-namely, 9037.; and it was sold for little more than one
quarter. On its sale the purchasers being Messrs. Payne and Fossit was offered to the late Earl Spencer at a moderate premium ; but that
Nobleman declined the purchase-for reasons which I endeavoured
anxiously to counteract, and which I have never since ceased to deplore.
In his library it would have been in its proper element, as a companion
to the Pliny of 1470, by the same printers, also upon vellum. But who
shall say it is not now " metely reposing" in the splendid cabinet of the
Hon. Tho. Grenville ?
410 ROXBURGHIANA. [ Roxburghe
Latin poem (from a MS. in the Cotton Collection)
by Geoffrey Arthur, Archdeacon of Monmouth, and
afterwards Bishop of St. Asaph, on the Life and
Prophecies of the Welch Merlin ; and was printed
in 1830. The transcription was made by Mr. Black,
who wrote a preface of some twenty pages, which
was afterwards cancelled ; and an analysis of the
poem by Ellis was substituted * .
The knell of our Club continued to be tolled with
no very long intervals between the strokes of the
bell, for in 1833 died the Rev. WILLIAM HOLWELL
CARR who has left anamebehind which entitles him
to be ranked among the most liberal of his country's
benefactors t. His place was supplied by the Rev.
66 * In Mr. Haslewood's copy of this book there also appeared a copy
of this cancelled preface, which he says Iwas never delivered to Lewis
the binder." What occasioned the suppression he had never been able
to ascertain.
66
+ I allude to his donation or bequest of his fine collection of pictures
to the NATIONAL GALLERY ; among which his Leonardo da Vinci shines
forth with an unrivalled lustre. It was purchased by Mr. Carr of the
Earl of Northwick ; and I met him on the very day of the purchase. It
was in Bond-street. After the usual salutations, and on enquiring about
his health, he answered,
as well as a man can be, who has just put his
hand to a three thousand five hundred pounds cheque for a PICTURE.”
It was for the " Christ among the Doctors," by the above artist.
"On
ne peut pas disputer pour les goûts ;" but in my humble judgment—at
least in my estimation—( and I had the cruelty to say so to him) the
St. Catharine by Raffaelle, in the same nobleman's collection, was the
finer performance-was a gem of a purer and more ethereal touch and
composition. My brother Roxburgher laughed at my graphical heresy,
and sought his home in apparently the highest spirits. " Another such
victory," said he, " and I am undone." "Obtain the Raffaelle," I replied, "and you are richer than before." This Raffaelle is nowin the
collection of Mr. Beckford, and, in my apprehension, it was a much
cheaper purchase at 2000 guineas, than the Da Vinci at 35001.
Club.]
ROXBURGHIANA.
411-
EDWARD CRAVEN HAWTREY, now Dr. Hawtrey, and
Head Master of Eton School. A more judicious
choice could not have been made ; for I know of
few libraries which compete with that of our newly
elected member * . It is at once choice and copious,
learned and resplendent ; and I am well pleased to
hear (as indeed I anticipated) that its owner has
recently enriched the Biblical department of it by
the purchase of a few desirable volumes at the Kloss
Sale, rendered valuable by the MS. notes of Melanthont. Dr. Hawtrey's book-contribution
* That library has been in part, and sketchedly, described in the
Bibliophabia, where its owner is introduced under the appellation of
PRISCIAN. As that description is short, a repetition of it may be endured. " Priscian, the classical and the accomplished. Books are his
' dear delight : ' and Bibles, among those books, the primary object of
attraction. The owner has a rare set of them—such as, in a private
collection, are eclipsed only by those at Kensington and Althorp. There
are also belles-lettres in abundance, in the German, Spanish, and
Italian, as well as in the French and English, languages. But oh ! that
splendid MS. of OVID ! —approached with delicacy, unlocked with care,
and surveyed with ecstacy ! " Aos d'oppadµorow idéola " exclaimed
I, as, on turning my eyes in an opposite direction, I essayed to see the
numerous folios and quartos-some of which were impervious to the
glorious sunbeam. " P. 59. Since this feeble and inadequate description
of Dr. Hawtrey's book-treasures has been penned, their owner has attained the dignity above mentioned in the text : and long may he wield
THE SCEPTRE of such a dominion ! Multiplied as his cares and anxieties,
and absorbed as his whole time must doubtless be, in consequence, I will
yet hope he thinks much and often of his library, and will lose no opportunity of a judicious addition to its treasures.
↑ The Bible purchased by Dr. Hawtrey at the sale of Dr. Kloss's
library was that of the date of 1557, enriched by numerous MS. notes
of Melanthon. What an extraordinary collection was the BiblioTHECA KLOSSIANA ! and with what admirable talent and success has
the catalogue of that collection been ushered into the world by Mr.
412 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
the Club is entitled the Private Diary of William
first Earl Cowper, Lord Chancellor of England :
it being an early transcript of the original Diary in
the possession of the late Earl of Hardwicke, 1833,
4to. The supplementary notes are to follow : and
I can only say, in common with my brother Roxburghers, "the sooner the better."
The next funereal stroke struck upon the bell,
was one which sent forth a dismal sound-not only
among the members of the Roxburghe Club, but
throughout Europe at large. I mean the death of
66
Sotheby the Younger. When I take the introductory matter of this
catalogue into consideration, I may conscientiously say that I scarcely
know such a début ; which does equal credit to the author's acumen,
diligence, and gallantry of spirit-for the PLATES accompanying the
catalogue are at once curious and abundant. I consider the Melanthon FOINT as fairly and fully established by the framer of the catalogue : throwing, thereby, a new light upon the marvellous talents of
that most learned, most amiable, and most enviable of the Protestant
Reformers. Dr. Kloss, in addition to the remuneration in the shape of
argent comptant, ” should send over the handsomest gold snuff-box
the town of Francfort can produce, to be deposited in the Sotheby Archives. Had such a collection been sold twenty years ago, the produce
had been threefold. It amounted to 22617. It had escaped Mr.
Sotheby to notice the extraordinary rarity of the Editio Princeps of
Bede's Ecclesiastical History, No. 655, which appeared to be printed by
Eggesteyn, about 1473 ; and which was well and wisely bought by my
friend Dr. Bandinel, for the Bodleian Library, at the stiff price of 20%.
My learned friend Mr. Petrie is vehement about the rarity and importance of this book. How the British Museum missed No. 4637, in
the same collection, is painfully incomprehensible ! And how that National Library, attached to the most knowing and the richest set of
human beings upon earth, can let so many opportunities slip of essential
aggrandisement to their book-treasures, is as unaccountable as lamentable. Can an establishment like that plead poverty ? Forbid it, every
succeeding Prime Minister. Reverting to Dr. Kloss, I anticipate with
confidence the " GOLD SNUFF-BOX."
Club.]
413 ROXBURGHIANA.
Sir Walter Scott-of whom, at this present moment,
I will say no more than what has been advanced in
a preceding page. My Scottiana will appear in
more correct chronological order in the pages to
come. Indeed, Sir Walter may be said to have
been the common property of thousands ; for, in
one sense, he was eminently distinguished for the
patriotic motto non sibi sed toto.
The order of these memoranda of defunct members
of the ROXBURGHE CLUB has at length brought us to
the notice of another Double Vacancy occasioned by
the deaths of two Members, whose names, although
upon very different grounds, are not likely to be
speedily forgotten. I mean JOSEPH HASLEWOOD and
RICHARD HEBER, Esquires. It is a melancholy truth
to state, that they lay in their coffins at the same time,
before burial. I wrote to Mr. Heber, conceiving him
to be at Hodnet, announcing to him the death of
our common friend Haslewood. That letter was returned to him at Pimlico, but on reaching him he
had himself paid the debt of nature. The first object that presented itself to me, on visiting the
mansion of my departed friend at Pimlico, was, the
letter in question-which I necessarily claimed as
my property. How little can human foresight calculate upon contingencies ! In that letter, of the
date of Sept. 27, 1833, I described our common
friend as being " above ground, in his winding-sheet,
and as having died on the preceding Saturday, in
his sixty-fourth year." I afterwards added, " the
414 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
Chronicler of the Club is no more *." In a letter
from our Noble President, on my having announced
to him the double vacancy, his lordship replied thus :
"Death has been rather busy among the Roxburghers of late ; and if I am not mistaken, I think
we have now four vacancies ; but as I am not sure
that I am correct, I inclose a list of the Club as I
suppose it now to stand ; and shall be obliged by
any corrections you may afford. " His lordship was
mistaken—for we had only three vacancies at the
time that of Sir Walter Scott's making the third.
But the next vacancy which occurred, was occasioned
by the demise of our Noble President HIMSELF !! I
proceed in the order before laid down.
And first, of " the Chronicler of the Club.”
Mr. Haslewood had been known to me from the
time of Reed's sale, in 1808, when we used to meet
under the smiling countenance of poor Lochée, and
* I concluded thus :-" I suppose Sotheby will dispose of his books
in December, and that you will have the final fingering of the rarer
comicalities of his whimsical collection. Again I say, peace to his
spirit." Mr. Sotheby did not have the disposal of my friend's books :
but it is justice to Mr. Evans, who did have the disposal of them, to
say, that it came into his possession not only without his knowledge (for
he was at Paris at the time) but without the slightest intervention of
what may be considered the efforts only of a fair and admitted rivalry.
How and why the Haslewood Collection did go to Mr. Evans, is quite
another question. It were enough to have brought the owner from his
grave—if he was serious in what I have often heard him say upon this
subject. Mr. Sotheby was his very old and confidential friend-and
"what will Sam Sotheby make of this, and of that, after I am gone?"
was constantly in his mouth. But, as is above remarked, " how little
can human foresight calculate upon contingencies ! "
Club.] ROXBURGHIANA.
415
when I found that he was an occasional- indeed the
principal-contributor to the Censura Literaria, of
which Sir S. E. Brydges was the nominal editor. I
am not sure whether we had not before exchanged
notes of a common literary gossiping nature ; but
in 1809, when the first edition of my Bibliomania
appeared, I found myselfjustified not only in begging
his acceptance of a copy of that slight performance,
but in introducing him into the work itself, as one
of those bibliomaniacal worthies who, assembling all
the known pieces upon CHATTERTON, and collecting
works upon Hawking and Rural Sports, evinced at
least a book-passion which could not be considered
contemptible. His poetical reply, on accepting the
copy in question, appears in a preceding page * . In
my second edition of the Bibliomania, after our acquaintance had ripened into intimacy, I introduced
him into the " Auction Room" of that Bibliographical Romance, under the character of BERNARDO† ; and at this distance of time (for twenty-
* See page 295.
+ That character is precisely in the following words.
"Lis. Who is that gentleman standing towards the right of the Auctioneer, and looking so intently upon his catalogue ? "
"You point to my friend Bernardo. He is thus anxious because an
original fragment of the fair lady's work which you have just mentioned,
is coming under the hammer, and powerful indeed must be the object
to draw his attention another way. The demure Prioress of Sopewell
Abbey is his ancient sweetheart, and he is about introducing her to his
friends, by a union with her as close and as honourable as that of wedlock. Engaged in a laborious profession (the duties of which are faithfully performed by him) Bernardo devotes his few leisure hours to the
416 [Roxburghe ROXBURGHIANA.
five years have elapsed since the composition of that
work) I look back upon the character there given
of my departed friend with the most entire satisfaction : for it was based upon truth. I presented him
with one of the very earliest copies of this second
edition also, and his answer to a note of mine, accompanying the book * , will be seen in the page iminvestigation of old works, thinking, with the ancient poet quoted by
Ashmole, that
' out of olde fields, as men saythe,
Cometh all this new come fro yeare to yeare,
And out of OLDE BOKES in good faythe
Cometh all this seyence that mene leare.'
Or, with Ashmole himself, ' old words have strong emphasis ; others
maylook upon them as rubbish or trifles, but they are grossly mistaken ;
for what some light braines may esteem as foolish toys, deeper judgments can and will value as sound and serious matter.'
" If you ask me whether Bernardo be always successful in his labours,
I should answer you as I have told him, No : for the profit and applause attendant upon them are not commensurate with his exertions.
Moreover, I do verily think, that, in some few instances, he sacrifices
his judgment to another whim, by a reluctance to put out the strength
of his own powers. He is also, I had almost said, the admiring slave
of Ritsonian fastidiousness ; and will cry pish ! if a u be put for a v, or
a single e for a double one ; but take him fairly as he is, and place him
firmly in the bibliographical scales, and you will acknowledge that his
weight is far from being inconsiderable. He is a respectable and every
way a praiseworthy man : and although he is continually walking in a
thick forest of black letter, and would prefer a book printed before the
year 1550 to a turtle dressed accordingly to the rules of Mr. Farley, yet he
can ever and anon sally forth to enjoy a stroll along the river side with
Isaac Walton in his hand, when he hath his wholesome walk and
merry, at his ease, a sweet air of the sweet savour of the mead flowers,
that maketh him hungry."" P. 165. His collection of WALTON's brought
70%. at the sale of his library in 1833.
* My friend Mr. Freeling happening to purchase this copy for
(57. 188.) at thesale of Mr. Haslewood's library, I find the note in question
(which I had never seen since it was written) to be thus : and I give it
Club.]
ROXBURGHIANA.
417
mediately following that referred to at page 295. I
think that I may add, from this period till within
some few months of his death, Mr. Haslewood found
at my house not only the heartiest reception on the
score of hospitality, but on that of a warm and sympathising friend, in many extremities. At no one
season was my door even half- shut against him.
He never looked upon my table-cloth without
finding a knife and fork placed there for himself.
He had seen my family grow up from childhood to
maturity. He had caressed them when living-he
had mourned for those who had taken their departures. He may be said to have had no home for
himself ; which only served the more to press him to
make my house, at all times, his resort : and at Exning as well as in London, he invariably found such
a reception as induced him often and often to number the hours and days spent there as "among the
eider-down ones of his existence." These were his
publicity, not so much as a test of early and cordial attachment, as of a
different destiny, to that indirectly anticipated in it, having awaited its
author.
MY DEAR FRIEND,
"Kensington, May 11 , 1811.
" The child is just born ; and I throw it, with all its swaddling
clothes, into your lap. May you find it rather smiling than frowning.
Cut open the leaves carefully, as they are yet damp. I need hardly
add that this is a pick'd copy, for so choice a bibliomanical wight as yourself. If you survive me in this troublesome world, fail not to think,
when you open the volume, that the author was one who subscribed
himself cordially yours,
"T. F. D."
E E
418 [ Roxburghe ROXBURGHIANA.
own words. Unfortunately, there was nothing " in
common" between him and his Uncle with whom he
lived, and who was graciously pleased to allot to his
nephew two rooms (of the size of a housekeeper's
china-closet), on the second and third floors, at the
back of his house, and to which the occupant ascended by a back staircase, precipitous and circular
enough to destroy the equilibrium of any visitor.
But all this discomfort only endeared Haslewood
the more to his books, when he got among them,
and which were attempted to be set-off by the most
capricious nick-nackery ( in the way of furniture
ornament) that ever presented itself to a critical eye.
Of the harmony of colour, my deceased friend had
no notion. His stained glass windows exhibited nothing but flaunting yellow and flaming red. His bookillustrations partook of this glaring discrepancy ;
the prints being too often " lugged in neck and
shoulders❞—with a very slight attention to size, subject, and condition. But all this seemed perfectly
natural in its way, and was as a sort of reflex only
of the character of the owner-about whom there
was neither guile, nor presumption, nor insolence,
nor ill- nature. To see him sit doggedly down to
"a batch of quartos and octavos, " as they came
from Charles Lewis's manufactory, was a treat of
no common kind. He seemed to hug the volumes
as his eye sparkled upon their exterior splendour ;
and he was sure to grumble at the charges, while he
exulted and expatiated upon the skill of that re-
Club.] ROXBURGHIANA. 419
nowned Bibliopegist * , as he placed the tomes upon
his shelves. Had the ménage of his Uncle's house
corresponded with the comfort of his book-closets,
Joseph Haslewood had been comparatively a happy
man. It was more than negative pleasure for me to
present him occasionally with proof impressions of
book-plates, curiosities, and a picture or two. How
often has he returned home from Kensington, or
Wyndham Place, with some extra subject, wherewith to embellish the Tour, the Decameron, or the
Edes Althorpiana ! I speak not these things vauntingly ; but it is necessary that they should be
* "Confound that extravagant chap, L— , if he were not so capital
a binder, he should never receive a stiver of my money"-was his frequent expression. I have known him return home prematurely from
an evening party (and he was a pretty good sitter) when he expected
one of the " batches" above alluded to. Latterly he had given up the
theatre ; but he may be said to have brought the theatres to himself
in that strange and interminable farrago, entitled " COLLECTAnea DraMATICA❞ —which brought 247. 10s. at the sale of his library. He affected
great indifference to Kean, being attached to the Kemble school-although he was as noisy as any man, against that renowned tragedian, in
the memorable O. P. row. What he did, he usually did upon a sort of
principle. He was a great Robin Hood man, and an indefatigable explorer of old ballads and dramatic fragments. When he accompanied
me, some six years ago, to the public library at Cambridge, there was
no getting him out of Bishop More's black-letter closet. I thought Mr.
Lodge, the public librarian, must have had recourse to " the strong
man" to pull him away from the editio princeps of " The blind beggar
of Bethnal Green." And at Althorp, when I set him down to that
unique tract called Gamaliel Ratsey, it was quite evident that his bosom
was labouring with heavings such as could not be exceeded in force and
frequency by those of a Sibylline prophetess !! Of what importance
this tract is, may be seen from Mr. Collier's extract from what Mr.
Haslewood has given of it, in his very recent and most interesting little
pamphlet, entitled, New Facts regarding the Life of Shakspeare, 1835,
p. 30-31.
EE 2
420 ROXBURGHIANA. [ Roxburghe
spoken and if his collection of my humble works
"were well sold " at the sale of his library, it is only
common justice to add, that these gratuitous contributions were greatly instrumental to such a sale.
He received all my " privately printed " tracts as a
matter of course, without even the trouble of asking
for them* . I have said, that our intimacy continued till " within a few months of his death." Had
he not lived latterly a good deal under the influence
* These tracts were, 1. Specimen of an English Debure ; 2. Specimen Bibliothecæ Britannica ; 3. Book Rarities ; 4. Bibliography, a
Poem ; 5. The Lincolne Nosegay ; 6. La Belle Marianne ; with presents of many single volumes of publications, besides my own : among
these, was the scarce pamphlet by the late Mr. Malone, privately printed,
upon the Tempest of Shakspeare. Notto have given him these things,
would have been depriving myself of a positive gratification ; and
therefore I assume no extra merit upon the occasion. Many of our
common friends can attest the truth of this remark. His collection of
my works, including private pieces, and the Malone pamphlet, produced,
I think, about 70l. They were all upon small paper. The last present
which he received from me (knowing his passionate attachment to books
of sports) was an English translation, by a Graduate of Medicine, of
the Greek of Arrian upon Coursing, &c., 1821 , with 24 embellishments from the antique-on India paper ; a book, so sweetly adorned,
and so admirably executed in its literary department, that I see with
delight my own brief commendation of it ( from the Bibliophobia), selected by Mr. James Bohn, in the most seductively printed, and well
laid-out catalogue, which I have seen a long time from a bibliopolistic
tyro. My friend Haslewood's reply on receiving the volume is so
characteristic of a kindly feeling, and of his own peculiar vocabulary,
that I hesitate not one moment to lay it before the reader. If I am not
mistaken, it was the LAST LETTER which I ever received from him.
"Conduit Street, July 2, 1832.
66 MY DEAR D***,
" I am certainly alive ; but from the time of losing an excellent wellwisher and good client in Sir J. Harington, I have been fighting with
the severest spasmodic attack of rheumatism I have ever had ; and was
wrapt in flannel when your splendid, heart- cheering present arrived―
Club.]
ROXBURGHIANA.
421
of one vulgar, domineering spirit, it had continued
to his dying hour. I am free to confess that I yet.
MISS my departed friend-in many a solitary mcment, and on many a social occasion. But we shall
meet again.
The foregoing-from the indulgence of mere personal feeling is the manifestation of a sincere desire to scatter at least one unsullied flower upon the
tomb of my departed friend.
" His saltem accumulem donis, et fungar inani
Munere."
Something more, however-and perhaps of greater
weight may be expected from me in reference to
the Deceased with THE CLUB. In consequence of
a public attack, by an anonymous writer, upon the
which absolutely revivified my spirits. To ME, the acquisition is invaluable. I do not know, of my two hundred volumes on the sports,
one to compete with it. The chaste and spirited embellishments prove
the author no trifling amateur in the arts ; and for the subject, poor Sir
James Mansfield, the most noted and enthusiastic courser and breeder
of long- tails I recollect, would have doffed gown and wig to make him
judge of the leash. Had I seen the book by chance, and found it unpurchaseable, I believe the parish bell might have tolled my funeral
knell. In venturing to treat myself with a volume of Ridinger's Animals, out of younger Bohn's catalogue last week-after several twitches
from my poverty-struck conscience—to add to my collection, I fancied
it was adding something of value ; but it is a cypher to your article.
I hope it will not keep me from church to-morrow, as I do not mean
to bend to the spasms, if resolution can rebut the same. Accept my very
best thanks, which is too trite an acknowledgment ; and I therefore wish
I had another pen for five minutes to speak more encomiastically.
"Yours truly,
"J. HASLEWOOD."
422 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
memory of the former-combining, in that attack,
something stronger than indirect censure of the
latter for its admission of him as a Member of their
Society-it may be expected that I should offer a few
remarks at least in behalf of ONE whom, the silence
of the grave has cut off from all means of reply.
There cannot be the slightest wish or desire of justifying the Club-which can only treat such an imputation with the contempt that it merits. Mr.
Haslewood was a solicitor, and an honest one into
the bargain. As his business was limited, his gains
were small. His education had been exceedingly
contracted, which only rendered his attachment to
books, and to antiquarian research, the more surprising and commendable. His contributions to the
Censura Literaria, and to the British Bibliographer, shewed that he had " the proper stuff ” within
him—to which must be added, the splendid and
most accurate reprint of Dame Juliana Berner's Book
of Hawking and Hunting, published in 1811 , of
which he had the editorial superintendence—and to
which an " Introduction " was written, proving at
least the very singular and patient spirit of investigation of its Editor. To these qualifications was
added a moral and upright character, with manners, which, although a little blunt and unpolished,
were never calculated in the slightest degree to
wound the feelings of the most fastidious. His own
particular vocabulary might be called Haslewoodian
-but it was neither vulgar nor offensive.
Club. ]
ROXBURGHIANA.
423
With these qualifications, I considered my departed friend as no unfit Associate for the Roxburghe
Club ; and Lord Spencer, Mr. Baron Bolland, and
others, confirmed the recommendation :-
"Me, me! adsum, qui feci ! in me convertite ferrum."
If there were impropriety or disgrace in the nomination of such a man, I desire to take it exclusively upon myself. His admission to this Society,
or Club, proved one of the greatest comforts of his
existence. He felt elevated by the circumstance.
It was a feather ( a small red one, perhaps) in his
bonnet ; and his zeal, diligence, and enthusiasm
were alike kindled to pursue his favourite bibliographical studies to their utmost extent. Hence, in
the following year, 1813, came out his most admirable reprint, with a preface, of Painter's Palace of
Pleasure, 2 vols . , 4to. This was rapidly followed
by Baldwin's Mirror for Magistrates, a reprint of
equal accuracy and elaboration, in the same form
and number of volumes. These were, in all respects,
not only excellent works in themselves, but the rarity
and value of the original impressions had rendered
such reprints of absolute importance to the Student
of early English Literature. They were accompanied by accounts and analyses of all the known
previous editions. I remember the late Mr. Gifford
to have said of these publications, " these are
something like ; this is bringing your black-letter
pursuits to some intelligible and useful issue. " But
424 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
the crowning result of my worthy friend's bibliographical labours (for I do not pretend to enumerate them all) was, the discovery of the Author of
Drunken Barnaby-and who should that author be
but RICHARD BRATHWAIT? Mr. Haslewood's
edition of this humorous, and of its kind classical
production, gave unqualified approbation to the
knowing in these matters. The discovery, of itself,
was not of much importance ; but the key which led
to it was very ingeniously and successfully introduced within all the wards of the lock* . But
enough. This tribute of respect to departed friendship may not be without its use, if it convince the
liberal and the kind-hearted that accusation is at
all times easier than proof ; and, as on this occasion,
that the apparently meditated suppression of truth
assumes the cowardly aspect of falsehood. According to the inferences drawn by the anonymous writer
in question, it should seem as if my departed friend
had been introduced into the Roxburghe Club as a
driveller and a dolt. I hope to have successfully
* What more particularly led to the discovery was, that in Brathwait's avowed pieces, the errata were usually designated thus : on the
Errata. The same designation appearing to the errata of the first
edition of the " Drunken Barnaby," led the Editor to the discovery in
question -which was abundantly confirmed by collateral evidence. Mr.
Haslewood's reprint of that first edition was one of the prettiest and
happiest efforts of his editorial labours. Of Brathwait's numerous
pieces, Mr. Haslewood had nearly a perfect collection. Some of them
well merit republication. The author was a most extraordinary man in
poetry and in prose, and yet we scarcely know any thing about him.
Club. ]
ROXBURGHIANA.
425
proved that he was as remote from, as he was undeserving of, the application of either of these opprobious terms* .
* I might here leave my departed friend to fight his own battle with
posterity, did not a sense of duty enjoin me, as well for the sake of
others as myself, to trespass upon the reader's patience for a few further
minutes, in the notice of what has been alluded to at the foot of
page 379, &c.
᾿Αλγεινὰ μέν μοι καὶ ΛΕΓΕΙΝ ἐςὶν τάδε
᾿Αλγος δὲ ΣΙΓΑΝ. Prom. Vinctus.
Lest "silence," however, should be construed into impotence, or an
inability to meet the charges, direct or implied, which are contained in
four successive articles upon the late Mr. HASLEWOOD and the RoxBURGHE CLUB, written in the Athenæum of January, 1834—and in
which articles the characters of others, as well as of my own, may be
supposed to be more or less impugned-I will take leave to submit a
few remarks in the shape of a REPLY to the articles in question. But
first, I beg to say a few words upon the transaction itself, which led to
the communications in the Athenæum. I agree with the writer of those
articles in thinking that such a MS. volume as that intitled the RoxBURGHE REVELS should never have seen the public light. As there
was nothing to call for-so there was nothing to justify-such an exposure. Mr. Haslewood died a bachelor, in comparatively easy circumstances. The whole produce of his library, whatever that might be,
was to go, unburdened, to his heirs, relations, or legatees. He had
often told me, in the earlier part of our acquaintance, that he would
refuse a thousand guinea cheque for his books. They produced at his
death about 2,500l.: the WHOLE being so much more than any person
or persons could reasonably expect for themselves, as their owner might
have sold his books in his lifetime, and put the amount of the sale into
his pocket, without there being the shadow of a right to call him to an
account for such a proceeding. This point is, I think, as clear as the
sun at noon-day.
However, it is too well known that Mr. Haslewood did not do so ; but
dying, he left two executors-one of whom, who was his brother, declined
to act. Theacting executor, an old and intimate friend of the deceased,
resolved to shew his affectionate respect for his memory, by selling
this volume with the whole of the library. There is no accounting for
tastes and one has heard of being " defended from friends, and taking
care of one's self against enemies." Poor Haslewood was in no condition to do the latter ; and accordingly THIS VOLUME-the concoction of
426 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
It is now in course that I should say something
of the OTHER deceased member of the Roxburghe
one in his gayer and unsuspecting moments-the repository of private,
confidential communications-a mere memorandum book of what had
passed at convivial meetings, and in which " winged words" and flying
notes of many gentlemen and friends were obviously incorporated —this
volume it was resolved TO SELL. Something like an unctuous balm to
something like a misgiving conscience was also resolved, in the first
place, to be administered , by putting in the book at such a price as it was
supposed would beat down all opposition ; and I have reason to believe
that TWENTY GUINEAS was the sum in contemplation. The mode
adopted to accomplish that end was singular enough. It was as if
pouring oil into a fire should extinguish the flames.
Long before the sale, the book became almost public property. It
was allowed to travel eastwardly and westwardly. Not only was the
substance of the greater part of its " C. Mery tales" noised abroad, but it
became stripped of portions of its contents. Never did spoliation
assume a more praiseworthy character. Never was an act of robbery
more to be commended. The only subject of lamentation is, that it
did not go FURTHER. If the executor, in the just exercise of what he
thought to be a discretionary power, suffered A, B, C, to receive back
their contributions, why, I ask, did he not extend the exercise of that power
to D? If the genuineness of the entirety of the volume be invaded,
upon what principle is the trespasser to stop ? Of ALL the contributors
to that unparalleled olla podrida, I think that the writer of these pages
had as great a right as any one to receive back his own. Above all, should
I have desired the letter of Sir Walter Scott-which was given to the
deceased as a document per se, and not for his family to enjoy its proceeds. As to the letter of Lord Althorp to me, and my note to the
deceased, which have served the purpose of indiscreet, if not indecent
remark, it was, perhaps, not to be expected that an executor, so wholly
absorbed in doing JUSTICE to the memory of his departed friend, should
think of restoring either. The volume was bought at the sale by Mr.
Thorpe for 40%. , and by him offered, through me, to the purchase of
the Roxburghe Club. Of course, no gentleman would think of putting
his hand into his pocket with a view, as it might have been said, of
hushing up any strictures advanced upon such an association. The
characters and rank in life of the members placed them far above it.
In consequence, the ROXBURGHE REVELS became the property of one
who " resolved to purchase it at any price, that he might gratify curiosity,
and give the readers [ of the Athenæum] its principal contents. " And
Club.] ROXBURGHIANA.
427
Club-who was lying, at the same time with my
friend Haslewood, in his coffin. That I should
further, he " hoped and believed he should execute his task without
giving offence in any quarter." The proof of this friendliness of disposition is remarkably verified in his fourth and last communication,
when he hopes to be able " to give the Roxburghe Club its coup de
GRACE ;" and that he " shall be happy to have done with, as well as
done for, both Mr. Haslewood and the Club." To be sure, there is no
"giving offence" to people when they are DEAD. Again, in the same
communication : —" the Club is extinct, and Haslewood has extinguished it." A little further : " the anniversary dinner of 1833 is the
last it will ever celebrate. " And the concluding sentence runs thus :-
"We have now finished the Roxburghe Revels and finished the Roxburghe Club. Mr. Haslewood has finished himself." I place these
points in front of this reply, to shew the quo animo of the writer ; and
how very strange and startling it is, to see a man going about with a
drawn sword or bludgeon in his hand, in order to transfix or knock
down individuals as he meets them, by way of gratifying curiosity, and
"not giving offence in any quarter."
:-
Renewing the expression of my entire accordance with this writer in
the unpardonably bad taste-to give it no harsher name—e-which could
have sanctioned the sale of the " Roxburghe Revels, " I must be allowed
to ask the censurer of such a measure, upon what plea or principle HE
could have contributed to give a more extensive publicity to the contents of the volume in question ? To have been instrumental to the
gibes and jeers of a sale-room, were sufficiently indefensible ; but, with
this conviction of the gross impropriety of such conduct in the writer's
mind, to have deliberately spreadfar and wide, by means of an ably- conducted hebdomadal journal, the whimsicalities and harmless absurdities of the book now under consideration, is utterly irreconcileable to
reason and honest dealing. It is quite evident from the beginning, that
the anonymous writer was determined upon the measure of exposure :
he was resolved to have the book, coute qu'il coute-and gave the purchaser at the sale five guineas for his bargain. He seems to have rushed
forward as a vulture upon his prey. The dead body of poor Haslewood
is mangled with his talons—and yet all this is undertaken, as he complacently tells us, " to gratify curiosity," and with the hope of being
"able to execute his task without giving offence to any one." If the
deceased had been the weak, harmless, ignorant, and puzzle-headed
creature described by this anonymous libeller, why take so much pains to
" ... draw his frailties from their drear abode ? "
428 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
approach the subject with mingled sensations, will
be sufficiently intelligible to those who, with myself,
4
And why, on dramatic points, betray such unusual sensitiveness and
acrimony of feeling and expression ? There seems throughout the
whole to be something like an under current of rivalry in the histrionic
department.
To descend to a few particulars. The spirit or principle of this
attack upon the memory of my departed friend, is to me sufficiently
revolting. To kick a man when he is down-to kick him when he is
lying upon his back IN HIS COFFIN-is so thoroughly unenglishman and
unchristianlike, that I have no words to express my mingled contempt
and abhorrence of such a proceeding. Mr. Haslewood is no sooner at
rest in his grave, than this writer tells us who and what he was : —-where
and how he was born. What does it matter " where and how” a man
is BORN ?
"Honour and Shame from no condition rise :
ACT WELL YOUR PART-there all the honour lies."
In what sort of homes were Shakspeare, and Milton, and Newton born ?
To be sure, my friend must not be mentioned in the same sentence with
these illustrious names : but the principle or position is confirmed by
such an illustration. Horace tells Mæcenas, that when he comes to pay
him a visit, he must not expect to find " ivory ornaments or a gilded
ceiling under his roof : " nor anything but (what might be translated
into) the vin ordinaire, or vin du pays, when he comes to dine with
him *. When I call to mind what I have heard, and believe, of the
early manhood of the deceased, the wonder may be that he lived to the
protracted period of his life (sixty-four years), and was allowed, through
a merciful Providence, to attain the little comfort and comparative distinction which latterly awaited him. Is a man to be pointed at, or
hooted at, because, late in life, he has associated with gentlemen—
when his evil stars, at an earlier period, had driven him in an opposite
direction ? Throughout the whole of this writer's strictures he boldly
affirms, although necessarily he was never present, that the Members of
* " Non ebur neque aureum
Mea renidet in domo lacunar."
Lib. ii. Ode 18.
Lib. i. Ode 20.
"Vile potabis modicis Sabinum
Cantharis.
Club. ] ROXBURGHIANA.
429
knew RICHARD HEBER, in " the high and palmy
state " of other days ; when his constitution was unthe Roxburghe Club were shocked and disgusted with the conversation
of the deceased. The assertion is CONTRARY TO TRUTH. Never was
speech more harmless than that which fell from his lips. As above observed, it was only Haslewoodian.
As to the allusions to, or express mention made of, myself, I desire
not to receive the standard of good breeding at the hands of this writer.
In other respects he may as well be informed that I am not the Secretary
-that I receive no emolument-that the office of Vice-President is one of
no trouble and of no indignity : further, that I have no Journal, or RIVAL
book of REVELS, to bequeath for the benefit of such as, like himself,
" hope to give no offence" by trampling upon the dead and indirectly
traducing the living. So short- sighted were this writer's views, or
rather so consummate his vanity, and audacious his prediction of the
extinction of the Roxburghe Club in consequence of his anathemas,
that, on the vacancies occasioned by the deaths of Mr. Haslewood and
Mr. Heber, and after the Athenæum articles had appeared, our venerable
President, although in indifferent health, came to town expressly to fill
those vacancies : when the elections of Mr. ARCHDEACON BUTLER and
Sir STEPHEN GLYNN, Bart. , M. P., gave no signs of morbidity in any
portion of the body corporate of ROXBURGHERS ! So much for a little
too much confidence in the exercise of unrestrained scurrility.
It is necessary to correct a few ERRORS in this memorable attack. I
wish I could call them, in the language of Quintilian, "dulcia vitia."
On the death of Mr. Dodd, it is said that application was made to " Mr.
Bliss, son of a bookseller at Oxford," to become his successor. Application was made to Mr. Bliss ; and I felt as anxious as my departed
friend for his election : —for his talents (evinced by his edition of Wood's
Athena Oxonienses) would have done credit to the choice. But the
application was made to the Rev. Philip Bliss, of St. John's College, and
now Dr. Bliss, Registrar of the University of Oxford. The father of
Dr. Bliss was a clergyman, and not a bookseller. But what if he had
been? The late Rev. Peter Elmsly, Principal of St. Alban's Hall, was
the nephew of a bookseller of that name in the Strand : and when did
Oxford boast a more perfect ATTIC-GREEK SCHOLAR than that excellent man? The writer further says, that application was made by
Mr. Haslewood, on the death of Sir Mark Sykes, for the admission of an
individual into the Club, whom he chooses to designate as a sort of literary
Paul Pry-and whose admission, he implies, would have disgraced it.
I can only say, that, leaving the individual here knooted, to fight his own
430 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
impaired, and his intellectual vigour undiminished.
But, remembering this brightness of his meridian
battle, which I presume him to be capable of doing, I do not believe the
statement. It was most likely to have come to my knowledge ; but it
did not. The. amount of the contribution to raise a monument to the
memory of Caxton, is so loosely stated by him, that one would think it
was only 21. 28. The members never objected, for one moment, to advance this sum per head, with equal readiness, as their quotas for the
anniversary dinners. What they did object to, was this : -to contribute
towards the payment of 1201. for the fees of erection of the monument.
As above intimated, the parochial officers of St. Margaret, much to their
honour, allowed this Roxburghian tribute of respect to the memory of
our first English printer to be placed upon the walls of the church, or
rather over the vestry-door, in the vestibule, as you ascend the staircase,
FREE OF ALL CHARGES : forming, in this instance, a striking and honourable contrast to their neighbours.
It is time to make an end. In what has been here advanced, I have
had neither selfish nor sinister views to gratify. There is a dead as well
as a living reputation both to defend and to substantiate ; and I trust that
I have effected this for my departed friend . In so doing I have not
held him up as the mirror of literary or antiquarian knighthood. Far
from it : but there is a difference between the charge of almost drivelling
idiocy and an uneducated understanding ; especially, too, as in this
instance, the former seems to be accompanied with an imputation of
disgusting vulgarity. As to the factitious titles attached by my friend
to certain volumes of minor poetry, such as " Garlands of Gravity—
Eleemosynary Emporium-Noddy's Nuncheon-Poverty's Pot-Pourri
-Mumper's Medley -Nutmegs for Nightingales, " &c. which brings
down the terrible wrath of the critic, I see nothing so formidably repulsive in these titles. A man has surely a right to call his books, as to
call his dogs, by what titles and names he pleases ; and we should no
more quarrel with Mr. Haslewood for the former, than we should for
having called one dog Pincher, another Boxer, and a third Blucher :
with this difference, that Blucher was at times a very troublesome, if
not dangerous, animal ; whereas " Nutmegs for Nightingales " might
have continued harmless, as well as untasted and untouched, upon the
shelf, for centuries. Mr. Evans has well and sensibly designated the
"Roxburghe Revels," as a very curious and whimsical record." It is
nothing more.
66
I admit, freely admit, that my friend's style was, in short, sui generis;
delectably original ; and at times irresistibly laughter-provoking. Yet he
Club. ]
ROXBURGHIANA.
431
sun, let us contemplate with a deeper sympathy its
declension-in the emaciated frame, flurried discourse, and uncertain movements of his later years.
Under this impulse, it will be no unworthy exercise
of an honourable feeling to bear in mind, when, at
the ROXBURGHE, as well as at all other tables, he was
one of the charms of society-and the rallying point
when conversation flagged : or rather, wherever he
was, conversation never became stagnant. And then
-how varied that conversation ! He would moot
Greek metres with my friend Mr. Drury, and fight
over derivatives and etymons with Roger Wilbraham.
With the Boswells he would quote long passages of
their father's biography of Dr. Johnson ; and with
Dodd or Haslewood ring changes upon Robin Hood
Garlands. His memory was only exceeded by that
of Porson ; which I have often heard him call " almost divine. " To a thorough facility in quotations
from the ancient classics, I have heard him at once
often seemed to be " near a good thing." He went " about it and about
it," and was within " an ace " of its discovery. Then, all at once, he
would strike off in a wild and unsearchable path. But enough. The
deceased was capable of something like " good stuff: " and had he been
allowed to concentrate his COLLECTIONS with a view to a new edition of
Warton's History ofEnglish Poetry, with its enlargement to the present
time-and of which it was in contemplation, some dozen years ago, to
propose the Editorship to Mr. SOUTHEY-We had received an invaluable
acquisition to our national literature. Moreover, had Mr. Haslewood
found encouragement to give us a new edition of Ritson's Bibliographia
Poetica (to which his additions were very considerable), and which I
believe he would have done with a very slender remuneration, we should
have sincerely thanked him for his toil, and considered him in any light
but that " of a driveller or a dolt."
432 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
ready and copious in long quotations from those of
the middle-ages-such as Politian, Sannazarius, and
Vida and bringing this passion down to later times,
my friend Mr. Drury and myself once heard him
repeat Canning's Iter ad Meccam from beginning to
end, apparently without a single trip. He was also
much attached to the lower school of the old Latin
poets, such as Lucan, Claudian, and Silius Italicus.
Of the latter, he published a small edition when
he was only twenty years of age. Of Claudian, a
new edition, very nearly perfected-some twenty-two
years ago was discovered on his decease * . It
should he remembered that, in all his conversations,
not one vulgar word-nor passionate expression—
would escape his lips during the most animated
discussion.
It is foreign to my feelings and habits to gainsay
what, in this and other works, I have deliberately
and conscientiously said of THE DECEASED. He
merited all the commendation which it was in my
power to bestow. His love of BIBLIOMANIA was
strictly his " ruling passion strong in death. " He
had visited Mr. Rodd, the bookseller, but the evening before ; and on the next morning (that of his
expiration) had sent his servant to him to come and
receive additional instructions in regard to some
book-commissions to be executed abroad.
* This impression, of which one copy only appears to have been
printed upon VELLUM, is hinted at in 384, vol. ii. of the Decameron.
Might it not be perfected with advantage?
Club. ] ROXBURGHIANA.
433
Myknowledge of his death was purely accidental,
and obtained of our common friend, Mr. Douce ;
now also among the departed ! On hearing it, I
thought that my friend had committed a mistakeand as poor Haslewood was lying dead at the moment,
I observed, " You mean Haslewood ? " "No : " emphatically rejoined Mr. Douce, " I mean HEBER ! "
It is anything but affectation to affirm, that for a brief
minute I lost my consciousness of every thing around
me. My friend perceived my distress ; and after the
opening of a window had let in air, and restored recollection, I retired abruptly. Within half an hour
of this communication, I stood by the side of the
coffin of RICHARD HEBER. I gazed upon that countenance, marked with the waxen rigidity of death,
which had never been turned upon me but with serenity and in smiles. I was not prepared for such
an alteration.
" Hei mihi, QUALIS ERAT !-quantum MUTATUS AB ILLO ”
whom I remembered, flushed with his OXFORD CONQUEST surrounded by congratulatory friends-and
the envied object of admiration and applause * !
* Among the letters of congratulation received by Mr. Heber on his
having gained the election as Member for the University of Oxford
against Sir John Nichols (both candidates being of the same political
principles) was one from his then intimate, and always powerful, friend,
Dr. Copleston, at that time Provost of Oriel College, and now Bishop of
Llandaff. Mr. Heber shewed it to me, with a conscious triumph on
receiving so admirable a letter from so respected a quarter. I have a
perfect remembrance of the ability of its execution. Shortly after my
FF
434 ROXBURGHIANA, [Roxburghe
Hector could scarcely have appeared less changed
to Æneas than was the countenance of my departed
friend to myself. And then-the room in which he
had breathed his last ! It had been that of his
birth. The mystic veil, which for twenty- five years
had separated me from this chamber, and which the
friend's election, on having paid his Oxford visit of thanks, I received a
letter from him, written at Shrewsbury, full of exuberance of spirits,
felicitous expression, and cordiality of sentiment. It was also written
in the height of his Shrievalty, or being high sheriff for the county of
Salop.
66 MY DEAR D
**9
66 Shrewsbury, Lion Inn. Nov. 21, 1821.
" I thank you heartily for your nice, chatty, and gossiping letter ;
which caught me at this place, where I have been passing the day partly
for the purpose of shrievalty-business, and partly to superintend the embarkation (by the coach) of a Cheshire cheese, from a certain senatorial
dairy in Shropshire, addressed to a certain bibliographical friend at
Kensington. As it weighs about 60 lbs. , I wish you would divide it
with our common friend PETRIE, as it will then have a better chance of
being consumed when in good order. And if you think this shabby,
remember the adage of Hesiod— “ οσω πλεον ἥμισυ πανλος” and call
upon me again on a future occasion. Observe, the said cheese was on
the road before the arrival of your letter ; and shall be followed, before
the close of the season, by a sample of Hodnet birds and beasts—free of
all expense except porterage-concerning which you may consult your
neighbour Douce, whom I wish well out of the jaws of the dog. [I
now forget to what circumstance this alludes. ] I lament to find you
can give no better account of your profits on the Tour. You suffer
yourself to be led away by your artists. I sincerely trust you may have
better luck with your Ædes Althorpianæ.
"My Oxford visit of thanks went off remarkably well, as I flatter myself HARRY DRURY will vouch for : but you are under an entire delusion about a certain PRINCIPAL [ Hodson of Brazen Nose—Mr. Heber's
own college] and his disposition to you-ward. He himself assures me
the whole must have originated in a mistake ; as he is perfectly unconscious of any unfriendly or unfavourable opinion respecting you, and
would at any time be most happy to see you. Nevertheless, he au-
Club. ] ROXBURGHIANÁ.
435
deceased would never allow me, nor any one else,
to enter, was now effectually drawn aside by the
*
thorises me to call you over the coals for being overseen in the postchaise full of three voters, under convoy of Hulk (was it not?) of St.
John's, who appear at least he the said Hulk-to have taken a wrong
bias on the journey. I think it was Mr. Barnet who was their sponsor
After my Oxford gaieties, I retired with Hodson to his parsonage at
Ewelm, near Benson, where we made a Christian of his young son and
heir, not without much of classical libation ; and from thence I adjourned to Dropmore, and, during my stay there, drove over, with Hart
and Baron Fagel, to Eton, and had a long gossip and flyting with that
learned conchologist, PROVOST GOODAL, in the library. Since my return to Hodnet I have had a week of much provincial jollity and compotation, at Shrewsbury, where good cheer and Sneyd's claret abounded :
to say nothing of parties of eighty, and healths "five fathom deep"-
the whole crowned with a gay ball . HASLEWOOD never heard such carolling or such madrigals in his life, as those which were then and there
produced. My subsequent employment has been chiefly among my
woods and trees ; BOOKS being at present quite in the back-ground.
66 Thank you for your account of Scorr's Pirate, which I have not
yet seen. Your correspondent's sketch † is interesting. I rejoice to
learn that you have reason to think dear Frank [my son, then in India]
is rising in his profession. Pray remember me kindly to Mrs. D. and
your daughters ; and as to Boxer [my son's dog, left behind], I am
commissioned by Regent, Rector, Malpas, Dash, Jack, Fly, Friskey,
Don, and sundry other greyhounds, harriers, and spaniels (" quos nunc
perscribere longum est ") -all dogs of excellent worth-to offer him their
cynical gratulations. Adieu, my dear D.; I still hope we shall meet
both before and soon after Christmas. Remember the dictum of the
* I cannot satisfactorily decypher the name of the Johnian : but I
can satisfactorily vouch for the Sponsorian fidelity of my friend Mr.
Barnet, then Member for Rochester.
+ This sketch is from the able and ready pen of Dr. James Browne,
ofEdinburgh ; a late correspondent of some years standing, whose letters
it was always a pleasure to receive and a yet greater pleasure to peruse.
I have never seen their Author. Our intercourse was established and
continued from literary sympathies. The reader will thank me for the
sketch in question, which is as follows :
" I have read the first two volumes of the " PIRATE," and 200 pages
•
FF 2
436 ROXBURGHIANA. Roxburghe
iron hand of Death. I looked around me with
amazement. I had never seen rooms, cupboards,
passages, and corridors, so choked, so suffocated
Schola Salernitana : " Si vis te reddere sanum, curas tolle graves." Alas,
poor GEORGE ISTED ! Ever affectionately yours,
Ristletr
The concluding expressions relate to the death of our common friend,
of whom mention is made at page 368, ante. Those who have known
the writer of this letter as long and as intimately as myself, will agree
with me, that it is strongly characteristic of his ordinary style of conversation and epistolary composition ; while, to ME it is in many essentials
most dear- as incorporating the names of those whom I cannot cease to
love and to respect ; and of FOUR, passed, with their writer, to their
"long account." It also marks my friend's career, when at the height of its distinction.
of vol. iii. The scene is laid in Shetland, and it is as unlike any of the
predecessors as Waverley is unlike Tom Jones. The hero is Cleveland,
the beau-ideal of a buccaneer of the first order : the heroine, Minna
Troil, daughter of Magnus Troil, an old Norseman, and a sort of Zetland chief, who is drawn to the life, as well as an Angushire Scotswoman, called Mrs. Baby Yellowley, with her brother Triptolemus, an
élève of St. Andrews, and a speculating idiotical farmer. An old sorceress (not a Meg Merrilies) called Norna of the Fitful Head, is a grand
figurante in the drama of the piece, and quite a Rembrandt painting.
The inferior characters shew an immense acquaintance with human nature in all its varieties and forms of existence. A scene between two
pirates is perfectly unparalleled. You think you overhear their quarrel,
and their language, as furious as that element on which they caught their
prey and made their boisterous homes. I thought these particulars
would amuse you, and I have scrolled them half blind from weak eyes.
I may add, which I do from personal knowledge, that the localities of
ultima Thule are given with a truth and effect perfectly wonderful. I
do not think the Pirate will be so popular as some of its predecessors, but it will probably strike the judges as more remarkable than any of them. It is as unlike Kenilworth as Kenilworth is unlike Old
Mortality."
Club.] ROXBURGHIANA.
437
with books.
were there.
Treble rows were here, double rows
Hundreds of slim quartos-several
upon each other-were longitudinally placed over
thin and stunted duodecimos, reaching from one
extremity of a shelf to another. Up to the very
cieling the piles of volumes extended ; while the floor
was strewed with them, in loose and numerous heaps.
When I looked on all this, and thought what might
be at Hodnet, and upon the Continent, it were difficult to describe my emotions. " Vox faucibus
hæsit ! " My friend Dr. Bliss had talked of the
Deckers, and writers of that author's time and description, which were in the Malone Collection * ____
but here there were two Deckers and three Deckers
* See page 384, ante. By Mr. Heber's bed-side, upon a small table,
was several of Green's Pieces. The first I opened was entitled Greene's
Groat's Worth of Wit bought with a Million ofRepentance, 1592, 4to.
With a profligate character, it might have been a curious coincidence
to have found such a book, in such a place, on such an occasion. See
a list of Greene's innumerable pieces in the Censura Literaria, Beloe's
Anecdotes of Literature, vol. ii. , pp. 168. 196. 261 ; and Censura Literaria, vol. viii. p. 380-391 : the latter furnished by the late Mr. Haslewood. My friend Sir Francis Freeling ( see Library Companion, p. 598,
second edit. ) possesses the largest collection I know of the very fanciful
yet pungent and not uninstructive pieces of ROBERT GREENE. I wish
Mr. D'Israeli would take this author up, and " give him a good shaking."
There is more to be learnt of the EXPRESS CHARACTER of the times in
the pieces ofGreene, Harvey, Decker, and Nash, &c., than in the elaborate disquisitions of learned historians. And yet, after all-howsingular !-
in none of these contemporaneous productions is there the slightest
mention of SHAKSPEARE-who was not only living, but in high repute.
One would have thought that his very "hose, doublet, and jerkin,"
would have been described by some of this vivacious and talkative
tribe. Who would wish to " lose one drop of that IMMORTAL MAN ? ”
438 ROXBURGHIANA, [Roxburghe
for every Frigate that floated in the Bodleian ocean
of books !
I turn to more generally interesting topics. My
first visit to this hermitage of death was rendered
the more mournful and impressive by the presence
and expressions of grief of an old and faithful servant, who had known the deceased from infancy ;
and when I mention the name of John Newell I
shall obtain ready credence from all who know him,
that his affectionate fidelity to his master was as unwavering as it was important. On my recovery of
the first shock from the affecting and yet wondrous
scene around me, I learnt, from this faithful servant,
that the body of his master was to be forthwith conveyed to the resting place of his ancestors, at Hodnet,
I had a sudden strong disposition to attend the funeral of my departed friend. It seemed to me, perhaps oddly enough, to be a debt even due to the
extraordinary Library left behind, that its owner
should be followed by me to his grave. I knew
that by no possibility could I receive the slightest
advantage in the shape of testamentary " Reminiscence ; " and, while many older friends and closer
connexions seemed to " leave the dead to bury their
dead, " I solicited and obtained a ready permission
to accompany the last remains of Richard Heber to
his " FAMILY VAULT." It was not a little singular
that I went down to Shrewsbury in the same conveyance with Mr. Wrightson, the member for North
Allerton, and cousin of the deceased ; nor till within
Club.] ROXBURGHIANA. 439
the last stage did we communicate to each other the
common object of our journey-to attend his funeral.
The day of interment was in all respects sad * .
It was a walking funeral. The sky lowered ; the
rain fell. The procession necessarily moved slowly,
for the six men who carried the body (in a leaden
coffin) were obliged to be frequently relieved ; and
the distance from the hall to the church was considerable. The bell tolled heavily. The church
walls and the interior of the church were crowded
with sobbing spectators. The pulpit, the reading-
* The account of this funeral in the Salopian Journal, of the date
of Oct. 23, 1833, was as follows :-
" It was our mournful duty, in a late number of this journal, to notice the decease of the above distinguished gentleman. It is now our
mournful duty to notice his interment. This event took place at Hodnet,
on Wednesday, the 16th instant. It was strictly of the most private
character, and a walking funeral from the hall to the church ; a distance
of some five hundred yards. The tenants, about thirty-six in number,
preceded the rector and his two curates : then the body, immediately
followed by the four Master Cholmondeleys, nephews of the deceased ;
the Messrs. Wrightson, his first cousins ; the Rev. Dr. Dibdin, his old
friend and literary associate ; and Mr. Macauley, domestic tutor to the
family ; R. Fisher, Esq. , solicitor ; and John Newell and John France,
each upwards of forty years the confidential servants of Mr. Heber.
Notwithstanding the untowardness of the morning, the churchyard and
the church were crowded with sympathising spectators. The service
was read by the Rev. Oswald Leycester, the rector, with a most peculiar
distinctness, power, and propriety. We notice this with the more surprise and gratification, as we are given to understand that the reverend
and worthy gentleman is in his eighty-second year.
66 By the death of Mr. Heber it may be truly said that the poor have
lost an active and bounteous friend, his tenants a liberal and kindhearted master, and the world a book-collector such as before had never
entered upon the arena of the fascinating and intellectual pursuit of
BIBLIOPHILISM."
440 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
desk, and the altar, were hung with black. The
service concluded, we all returned as we had left the
mansion ; but the SPIRIT, which once gave that mansion vitality and animation, was LEFT BEHIND. Indeed, from sunrise till sunset it was " a sad day. ”
But although the master-spirit had fled, it seemed
yet to speak in the LIBRARY left behind-immense,
widely scattered, unparalleled in variety and extent* !
*
A sketchy, and I hope spirited, account of this library appeared in
the Literary Gazette, of which it would be affectation, as well as falsehood, to deny myself to be the author.
BIBLIOTHECA HEBERIANA,
"If ever a library merited an ample detail in its description, it is that
which belonged to the late RICHARD HEBER, Esq. , of Hodnet Hall ,
Shrewsbury, and of Pimlico Lodge, Westminster ; and yet pages upon
pages were scarcely sufficient for the adequate execution of such a task.
But if we cannot be copious, we may be correct ; and if every feature
may not be, just now, minutely described, the complexion or general
character of the countenance may be spiritedly and faithfully impressed
upon the attention and remembrance of the reader.
" In the first place, it may be as well to correct a few flying errors,
which the public is at all times sufficiently prone to adopt ; and which,
in sober minds, may produce an impression that ought to be as speedily as possible modified or effaced. Vacant heads and flippant tongues
think and talk of the number and value of books, as if there were no
end to the first, and no limits to the second. We have heard very
worthy folks declare, that Mr. Heber had a quarter ofa million of books,
which had cost him scarcely a less sum in pounds sterling. For madness like this, nothing short of a statute of lunacy ought to have been
the corrective. It was not so with the deceased. He was, in truth, an
early and a late collector ; but as his fortune was not boundless, so his
repository was not illimitable. The great and strong passion of his life
was to amass such a library as no individual before him had ever amassed.
But such a passion, unless guided by judgment and tempered by prudence, might have led to the most ridiculous and deplorable results.
Accordingly, that judgment and prudence were not only called in, but
Club.] ROXBURGHIANA. 441
How was it to be disposed of?
WILL ? For four successive days,
Where was the
every escrutoire,
eminently exercised, in the stupendous collection left behind as an imperishable monument of his fame.
6
"Mr. Heber's early attachment to the lore ofancient Greece and Rome
gave a tinge or bias to the character of his early spirit of book-collecting ;
and so strongly did he feel this, as well as evince his passion for purchasing at auctions, that, even in his tenth year, in one of his letters to
his father, he suggests his purchasing for him a set of books at a certain
sale, in which, as he is given to understand (so he expresses it), there
would be the best editions of the classics.' His private habits, or studies,
partook of this charcteristic ; for, as early as his eighth year, the author
of this article had seen a ' Catalogue of the books belonging to Richard
Heber.' In this catalogue, the prices of the books, as well as directions
for the binding of several of them, are to be found. The history of his
progressive attachment to books, illustrated by some curious anecdotes,
must be reserved, with a great quantity ofsimilar matter, for the ' literary
memoir ' ofhim, which we hope may one day be given to the world *.
But those who imagine that this book-mania was composed of the ordinary elements of such a passion, are little aware of the transcendent taste
and skill evinced in the lore itself, by which the pages of his beloved
Delphins and Variorums were enriched. There are metrical versions of
Ovid, Virgil, and Horace, by our Heber ( in his eighth and ninth years),
which would have tasked the courage and equalled the skill of some lads
in their fourteenth year. He died in his fifty-ninth year.
"But our immediate object is not the pursuance of this theme, however delightful and varied. Youth has merged into manhood-manhood
has approximated to the grand climacteric-and the grave is now the
depository of Him who once gave life and animation to the republic of
literature. Our business is with the character and destination of THE
LIBRARY which he has left behind. Of its character, not much must
be expected within the necessarily confined limits of this article. It is
perfectly omnigenous; but the predominance of some classes, according
to the taste of the collector, must necessarily be anticipated . Of these
classes, those of ancient philology (including all the brightest names of
antiquity) and of modern poetry and romance, probably predominate.
Wide, varied, and luxuriant as are the latter, there is nevertheless to be
found an immense body of Grammatical and Critical learning, from the
* There is, now, NO HOPE of the kind.
442 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
drawer, cupboard, and recess, was diligently searched
in the family mansion-but in vain. It must be in
pregnant brevity of the Stagyrite, to the pointed canons of the author of
the Diversions ofPurley. And this love of languages was evinced by our collector in almost all the ramifications in which it could be extended : in the Celtic, Bréton, Spanish, Portuguese, Modern Greek, and
other European dialects. From Suidas to Jamieson there is scarcely
the deficiency of one link. In poetical lore, from the days of Homer
to those of Byron, the same surprising continuity may be observed. In
voyages and travels, and county history, it is more than probable that
the palm may be conceded to the Hon. T. Grenville ; while in theology
and ancient classics, Lord Spencer's collection can never be even slightly
shaded by a comparison with that of any private individual, past, present, or-we had almost said—to come ! Comparisons are, to be sure,
usually vague, and seldom establish any one point satisfactorily ; but
the object of Mr. Heber was that of a general library-and it has often
been observed by him to the author of this article, that the catalogue of
the Harleian library and that of Thomas Rawlinson (the Tom Folio of
the Tatler) exhibited the most surprising collections of books at that
time known. As to the number of volumes contained in the library
under consideration, that may be safely estimated at 85,000 in England,
and about half that number abroad. From the latter such a selection
will be made as may probably swell the number for sale, in England, to an additional 5000 volumes. Let the reader pause for one moment upon
such a stupendous mass of intelligence as these volumes must contain ;
and let him marvel, as he well may, at the unconquerable diligence, activity, and zeal, by which they have become the property of one man,
whose life fell much short of the prescribed Scripture limits of mortality!
"As to the Cost at which so many thousands of volumes have been
secured, it may be premature and unnecessary to give even a vague
guess ; but the sobriety of truth will not be much violated when it is
placed at little short of 100,000l. Acontemplation of the returns, from
a public sale, may probably fill the minds of surviving friends with
anxiety ; but, comparatively sluggish as the public pulse may now beat
in the cause of Bibliomania, an honourable and even a prosperous issue
may be anticipated. It is no common event that now awakens the attention, and speaks to the heart of every spirited and discerning collector. An oak of no ordinary size has just fallen, to afford almost every
man a faggot for his fre. Δρύος πεσούσης πᾶς ἀνὴρ ξυλευεται. See
Club. ] ROXBURGHIANA. 443
town, at the Pimlico Hermitage. In the Pimlico
Hermitage the same diligent search was instituted.
Drawers without number, and boxes without end,
were emptied of their contents. Bills, notes, memoranda, letters, communications of every kind and
description-but still NO WILL. It must be abroad,
in some book-depôt of the deceased. An agent
at Paris was appointed, and another in the Low
Countries-to no purpose. A confidential solicitor
next left the country expressly to search in those
places for the will. He tarried abroad three weeks,
and returned...as he went. The will was not to be
found.
For myself, I had never but one idea about its locality. Although I had been almost interdicted from
making researches amongst the books at Pimlico,
I yet persevered; and one morning, when all hope,
Bibliomania, p. 480. Let the timid take courage, and the experienced
direct their energies to one laudable object—that of completing the several departments in which their libraries exhibit melancholy proofs of
hiatuses. The veteran will not fail to be found grasping his spear in
that day, when the spoils of such a library can be acquired only by the
intrepid and persevering ; and it may with confidence be predicted, that
a new race of book-knights will be found, entering the lists at such a
tournament, when the prize to be won will be often of unprecedented
brightness and beauty.
"Pimlico Lodge, January 8, 1834.
" D."
I may here add, that the sum first considered in this communication
as that of the cost of the library, was 150,000l. From the result of the
sales of three-fourths ( see p. 366, ante) I am disposed to cut down the
original cost to 100,000l. But I knowof nothing certain upon the subject beyond this-that whether it were 150,000%. or 100,000/. it was an
IMMENSE SUM.
444 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
with those likely to be eventually benefited by its
discovery, was about to take its departure, I FOUND
THE WILL*! And to reward me, as it were, for my
* An account of this " finding"...thus appeared in the Literary Gazette of January 18, 1834. "Few things, in what is called the republic
of literature, have excited more attention than the supposed existence
and discovery of the will of the late Richard Heber, Esq. To those
who were intimately acquainted with the character of the deceased, and
who had examined documents whereby his decided intentions as to the
future destination of his property could be matter of not even the
slightest doubt, the existence of such a will, with a knowledge of its material contents, was a matter as clear as the sun at noon-day. Its discovery could be left only to time and aecident.
"On failure of finding it, after an extended search, in the first instance, at Pimlico, and after a very careful and elaborate one at Hodnet,
the different rendezvous of Mr. Heber at Paris, Brussels, Antwerp,
Louvain, Leyden, the Hague, &c. , were diligently examined ; but with
no fortunate result. At length, on the return of the sister of the deceased to Pimlico, for the purpose of taking out letters of administration,
a more strict, particular, and extensive search was instituted ; and Dr.
Dibdin, the old and anxious friend of Mr. Heber, was so fortunate as
to alight upon it, in the act of moving some duodecimos, on an upper
shelf, for the purpose of re- arrangement of the library. A prognostic,
of no very sinister complexion, was the precursor of the discovery. In
removing a set of grammatical works, for the sake of classification, one
bright, solitary sovereign dropped upon the floor ! This was hailed as
an auspicious omen ; and about an hour afterwards, the wILL itself followed the course of the sovereign.
"It bore every mark of unquestionable authenticity upon its envelope;
and its interior fully corroborated this external evidence. The whole
wording of the will, strictly conformable to professional instructions previously received, was in the handwriting of the testator. The attestation, by three witnesses, was in all respects perfect. The date was
Sept. 1 , 1827. The will was so short as to occupy only one side of a
common sheet of letter-paper. The curious will be probably disappointed. No mention whatever is made of the library ; and of course
its bequest to any particular corporate body is quite out of the question.
The exigency of the case demands the bringing of the library in question, with all possible convenience, to the hammer. The property at
stake, as we notified in the last number of our journal, is immense ; and
Club. ]
ROXBURGHIANA.
445
perseverance as well as yet to connect me with my
departed friend-I found it lying behind some books
within a few inches of my Decameron and Tour.
On the 8th of January, in the year of our Lord,
1834, I FOUND THE WILL ... by which property to the
amount of upwards of 200,000 . was to be disposed
of. I was necessarily both proud and happy at such
a finding, and wrote immediately to those common
friends whom I thought the more likely to be interested by a knowledge of the discovery ; namely, to
Earl Spencer, Sir Robert Harry Inglis, Sir Francis
Freeling, the Rev. H. Drury, Mr. Petrie, Dr. Bliss,
and Mr. Foss. I preserve all their answers * . For
the individual who, in the end—that is, for her life—
was to be benefited by the sale of the property, real
and personal, (after the discharge of very heavy
incumbrances), I felt as if she had been a near
we wish the issue of the sale to be as prosperous as the most ardent admirer of the talents of the deceased, or the most interested of his relations in the distribution of his property, can desire.”
* Although these answers are short, and are particularly characteristic
of their authors, I will not even venture to transcribe the shortest, that
of Mr. Foss. It might be stigmatised as bad taste. It is not necessary
to prove, on the one hand, the sincerity of my joy on finding the will,
nor, on the other, the sympathy of my friends on my being the instrument ofits discovery. I remember, on the evening of that discovery,
having a long and particular conversation with my neighbour and
friend, Sir F. Freeling, about it. He said that " he knew of nothing,
out of the pale of his family, which had given him a livelier satisfaction
-were it only to put an end to the idle tales and absurd surmises which
had gone abroad upon the subject." He was quite right. The supposed non-entity of the will was a common topic of discussion at clubhouses as well as private tables.
446 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
relation ...my Sister. But enough. The sequel is
" MATTER OF HISTORY.'
دو
The Newspapers were full and particular in their
notices of the deceased * ; and in the ensuing spring
* Among them was the following notice in the Atlas, (conducted with
great ability), a weekly paper of January 25, 1834.
"Let not the reader be alarmed. We are not about to introduce him
to the interminable mazes of Mr. HEBER's library, which sparkles, from
one extremity to the other, with the richest lore of by-gone and of
modern days. Our present object is rather the MAN than his books.
Of him we would speak somewhat in the gentlest spirit of Christian
charity-with sentiments at once warm, generous, and grateful. Altogether he was among the most singular and prominent of the literary
characters of his day. In company, ready, cheerful, instructive, and
winning, almost beyond any man. He was never sarcastic ; never bearing down the weak, or crushing his victim when the victory was obtained. The captive seemed to be hardly conscious of the fetters imposed
upon him.
"From circles of the first respectability, as well as splendour-for we
by no means consider these substantives as synonymes-Mr. Heber
shrunk into his privacy at Pimlico as if unconscious of the impression
made by his colloquial powers. He betook himself to his first editions,
his chronicles and romances, with an increased zest, as if there were
nothing in life comparable with these treasures. To an active mind like
his, and with such inexhaustible stores at his command, there was always
something, and much, to do at home. His correspondence was necessarily great ; because, having the book-means of assisting scholars and
collectors, he possessed also the inclination-for his good-nature was
equal to his ability. Accordingly, there was scarcely a scholar or author
of distinction, in his own country, but what readily applied to him, and
as readily found his wants supplied . Of the former class, his escrutoires
bear evidence in the collection of letters from PORSON, MATTHEW RAINE,
WAKEFIELD, GAISFORD, and ELMSLY. Of the latter, the names of
SCOTT, SOUTHEY, MACKINTOSH, CAMPBELL, CRABBE, and especially
LEYDEN, are constantly occurring. Scorr had, indeed, truly, as well as felicitously observed-
' His volumes, open as his heart,
Delight, instruction, science, art,
To every ear and eye impart !'
But it must not be supposed that these volumes were merely printed
Club.]
ROXBURGHIANA.
447
it became necessary to fill up the gap in our Club
by the election of two new Members. Our Presi
dent, although in an infirm state of health, came up
expressly from Althorp with a view to this election ;
being anxious, in so doing, to let the Members see
in what thorough contempt he held the late attacks
levelled at our fraternity. Accordingly, the election
took place at an extra meeting, at the Clarendon
Hotel, when the VENERABLE ARCHDEACON BUTLER, D.D. ( Head Master of Shrewsbury School), and
SIR STEPHEN GLYNN, BART. , M. P., became the successors ofMr. Heber and Mr. Haslewood. This election evidently gave general satisfaction, as I know it
did to our President in particular. I now proceed
to the notice of what may be considered the heaviest
sound of the funeral bell of the Roxburghe Club.
treasures. They were frequently MSS. ofgreat cost, as well as antiquity.
In the correspondence of Mr. Heber, some of the most illustrious
names are also to be found-as those of SPENCER, GRENVILLE, HOLLAND,
LIVERPOOL, and CANNING, &c. There was no circle, however choice,
from rank or talent, in which the presence and conversation of the deceased might not have been considered in all respects an acquisition.
"In regard to the darling passion of his heart, we should say, Mr.
Heber was BORN a bibliomaniac. There has been lately printed evidence
that he commenced forming a library in his eighth year, and that he
then wrote to his father to purchase classical volumes at a book sale in
the country. After completing his seventeenth year, he entered Brazennose College, Oxford, as a Gentleman Commoner. Bishop CLEAVER
was at that time the principal. The bishop received, on his entrance,
that testimony of the talents and character of the Freshman, which
might be considered only a repetition of what, on the completion of his
schoolboy education, the father of HEBER had received at the hands of
his son's tutor, the well-known Dr. GLASSE. It was a character, ofwhich
the principal and the parent might have been equally proud . Mr. Heber's
448 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
When our venerable President last dined with us,
in 1833, it seemed to several of the Members
that he took leave of us with a sort of presentiment
that he might not meet us again. He retired early,
and bade us adieu in few words, and in a low tone of
voice. On retiring to Althorp, with increasing
infirmity, and a fixed resolution to abide there * ,
it was not expected that we should see him again
at the head of our table.
talents were immediately appreciated, and his society courted in consequence. In his stature he was tall, robust, active, and of a most pleasing
countenance, with a highly-raised forehead."
* It is not a little extraordinary that the last book which I saw the
late Earl Spencer open during my last stay at Althorp, in the Christmas
of 1833, was the Funeral Sermon upon the FIRST BARON SPENCER,
preached at Brington church (called Braynton in the title-page of the
book) in November, 1627. The preacher was Richard Parre, Rector of
Brington, and a Fellow of Brazen Nose College, Oxford. The sermon
was published in 1628, 4to., and is entitled, " The Ende of the Perfecte
Man." Prefixed are some commendatory verses-of which His Lordship read the following with a marked emphasis. He might be said to
have been in part reading his own epitaph : for, most assuredly, in many
of the points here delineated, he might have discerned the reflex of his
own bright character.
"What warmth his beames of goodness did impart
To the distressed, sad both in face and heart ;
What an unwearied, large, and open hand
He stretched out to the Poor, and how his land
Was by their backs and bellies blest, while they
Like rounds in Jacob's ladder, sate each day
In troupes about his hospitable gate ;
Whence, laden with his alms, early and late
They parted to their coates, and timely fed
Their bedrid mates, and infants with their bread ;
What bounteous entertainment, and how free
And hearty welcome, every guest might see
Club. ]
ROXBURGHIANA.
149
His intellectual faculties continued undiminished
to the last. His birth-day was on the 1st of September ; and it was always with the sincerest pleasure, whenever I had occasion to write to him about
that time, that I congratulated him upon its recurrence. On the last occasion, he happened to be
on a visit to his son-in-law, Lord Lyttelton, at Hagley ; and on receiving my letter (in which I took
occasion to announce to his lordship the prosecution
of the PRESENT WORK) , his answer ( Sept. 3, 1834)
began thus : "" In return for your kind letter of con
gratulation on my having been permitted to pass the
formidably-sounding period of three quarters of a
century, I send my good wishes that your projected
Both in his face and house ; which for resort
And entertainment was a STANDING COURT
Where every honest man, though nere so plaine,
As welcome was, as if a scarlet traine
Or silken sail had ushered him ... * * * *
How just he was in all his actions,
How free from racking or oppressions ;
How far from causing any poore man's grone,
How prone to hear, and right the meanest one ;
What large rewards and means of livelyhood
His servants had from him, who understood
And loved the service : and how firm a friend
He was, how ready goodness to defend ;
What progeney he left, how trained and bred
TO SERVE and STAND THE COMMONWEALTH IN STEAD
In any course it steer'd, and how he shone
With Piety and true Devotion ;
Which op'd and clos'd his each day," &c.
G G
450 ROXBURGHIANA. [ Roxburghe
'Reminiscences ' may, when concluded, contain as
fair a proportion of satisfactory matter as mine might,
were I disposed to record them ; for though the condition of mortality must necessarily be accompanied
by a checquered aspect, the general result will of
course depend on the comparative number of white
and black squares on the board. " I anticipate the
reader's concurrence with me, that few points could
have been more neatly touched.
Towards the middle of the following month a report was prevalent that his lordship was no more.
Indeed few noblemen had been so frequently killed
as the late Earl Spencer, by the conductors of newspapers. I read that report when at Cambridge, and
was on the point of quitting the place for Northampton, when I was undeceived by a contradictory statement in a paper of one day's later date :...but to the
end of my career I shall not cease to lament that
I was not beyond the reach of that counter statement ... for I should then have seen my excellent
Patron...who, ' ere another month had passed, was
66 GATHERED TO HIS FATHERS." His last letter to
me, noticing the misery and mischief oftentimes
arising from these false reports, was of the date of
Oct. 26, 1834 * . Within a fortnight of its being
written, the writer of it was no more.
* I have above made mention ofthe date ofa letter, which happened to
be THE LAST I ever received from my noble and revered correspondent.
Club.]
ROXBURGHIANA. 451
There could be but one feeling throughout the Empire upon the death of SUCH A MAN * . In a thousand
other bosoms besides my own, were excited the mingled emotions of respect, admiration, and regret.
Mine were precisely of that description. Whatever
they prompted me to do, I did it
"Warm from the heart and faithful to its fires."
My sincerity must have been beyond all suspicion.
Ihad lost mybest friend and earliest patron ; and what
was transmitted by me on the occasion to the amiable
and able Editor of The Bury and Norwich Post and
East Anglian (one of the best constitutional papers
in the kingdom), was at least evidence of a fearless
and honest appreciation of the public and private
Its writing was as clear and legible as anything which I had ever received from him—as a fac-simile of its conclusion may testify.
Yourseversincerely
Spencer
* I received the first intimation of Earl Spencer's decease from the
pen of Mr. Appleyard, his secretary. His letter commenced with the
announcement of the probably speedy approach of death, and concluded
with that of its having actually taken place. He had "just seen him
breathe his last,” at twenty-five minutes past two o'clock, on the 10th of
November, 1834. Meanwhile, a too correct report of this sad event had
reached London ; for on the following day my excellent friend Sir F.
Freeling wrote to me thus : " I fear it is too true that our dear Lord
Spencer has left this world for a better. You may not hear this from any
other quarter by this post, but I consider it a duty to you, who knew and
loved him so well, to apprise you without delay of this afflicting and
lamentable event."
GG 2
452 ROXBURGHIANA. [ Roxburghe
worth of THE DEPARTED. The Editor, on receiving
my communication * , emphatically remarked, " Alas!
I fear Lord Spencer's departure will prove a wider
sorrow than to his family and friends." The testimonies received by me, from private quarters, of his
unsullied reputation...the high sense entertained of
his unshaken integrity, as well as of the whole course
of his incorruptible public life...may, in part, speak
for themselves in the subjoined extracts t. His name
* My communication extended to about a column and a half, in three consecutive papers. To the best of my recollection, copies of these
papers were sent by me to Sir F. Freeling, Dr. Bliss, Mr. G. Baker, and
myheartily sympathising friend, Mr. Major, the bookseller. I possess
only two spare copies of this communication.
+ The historian of the county of Northampton, Mr. George Baker,
to whom the deceased had, in so many instances, been a kind and patronising friend, led the way in this threnodiacal correspondence. His
expressions of respect and admiration for the departed, were as warm
as unqualified. Dr. Robertson, the leading physician of the town of
Northampton, having occasion to write to me upon some topic of business, thus concludes, in reference to the deceased. "We are in a state
of gloom and depression here from the death of your venerable friend,
Earl Spencer. It is impossible for any one to be more generally lamented, or more deservedly ; for his was worth of surpassing excellence." Nov. 15, 1834. Lord Spencer's neighbour, Beriah Botfield,
Esq. (who a few years preceding had served the office of High Sheriff,
and whose BOOK-SYMPATHIES were attested by his possession of a fine
library and the interchange of visits) thus mentions the mournful
subject in a letter from St. Leonard's, of the date of 12th Nov. 1834.
" I write to thank you for your kind letter of the 7th inst. , and to
join my deep condolence to yours on the death of that truly noble and
estimable man, and erudite bibliographer, THE EARL SPENCER.
shall never forgive myself for having allowed pressure of business to
prevent my riding over to Althorp during the few days that I spent at
Norton, [Mr. Botfield's residence, near Daventry]. His Lordship's
uniform kindness and great consideration for so humble an individual
as myself, will ever be by me most gratefully remembered." It may
I
Club.] ROXBURGHIANA. 453
will be mixed up in the records of some of the brightest
periods of our country ; and while that task is left
to the pen of the historian, it may be permitted an
humble individual, like myself, to notice his love of
letters and patronage of learned men ; his pure political principles as a constitutional whig ; his unbending attachment to church and state ; his love
oforder ; of moral worth ; and of all those endearing
qualities which move in the train of CHRISTIAN
CHARITY.
Then, again, the very admirable manner in which
he fulfilled all the duties of what may be called a
Country Gentleman. As a Magistrate, he had few
equals ; having filled the office of chairman of the
Quarter Sessions thirty years, with singular tact,
be no trifling gratification to the writer of this epistle to know, that
his Lordship's opinion of his collection and bibliographical labours was
far from being inconsiderable. In a note of the 5th of May, 1832,
Lord Spencer observes, “ I paid a visit to my neighbour, Mr. Botfield,
a few days ago, and was much pleased, as well as surprised, at the sight
of his books, some of which-out of a very large collection, packed up in
cases, and filling almost the whole of his house—he shewed me. He
also shewed me the Catalogue Raisonné upon which he is employed, in
describing them-a very extraordinary undertaking for so young an amateur."
Nor must the honest and warm ebullition of feeling of my friend Mr.
Petrie the Keeper of his Majesty's Records in the Tower of London—
be withheld on this occasion. He writes thus on the 14th of November.
"The shock occasioned by the unexpected death of our excellent friend
brought on a slight attack of gout, which is still lingering in my ancle.
Howmuch I honoured him while living, and now cherish his memory,
I need hardly tell you ; nor how readily I should attend the last melancholy ceremony of his funeral-if I could suppose that there was the
slightest wish on the part of the family that I should do so."
454 ROXBURGHIANA. [Rexburghe
urbanity, and discretion. Whatever he undertook,
he undertook zealously, conscientiously, and with a
determination to be correct as well as punctual in
the fulfilment of all its concomitant duties. At the
Northampton Hospital (one of the largest and best
conducted institutions in the kingdom) his attendance was as important as it was exemplary. He was
the Chairman to act as well as to preside. Even in
the minor department of the Savings Bank, he
regularly took his turn of attendance, when at Althorp ; and in London he was not less regular in
attending the great similar establishment in Pantonstreet. He was also, till of late years, Colonel of
the Northamptonshire Yeomanry; and I have seen
him charge at the head of his troops with all the
precision and energy of a commander of regulars.
Among the last noble acts of his protracted life, was
a most liberal donation towards the erection of an
Asylum for Lunatics, in the same county. As a
HUSBAND, PARENT, FRIEND ... but no more.
His funeral, according to his expressly written instructions -found after his decease -was on the
most private scale : none but those of the household,
and relations and friends present at the time of his
decease, together with the tenants, being allowed to
attend *. Had it been otherwise, half the county
* His FUNERAL SERMON was preached by the Rev. Henry Rose, A. M.,
Rector ofBrington, and formerly Fellow of Clare Hall, Cambridge. The
sermon was preached in the parish church of Brington, on Sunday,
Club. ]
ROXBURGHIANA.
455
would have followed the Body to the grave. No
party feelings, nor petty distinctions, would, I am
November 23, 1834, and printed by E. Dicey, Mercury Office, Northampton, in the same year. It bears for title, " THE MEMORY OF THE
JUST IS BLESSED. " It is dedicated to the Parishioners in the following
affectionate address.
66 DEAR PARISHIONERS,
"I known not to whom I could better dedicate the following Sermon
than to you, who both heard it preached, and have since, in a manner
so flattering to my feelings, desired to have it printed. Should the perusal of it by the blessing of God, cause any one to become wiser and better, I shall indeed be thankful and rejoice ; for to promote your
highest interest is not only the duty, but the chief desire and aim of
"Your appointed Minister,
66• HENRY ROSE."
I feel persuaded that I should receive no excuse-as I ought to receive
none at the hands of the reader, if I withheld from him the concluding
portion of this most unaffected and thoroughly christian-hearted discourse. And I also feel persuaded, that, there is not a point which it
touches upon-or a feature which it developes -that finds not a responsive emotion in the breast of every one who was as thoroughly acquainted with THE DECEASED as myself.
"As to his CHARITIES in this place, I hope it is unnecessary to remind
you, my poorer Brethren, that there is scarcely one among you who has
not been entirely educated and nourished by his bounty, in sickness and
in health, year by year, continually, from your cradles to the present
time ; and many of your fathers before you, from their cradles even to
their graves. Neither did he forget to reward those faithful, aged, and
infirm labourers, by weekly pensions, who had spent their best days in
his service. Some of you, perhaps, have not known exactly who your
benefactor, under God, was ; but none of you, my Brethren, I trust,
have been without gratitude ; and with regard to those who have known
him, perhaps some have never had an opportunity in person to return
him thanks for his kindness. If, however, you have only wished to do
so, it is enough ; and remember that he was not anxious to be known,
or to be thanked. He did you good, both out of good will to you, and
a desire to please God ; but he loved the praise of God more than the
praise of men ; and the praise of God will be his ' exceeding great reward.' As to the richer sort in this place, it would be difficult to find
one who has not been benefited by him in some way or other, either
456 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
persuaded, have stood in the way of the collection
of an assemblage of mourners, where pomp would
directly or indirectly ; and, with regard to Myself, I must pass over the
many favours I have received, and the unceasing and undeserved kindness with which I have been always regarded by him, lest I should become unable to utter all that remains to be said on on this part of the
subject.
·
“ If then he was rich, he was also rich in good works,' ' ready to
give, glad to distribute.' Of a truth, it may be said of him, " he hath
dispersed abroad, he hath given to the poor, his righteousness remaineth
for ever, his horn shall be exalted with honour.' Some of his reward
he received in this life, for he lived to a good old age, he saw much of
the ' goodness of the Lord in the land of the living'-' he came to his
grave in a full age, like a shock of corn cometh in, in his season,'-he
lived to see his children's children ; and peace upon our Israel. The
rest and greatest part of his reward he will receive at the resurrection
of the Just.'
"
"Yet he had troubles, many and great ; some of an ordinary, some of
a more than ordinary, grievousness. ' Great are the troubles of the
righteous,' says the Psalmist ; but, then he adds, the Lord delivers
them out of all .' Troubles are not to the righteous signs of God's anger,
but ofhis love ; they are the trials of faith and patience, to perfect us in
the fear and love of God, and are therefore good for the righteous.
"But I will not venture to particularise any of his troubles, lest, from
this cause also, I should render myself unable to pay the remainder of
this poor tribute of respect to the memory of my departed and highly
valued Patron. On this head it will be sufficient to observe, that, I
know, he bore his trials like a CHRISTIAN ; and that he had troubles,
which nothing but a religiously instructed mind, and a heart exercised
in daily devotion to God, could have enabled him to endure. The things
which have been already brought before you, Brethren, are enough to
endear the memory of THE DEPARTED to us all , and to call such MEMORY
BLESSED. How worthy then is he of our imitation in all these particulars of his duty to his fellow-creatures ! As far as it may be in our
power, let us be careful to follow his example.
"Let us now proceed to consider that example as regards our duty
towards God. Constant in the use of Private Prayer, Family Worship,
and of Public Worship, as far as health and other circumstances would
permit ; constant also in the practice of daily readings of the Scriptures,
and a never-failing guest at the Lord's table, to remember his love in
Club.]
ROXBURGHIANA.
457
have merged into sympathy, and ceremony been
forgotten in sorrow.
dying for the sins of the whole world : -In all these things he is our
example indeed, and in all these respects we may each follow that example to the fullest extent. With regard to the last mentioned duty
to God and our Saviour, Christ, never shall I forget-never will they
who had the happiness to be present at the same time, forget-his LAST
APPEARANCE amongst us at that heavenly feast. It was a pleasing
and a painful sight-painful on account of the difficulty with which he
performed this duty, and pleasing to see one so resolved to do it notwithstanding that difficulty. Yes, Brethren, it was an edifying sight to
see one, struggling with age and infirmity, and scarcely able with the
assistance of two attendants to reach the spot where he desired once
more to bend his feeble knees in humble adoration of the Lord of all
Lords, and to receive the consecrated elements of bread and wine, as
pledges of that Lord's love, and in remembrance of his death, to his own
great and endless comfort. This happened only just three weeks before
he was called by the same Lord to sit down at his table with the spirits
of just men made perfect,' in the kingdom of heaven. Surely, if any
believer in the Lord could make excuse for absence from his table without offence, he could have done so under these circumstances, especially
when we consider that from youth to age, he lived in tne habit of being
present at it ; but age and infirmity could not keep him back. I beseech you, Brethren, then to consider howtheir conduct must appear by
the side of this, who from youth to age neglect this ordinance of the
Lord without even the shadow of an excuse for such offensive behaviour.
" But what are all his duties, however regularly pefrormed, both to
God and man-what are his unceasing prayers and alms-unless offered
up, not only in the faith of Christ, but in the spirit of Christ? They
are nothing ; for if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none
of his.' Now this spirit was manifest in everything which the departed
said and did, and became more and more visible continually. It is this
which endears his memory to us more than all the rest, and makes it
truly blessed. And what is the Spirit of Christ? It is unfeigned love
of one another, springing from the fear and love of God. In cultivating this spirit, we may all follow his example ; and ifwe have nothing
to give, we can love, and desire to give-we can sympathize with our
brethren in their troubles, and so comfort and refresh a sufferer, when
nothing else can-when silver and gold, if he had the world full of it,
would be of no avail. This Christian spirit made him regard ALL with
458 [Roxburghe ROXBURGHIANA.
The death of our venerable President may be said
to have caused a two -fold vacancy in our Club : the
equal love, however they might differ from him in opinion, in matters
either of Church or State. Conscientiously and firmly attached to that
form of Christ's religion established in this kingdom, he nevertheless
viewed with respect and esteem some of the many different communions
of Christians who dissent from us ; and where he could not esteem, he
would pity and compassionate. He felt that the Christian religion,
under any form, however fanciful and scrupulous, was incalculably
better than no Christian religion at all ; and though he could not respect the scruples and fancies of some religionists, he could and did
respect their consciences, when a quiet and peaceable life was the result.
He felt that opposition was not consistent with the spirit of meekness
and brotherly love enjoined by the GOSPEL. He knew that when it has
been resorted to, it has always made matters worse, and can never promote that unity among Christians which should be their desire and their
aim, and which is so strongly insisted upon by our Lord and his
Apostles. If, therefore, any one denomination of Dissenters opposed
themselves to any other, or to the Established Church, his respect for
that denomination would cease ; because the Spirit of Christ was evidently in that case gone from it, however correct their faith, and however correct their lives might be in other respects.
" The CHURCH, then, brethren, cannot help being satisfied with SUCH
A MEMBER AS THIS. And if a strong mind, highly cultivated by all
manner of useful learning, well versed in the Bible, and daily exercised
in devotion to God, is to be no guide to the consciences of others in
matters of religion, it should at least cause all manner of persons to
respect a church which can boast such members as these ; and, if any
still feel themselves bound in their consciences, notwithstanding such
examples, to differ and to separate, to do so with modesty and regret,
with humbleness of mind and charity—such charity towards the church,
as the church and all good men in it feel towards them : and such,
moreover, as He had in an eminent degree, whose departure from us we
do, with so much reason, lament.
"But he is gone to join the company of those, who, since the world
began, have departed this life before him in the faith and fear of God.
Let us prepare to follow him, for we know not how soon we may be
called upon to give up our accounts to the great Judge of quick and
dead," &c. &c. &c.
The church of Brington was thronged to excess on the memorable
Club.] ROXBURGHIANA. 459
one, to be filled up by the election of another President the other, by the election of another Member.
The choice of the former fell upon Viscount Clive, of
whom it is but justice to say, that he had previously
consulted the present Earl Spencer and the Duke of
Devonshire, in regard to what might be their wishes
or feelings as successors of the late Earl. The new
Member was the DUKE OF BUCCLEUGH AND QUEENSBURY, a young nobleman most especially qualified by
his love ofLarge Paper Hearnes * , and ofGreek and
day of the delivery of this discourse. The deepest silence, disturbed
only by the sobs of those upon whose hearts these truths fell with a resistless force, attended its delivery ; while the preacher seemed through the
whole to be sustained by a peculiar energy. It must be admitted, I
think, that few Discourses for the occasion, and for the congregation of
a village church, could have been more judiciously and more effectively
composed. Of ALL the baronial bodies which sleep beneath the
monumental marbles at Brington, there is NOT ONE that merits a
MORE SPLENDID CENOTAPH than that which has been recently entombed
there.
* The Duke of Buccleugh is now the possessor of the magnificent
set of HEARNE'S PUBLICATIONS, printed upon large paper, and bound in
red morocco, which had once been Dr. Mead's, and was purchased at
his sale, by an ancestor of Meerman, for some fifty guineas. It continued at the Hague, with Meerman's library, till the sale of the latter
in 1822, when it was purchased by some London booksellers for 2001.
Mr. Pickering obtained possession of it, and sold it to Mr. Hanrott for
5007. At the sale of Mr. Hanrott's library in 1833, this set was purchased by the Duke of Roxburghe for 400l. Works and volumes like
these are the very buttresses which adorn while they prop up the noblest
collections. With all his whimsicalities, bitter and foolish prejudices,
and arrant-mad credulity, it will be long before we look upon such a
man as Tom HEARNE again. In the Bibliomania and Library Companion may be seen perhaps more than enough about him. The RELIQUIE HEARNIANE of my friend Dr. Bliss have vanished like the
morning dew. Wherefore ?
460 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
Roman Classics in their most towering forms, to do
ample justice to the election. I calculate upon the
Club's receiving from His Grace a rich and rare
book-contribution ; he being now in all respects a
Roxburgher-having become the purchaser of Mr.
Heber's set of our GARLAND. And more his contribution of the Chartulary of Melrose to the Bannatyne Club, may be considered only as a forerunner
of a yet greater achievement in regard to ourselves.
And here I close these Roxburghiana-in respect to the Club which has induced me to adopt
that title...adding, by way of corollary, an account1. Of the Publications of the Club-forming what
I choose to designate as the ROXBURGHE GARLAND.
2. Of the Brother Clubs, or Book-Fraternities,
which have sprung up from our own-and which
may therefore be called GRAFts.
I cannot however look back upon the last hundred
pages of these Reminiscences, without perceiving
myself unconsciously, as it were, to have performed
the part of a Necrologist-in the obituary details
with which these " ANA" abound. How soon, or
how late it may be, before the whole of the present
existing Members may be gathered to those who
have preceded them, it belongs not to finite intelligence to pronounce ; but that the period of tarrying among them, with ONE, who is advancing by
swift strides towards what is called the grand climacteric of existence, cannot be very considerably
Garland.] ROXBURGHIANA. 461
protracted, may be pronounced as sufficiently certain.
In the mean time, let it be as it is-some consolation to that " ONE," to have stepped forward, unsolicited and unhired, in the achievement of a Record which can never be displeasing to the man of
literature and taste : which makes known an association of gentlemen united by one common tie of bookardour-in other words, of the Bibliomania * —for
the diffusion of at least interesting intelligence.
That it has hitherto not held its meetings in vain,
is palpable enough from what immediately follows ;
and that it may accomplish yet higher and more
desirable objects, is the fixed conviction of Him by
whom this Record has been executed.
* Some idea may be formed of the BOOK WEALTH of a few of the
Members of the Roxburghe Club when the Libraries of only five of them
produced the sum of upwards of 100,000l.: as thusMr. Heber's ( not completed)
Mr. Hibbert's ·
Sir M. M. Sykes's
Mr. Dent's •
·
Duke of Marlborough's
£34,366
21,700
18,700
• 15,000
14,482
£ 104,248
The residue of Mr. Heber's library may produce 10,000%.; although
I speak from little better than vague conjecture. Now, to the foregoing,
add the supposed value of the Libraries of EARL SPENCER and the
DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE alone, and you may then safely add ( as I should conceive) TWICE THE ABOVE AMOUNT. It would be difficult throughout Europe to find three times seven individuals (the foregoing number being only seven) whose united book-property would produce the sum of a THIRD of a MILLION STERLING.
462 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
1. The ROXBURGHE GARLAND ; or List ofBooks
printed for private distribution by the Members of
the Roxburghe Club.
ALTHORP, VISCOUNT.-Interlude of the World and the
Child (Mundus et Infans) . From a unique copy printed
by Wynkyn de Worde. Reprinted 1817, 4to. Thirtyfour copies: one upon vellum.
Bentham, WILLIAM. -Ceremonial at the Marriage of
Mary Queen of Scots with the Dauphin of France. From
the Original ( 1557, 4to. ) in the British Museum. 1818,
4to. Forty copies printed.
BOLLAND, Mr. BARON.-Certain Bokes of Virgile's
Enæis [only the second book] by the Earl of Surrey.
1814, 4to. Sixty copies. See page 379, ante.
BOSWELL, JAMES. -Poems by Richard Barnfield : including Remarks by the late Edmund Malone. 1816, 4to.
Thirty-four copies.
JAMES. A Roxburghe Garland. 1817, 12mo.
See pp. 389, 390.
BRYDGES, SIR S. E. BART.-Hagthorpe Revived ; or
Select Specimens of a Forgotten Poet. 1817, 4to.
A beautiful volume, printed at the Lee Priory Press.
SIR S. E. BART. -Lælii Peregrini Oratio in
obitum Torquati Tassi. Edit. Sec. Hurd. Allob. [Geneva]
1822, 4to. Second Contribution.
Butler, Ven. ARCHDEACON. -Sidneiana : being a collection of some very scarce, and in some instances unique
Tracts, relative to SIR PHILIP SIDNEY. This contribution
is now in the course of being printed. Sir Philip Sidney
was educated at Shrewsbury School, of which Dr. Butler is
the Head Master.
CARR, Rev. WILLIAM HOLWELL.-Istoria Novellamente
Ritrovata di Duc Nobili Amanti da Lurgi Posto. The
original of Shakspeare's Romeo and Juliet. 1817, 4to.
Garland. ] ROXBURGHIANA. 463
CARLISLE, EARL OF-An elegiacal Poem on the Death
of Thomas Lord Grey of Wilton, by Robert Marston.
From a MS. in the library of the Right Hon. Thomas
Grenville. 1822, 4to. Thirty-six copies printed.
CAWDOR, EARL.-The Ancient English Romance of
William and the Wer Wolf. From a MS. in the library
of King's College, Cambridge, of the fourteenth century,
by one ofthe Earls of Hereford. Edited by Sir F. Madden.
See page 409, ante. Fifty-three copies printed.
CLIVE, VISCOUNT. -Metrical Lives of the Saints. By a
Monk of Clare, in Suffolk. From a MS. in the British
Museum. Written in 1443. 1835, 4to. Fifty-five copies :
and two upon vellum.
DENT, JOHN.- Solemnities and Triumphes doon and
made at the Spousels and Marriage of the King's Daughter,
the Ladye Marye, to the Prince of Castile, Archeduke of
Autrige. 1818, 4to. From a unique Tract in the British
Museum. Thirty-six copies : and one upon vellum. See
the Archæologia, vol. xviii.; with observations by Sir Henry
Ellis.
DEVONSHIRE, DUKE OF.-The Life of St. Ursula. Guiscard and Sigismund. 1818, 4to. From two exceedingly
rare pieces of early English poetry, printed by Wynkyn de
Worde. In the library of His Grace. Thirty-two copies :
two upon vellum.
DIBDIN, THOMAS FROGNALL, V. P.-The Complaint of
a Lover's Life. Controversy between a Lover and a Jay.
1818, 4to. Thirty copies : and one upon vellum.
DODD, REV. JAMES WILLIAM.-The Funeralles of King
Edward the Sixt. 1566. Reprinted 1817, 4to. Forty
copies.
DRURY, REV. HENRY.-The Metrical Life of St. Robert
of Knaresborough. 1824, 4to. From a MS. formerly in the
library of the Rev. Mr. Drury, but now in that of the Duke
of Newcastle. It was superintended by the late Mr. Hasle-
464 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
wood, and has received some annotations by the late Mr.
Douce. St. Robert ( or Robert Flower) was son of the
Mayor of York, and lived as a hermit in his cell at Knaresborough, in the time of King John. Thirty-five copies
printed ; of which the extra four are now placed in public
libraries.
DRURY Drury Rev. HENRY. - Cock Lorell's Boat. A Fragment from the original in the British Museum ( Garrick's
Collection) : considered to be unique. Thirty-four copies :
two upon vellum.
Freeling, Sir FRANCIS, BART. -Dolarney's Primrose.
1606, 4to. Reprinted 1816, 4to. From the original rare
volume in Sir Francis's Collection. Thirty-three copies.
GEORGE HENRY. -Newes from Scotland.
1591 , 4to. Reprinted 1816, 4to. Thirty-six copies : one
upon vellum. Mr. Martin, in his somewhat particular account of this book, which is devoted to the " Damnable
Life of Dr. Fian," notices an allusion to this unhappy
man's fate (by having undergone the punishment of “ the
Boot") in Sir Walter Scott's Demonology and Old Mortality. He might have referred us to a wood-cut representation of this horrible torture given in Mr. Douce's Illustrations of Shakspeare.
GEORGE HENRY.- La Contenancee de la
Table. 1816, 12mo. Thirty-six copies : one upon vellum.
This was not a regular Roxburgher-if I may so designate
it. See a mirthful history relating to it, in the Bibliographical Decameron, vol. iii . p. 73 ; and a spiteful notice
of it, irrelevantly introduced, in a number of the Quarterly
Review for 1825.
GEORGE HENRY.— Information for Pylgrymes unto the Holy Londe. From a rare tract in the
library of the Faculty of Advocates at Edinburgh. 1824,
4to. Thirty-five copies printed. Second Contribution.
Gower, Earl, now DUKE of SUTHERLAND. - Balades
and other Poems, by John Gower. Printed from the
Garland. ] ROXBURGHIANA. 465
Original MS. in the library of the Duke of Sutherland at
Trentham, in Staffordshire. 1818. 4to. The Original
Book was presented by Gower the Poet, about the year
1400, to Henry IV. , and came into the library of the
Duke from having been presented by Lord Fairfax, one of
Cromwell's Generals, to his friend and kinsman, Sir Thomas
Gower, Knt. and Bart. , in the year 1656. These ballads,
in the French language, are here printed for the first time.
GRENVILLE, HON.. AND REV. NEVIlle. Gaufridi
Arthurii Monemuthensis Archidiaconi postea vero Episcopi
Asaphensis, De Vita et Vaticiniis Merlini Calidonii Carmen
Heroicum. From a MS. in the British Museum. See
page 410, ante. Forty-four copies were printed, of which
thre weree upon vellum.
HASLEWOOD, JOSEPH.-Two Interludes ; Jack Juggler
and Thersytes. From a unique copy of each Interlude.
1820, 4to.
HAWTREY, REV. EDWARD CRAVEN, D. D.-The Private
Diary of William, first Earl Cowper, Lord Chancellor
of England [ Supplementary Notes to follow. ] See page
412, ante. Fifty copies printed.
HEBER, RICHARD. -Caltha Poetarum, or the Bumble
Bee, by T. Cutwode, Esq. 1815, 4to. Thirty-two copies.
* A singular history attaches both to this Original and to its reprint
According to Ritson, the Original " was staid at the press by order of
the Archbishop of Canterbury and Bishop of London ; and such copies
as could be found, or were already taken, were to be presently brought
to the Bishop of London to be burnt." The cause of the above reprint
was this. A bet was laid (the winner of the bet to give the Roxburghe
Club a dinner) between Sir M. M. Sykes and Mr. Dent, whether the
Anniversary Meeting of 1815 were the third or fourth of the Club? Mr.
Dent was the loser ; when Mr. Heber promised to present the Club with
a reprint of the above poem at the extra dinner in contemplation. Only
nine days intervened ; but within that period the reprint was transcribed,
superintended at the press by Mr. Haslewood ( without a single error),
bound by Charles Lewis, and presented to the Members on sitting down
to dinner. Mr. Haslewood was reported to have walked in his sleep, with
a pen in his hand, during the whole period of its preparation.
H H
466 ROXBURGHIANA. [ Roxburghe
The original, 1599, 4to. , from which this is printed, is
now in the Collection of Sir F. Freeling, Bart. *
HIBBERT, GEORGE.- Six Bookes of Metamorphoseos,
in which ben conteyned the Fables of Ovyde. Translated
out of Frensshe into Englysshe, by William Caxton .
From a Manuscript in the Pepysian Library at Cambridge.
With a fac-simile of the original text, and a woodcut
representing Orpheus. 1819, 4to. A curious and splendid
donation to the Roxburghe Club* . About forty copies
were printed, of which two were upon vellum.
ISTED, GEORGE.-The New Notborune Mayd. The
Boke of Mayd Emlyn. From copies in the collection of
the late Thomas Caldecott, Esq. 1820, 4to. Thirty-eight
copies: one upon vellum.
Lang, Robert. —Le Livre du Faulcon. A reprint of
an exceedingly scarce tract in the black letter, printed by
Verard without date, from a copy in Mr. Lang's own
library. See p. 403, ante.
Littledale, MR. JUSTICE. —Magnyfycence, an Inter-
* Six-and-twenty years have now elapsed since a notice of the very
extraordinary ORIGINAL of the above printed volume was given by me
-chiefly through the kind intervention of the present Bishop of Peterborough-to the public, in the first volume of my Typographical Antiquities of Great Britain, p. 83, together with a fac-simile of its
inscription. It is a little singular, that this should not only bethe only
MS. with which I am acquainted, incorporating the name of Caxton
as "Translator and Finisher," but the only presumed performance of
that venerable Printer of which no printed copy is known. How
Casimir Oudin, in his Commentary upon the Ancient Writers of the
Church, got intelligence of its existence, in any shape, is to me somewhat surprising. At the close of this account I had said thus : —“ I
cannot dismiss this curious article without indulging the hope that the
labours of some more successful bibliographer may bring a printed copy
of the book to light ; none of the kind has hitherto, I believe, been seen
or heard of." Little could I have anticipated, at the period of making
this remark, of the treat afforded to all lovers of curious literature by
the publication of Mr. Hibbert-to which I must again have recourse in the ensuing pages.
Garland.] ROXBURGHIANA.
467
lude. By John Skelton, Poet Laureat to Henry VIII.
(1553. ) From a copy in the British Museum, and another
in the University Library at Cambridge. 1821 , 4to. Fifty
copies printed.
LITTLEDALE, EDWARD. -Diana, or The excellent Conceitful Sonnets of H. C. [ Harry Constable. ] 1818, 4to.
Fifty copies.
-- LLOYD, JOHN ARTHUR. The Cuck- Queanes, and
Cuckolds Errants. The Faery Pastorall, or Forest of
Elves. From a MS. in the Library of the late Mr.
Haslewood, which had been previously in that of the Duke
of Roxburghe *. See page 397, ante. Thirty-seven copies
printed; one upon vellum.
MARKLAND, JAMES HEYWOOD. - Chester Mysteries, De
Deluvio Noe. De Occisione Innocentium. With a frontispiece representing the Abbey- Gate of Chester, drawn by
Uwins, and engraved by Robinson ; a beautiful specimen of
united graphical elegance. Fifty-three copies, and three
upon large paper. 1818, 4to. The introduction to this
work upon our earliest dramas, and which does so much
credit to Mr. Markland, was reprinted in Mr. Boswell's
edition of Malone's Shakspeare.
MARLBOROUGH, Duke of. -Selections from the Works
of Thomas Ravenscroft, a Musical Composer of the time
of King James I. 1822, 4to.
PHELPS, JOHN DELAFIELD.—The Glutton's Feaver, by
Thomas Bancroft. 1633, 4to. Reprinted, 1817 , 4to.
PONTON, THOMAS. -Le Morte Arthur. The Adventures of Sir Launcelot du Lake. 1819, 4to. First printed
from a MS. in the Harleian Library ; with a fac-simile of
the original text by Mr. R. Thomson, by whom the work
was superintended at the press. Thirty-one copies printed.
ROXBURGHE CLUB.-Printed at the Joint Charges of.
Havelok the Dane. 1828, 4to. Sixty-two copies printed ;
of which Earl Spencer purchased six. Intrinsically con-
* This manuscript was sold at the sale of Mr. Haslewood's library for 127. 12s.
HH 2
468 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
sidered, this is perhaps the most valuable, as well as curious,
volume among those of which the ROXBURGHE Garland
is composed. A whisper is abroad, that, with permission of
the Club, and of Earl Cawdor, it is the intention of Sir
Frederick Madden, the able editor of this work and of the
Werwolf, to reprint them, with notes and an index, in an
octavo form, as a companion to his forthcoming edition of
the Brut of Wace-—a rare treat for the lovers of early English romance and history.
SCOTT, SIR WALTER, BART. -Proceedings in the Court
Martial held upon John Master, of Sinclair, &c. ( See
page 402, ante. ) 1828, 4to. Fifty-two copies printed.
SPENCER, EARL, K. G. PR. -The First Three Books of
Ovid de Tristibus, by Thomas Churchyarde. 1535, 4to.
Reprinted, 1816, 4to. Thirty-six copies ; one upon vellum.
From the Original in the Library at Althorp, and the
only copy (which had been Farmer's) hitherto known.
EARL, K. G. PR. -La Rotta di Francciosi
a Terroana Novamente facta. La Rotta di Scocesi. Reprinted from two rare Italian poems on the battles of
Terrovane and Flodden Field. 1825, 4to. Forty copies
printed. Second Contribution.
SYKES, SIR MARK MASTERMAN, BART.-The Chorle
and the Birde. First printed by Caxton, and afterwards
by Wynken de Worde. Reprinted in 1817, 4to.
SIR MARK MASTERMAN, BART. -The Hors,
the Shepe, and the Ghoos. From the presses of Caxton
and Wynken de Worde. Of excessive rarity. 1822, 4to.
Second Contribution. Thirty-five copies.
TAYLOR, GEORGE WATSON. -Poems written in English,
by Charles Duke of Orleans, during his captivity in England after the Battle of Azincourt. From a MS. in the
British Museum, and printed for the first time. 1827, 4to.
Forty-four copies printed, of which four were upon vellum.
Of these vellum copies, one, splendidly bound in morocco,
was destined for Charles X. late King of France ; a second
is in the library of Earl Spencer ; a third in the British
Garland.] ROXBURGHIANA. 469
Museum ; and the fourth, in the possession of the Contributor. A curious, singular, and most acceptable volume.
TOWNELEY, PEREGRINE. -Judicium, a Pageant. From
the Towneley MS. of Ancient Mysteries. 1822, 4to. The
preface was written by the late Mr. Douce. Fifty copies
printed.
UTTERSON, EDWARDVERNON.-Chevelere Assigne. From
a MS. in the Cotton Collection in the British Museum.
[ 1820] 4to. Fifty copies printed.
WILBRAHAM, ROGER. - Daiphantus, or the Passions of
Love. By Antony Scoloker. ( 1604. ) 1818, 4to. See
page 408, ante.
WRANGHAM, ARCHDEACON FRANCIS. -The Garden Plot.
An Allegorical Poem, inscribed to Queen Elizabeth by
Henry Goldingham. From a MS. in the British Museum.
With a Reprint of the Author's Masque performed before
the Queen at Norwich in 1598. 1825. 4to. See page 396
ante. Thirty- nine copies printed.
*** It ought to have been observed that, of the copies
printed upon vellum, ONE was always reserved for our PRESIDENT,
Such are the Flowers of which I consider the
ROXBURGHE GARLAND to be composed. These
flowers doubtless vary both in colour and in quality;
and the Garland is as doubtless more picturesque in
consequence. But considering these FORTY-FOUR
volumes as the production of a society of noblemen
and gentlemen of only twenty-three years standing,
put forth without the slightest probability of any
profit but that of the satisfaction arising from adding to the Archæological Curiosities of their country,
they ought to stand well in the estimation of all
honourable minds. Whatever may be the ultimate
470 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
"sway" offashion, the ROXBURGHE CLUB- if it rest
only upon its present oars of distinction-will have
deserved well of the Republic of Literature. There
are yet a few volumes in arrear-and there is yet a
strong feeling among several Members to redeem, by
a second contribution, the comparative inferiority of
the first ; but after every Member has contributed
his quota, I adhere to the opinion expressed in a
previous page, that it will be better to contribute our
respective quotas to the supply of some such other
performance as that of HAVELOK. It will be observed, from the foregoing list, that during one year,
1818, not fewer than six volumes were contributed.
Well might the guests at that annual symposium take
little heed of the amount of the bill of fare, when such
treasures were to be borne away to their homes * !
I am now to make brief mention of what I choose
to consider as Grafts from the Parent Stock ; or
other BOOK- SOCIETIES formed upon the plan of our
* The symposium in question took place at the Albion Tavern, in
Aldersgate-street, during my absence on the Continent, on the day on
which I gave a sort of brother-festival, or banquet, to eight distinguished literati at Paris ; the whole of the expenses of which were considerably beneath the charge for one guest at the Albion festival. The
reader may remember my notice of this piece of naughty extravagance
in the second volume of the Tour ; little supposing that the proceedings of that day, together with the items and charges of the dinner,
were to be dragged to public view in the pages of a weekly journal, and
afterwards in those of a newspaper. Poor Haslewood (whose skin, like
that of John Ziska, is doomed to make more noise after death than
during life) with his incautious " Revelry-" or rather the utterly incomprehensible conduct of his executors-has been the source of such
unwarrantable exposure : although I have heard the deceased, more than
once, say, that " for such a bumper of BOOKS he would cheerfully have
paid double the costs of the bumpers of WINE."
Grafts. ]
ROXBURGHIANA. 471
own. And first-in chronological order, if not in
intrinsic importance of THE BANNATYNE CLUB. It
will be seen from a previous page (399), that in a
letter addressed to me by the late Sir Walter Scott,
this Club was then ( 1822) in contemplation on the
plan of our own. Sir Walter became the first President. On his decease, Thomas Thomson, Esq. ,
before Vice-President, succeeded to the presiding
chair. A fitter selection could not have been made.
Mr. Thomson is à zealous and learned antiquary
in matters relating to law as well as to manners and
customs to constitutional history, as well as to
dusty records ; and is alive, at all times, to the best
interests of civil and religious liberty. A crumbling
arch or a decayed charter is equally interesting to
his feelings ; and the song or the speech of other
days, warmed by patriotism, or pointed by wit, is
sure to meet at his hands with a ready and gracious
reception. Many years have passed away since we
met at the truly hospitable table of the great Caledonian Historian, the late GEORGE CHALMERS ... of
whom in a future page. Our conversation at that
meeting cannot be easily forgotten.
“ manet altâ mente repostùm"
To return to the Bannatyne Club. It derives its
name from one GEORGE BANNATYNE, a worthy wight
or gentleman, born about the middle of the sixteenth
century, of whom, in fact, we know nothing. It
should seem that, in his youth, this George Banna-
472 ROXBURGHIANA. [ Roxburghe
tyne led a sedentary and secluded life. Indeed, I
feel persuaded that he was in possession of some intellectual reservoir which received the precious deposit of past wit and bygone genius, through a
filtering process of which no particulars have survived. Equally persuaded I am that he was in the
habit of receiving, in early youth, certain dicteria—
perchance odd heads and tails of rhyming balladsfrom some hoary headed sage who had been a carouser at the " merrie court " of James V. of Scotland. Bannatyne, in fact, appears to have done for
the poetry of his age, what the unknown transcriber
and compiler did for that of a later age, in the manuscript consulted by the Bishop of Dromore for his
Reliques of Ancient English Poetry * . He filled 800
folio pages with transcripts of Scottish poetry, during
the sixteenth century. Some few of these transcripts
have the value of originals, as their prototypes have
never been found. Others are copies of what were
considered to be exceedingly scarce pieces.
whole appears to have been carefully and neatly
transcribed by Bannatyne for the purpose of publication. This truly precious NATIONAL RELIC, in two
volumes, is now inlaid and splendidly bound in morocco, and deposited in the library of the Faculty of
The
* A very particular account of this curious manuscript, together with
fac-similes of its scription, may be seen in the third volume of the
Bibliographical Decameron ; while in a preceding page (369) a hint is
thrown out that the manuscript may be yet made more substantially
serviceable to the interests of OLD SONG by a more copious selection of
its contents.
Grafts.]
ROXBURGHIANA. 473
Advocates at Edinburgh * . That Library is the first
shrine at which I should kneel, if fate ever carried
me to that most interesting capital. Myfriend David
Laing, Esq., the erudite and able secretary, would,
I feel persuaded, help me up in case I fell—or was
taken with too long a swooning fit of delirious
rapture.
I must refer the reader to the copious and instructive pages of Mr. Martint for an account of
all the publications of this most respectable Graft,
or Brother Club. The number of impressions of
whatsoever they print is limited to one hundred and
thirty-six. The subjects chosen for publication are
usually well chosen, from their being generally interesting. In diligence the Bannatyners have far
outstripped the Roxburghers ; for, considering their
standing-only about a dozen years-they have already equalled the latter in the number of publications. This Fraternity is at present in high repute.
All classes of society are incorporated as members ;
and each member pays a contribution of five guineas
per annum. High and gallant names glitter in their
muster-roll ; and he who would enter the lists with
* The whole of the first volume, in two parts, -and the first part of
the second volume, have been already published by the Club, under the
editorial care of Mr. Laing, the secretary.
↑ Pages 358–378 : with a beautiful wood-cut of the assumed arms of
the Club. But of all the beautiful wood- cuts with which this beautiful
volume abounds, not one reaches the lovely heraldic vignette by way of
prefix to the books printed at Newcastle- upon-Tyne. On large paper,
the effect is dazzling. I rejoice to see the name of Byfield as that of
the artist by whom it was engraved.
474 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
a view of being a candidate, ought to look well to
his Glass-especially if he be a Sexagenarian-lest
increasing inroads upon the surface of the cuticle
warn him that, at the probable period of his election,
he be
66
may
... sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans every thing."
I now come, in the order of narative, to notice
another vigorous shoot, or promising Graft, from the
parent Roxburghe Stem-in the formation of the
MAITLAND CLUB. But before II send my readers
to the copious and instructive pages of Mr. Martin,
whose book is a sine quâ non in every collection of
elegant literature, I must be permitted to detail
the origin and progress of this Book-Club in the
language of its efficient Vice- President, John Kerr,
Esq., of Glasgow; from whom I received the following account in a letter of the date of Nov. 16, 1829 ;
and by which it will appear that SCOTLAND has
caught the blaze of antiquarian lore kindled by the
torch of the ROXBURGHERS.
66 MY DEAR SIR,
" 15, Blythsward Place, Glasgow,
" 16th Nov. 1829.
" I think it will be gratifying to you to know, if you are
not already informed, that upwards of eighteen months ago
a Club was formed here, on the model of the Roxburghe
and Bannatyne Clubs, for printing works illustrative of the
History, Literature, and Antiquities of SCOTLAND. As one
of the founders of the Club, the members did me the honour
of electing me their Vice- President ; and in that capacity I
have one copy of their first work at my disposal, of which
Grafts.]
ROXBURCHIANA. 475
I request your acceptance. You will find it chiefly the
composition of Sir RICHARD MAITLAND* , whose name we
chose for our Club, and whose MSS. , therefore, became a
fitting object of our first use of types. I trust the volume
(at least in its external appearance) will please you. One
hundred copies were thrown off for the Bannatyne Club, on
their own paper, and another hundred were thrown off for
the Maitland Club. Of the last, fifty copies were distributed
among the members ; one was retained for the Club library;
thirty were laid aside in the event of an increase of members being resolved upon at a future period ; and of the remaining nineteen, four were presented to Mr. C. K. Sharpe,
(who presented the Club with two of the three plates which
illustrate the volume) , for the Marchioness of Stafford, himself, and two other friends. One was given to each of the
Vice- Presidents and Secretary of the Bannatyne Club, and
another Edinburgh gentleman for services rendered. One
was given to the Earl of Eglintoun, the descendant of the
Seton family; six were allotted to the Editor, Mr. Fullarton ; one is now presented to you ; and four still remain in
the possession of the Club. That I may not tire you with
* It is entitled "the HISTORY of the HOUSE OF SEYTOUN, to the year
1559. By Sir Richard Maitland of Lethingtoun, Knight. With the
Continuation by Alexander, Viscount Kingston, to 1687. Glasg. 1829,
4to. This Richard Maitland was born at the end of the fifteenth century, and is the parent stem ofthe noble house of LAUDERDALE. He was
an active, inquisitive, and industrious man ; and seems to have stood
alone, in the very interesting period in which he lived, in collecting
literary, and especially POETICAL, RELICS. His daughter, about the
middle of the sixteenth century, was his amanuensis in copying out his
Collections of the early Scottish Poets-now in the Pepysian library at
Cambridge. He was Keeper of the Privy Seal in the reign of Queen Mary ; and died in his ninetieth year in 1586. He was in France
when the unfortunate Mary Stuart was married to Francis II. , then
Dauphin :-perhaps a spectator of the ceremony. I wish he had given
us his " REMINISCENCES." One might have parted with much antiquated lore for SUCH a work.
476 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
Maitland details, allow me to refer you to the regulations,
of which you will find a copy sent herewith."
For a minute list of the pieces or volumes already
put forth by this Rival Club, the reader must consult
Mr. Martin's seductive volume. Only six years appear to have elapsed since their incorporation, and
their diligence has been amazing. Twenty-four
volumes have already appeared ; and eight more are
announced by Mr. Martin as in preparation. The
general object of these volumes is admirable ; and
both the Bannatyne and Maitland Clubs must be
allowed to have outstripped our own, not less in the
rapid succession, than in the instructive complexion,
of their publications. We have been too indolent or
careless. Where we have gathered a flower, they
have brought home a nosegay. But competition is
the very spur to excellence ; and our Havelok and
Werwolf may always raise their heads without the
fear of being overtopped.
I now pass on to the notice of another graft from
our parent stem, planted in aforeign soil. I allude
to LA SOCIETE DES BIBLIOPHILES FRANCAIS, established at Paris about fifteen years ago, chiefly
through the influence and exertions of my friends
the Marquis de Chateaugiron and Durand Delançon ; gentlemen, of the true bibliomanical breed ;
keenly alive to all the glories that encircle the venerable heads of Aldus, the Giunti, Plantin, Elzevir,
Barbou, Tonson, and Baskerville. The very motto
Grafts. ]
ROXBURGHIANA. 477
upon their banner shews of what proper materials
the Bibliophiles are formed. They avow their object
to be " pour nourir, relever, et faire naître même la
passion de la BIBLIOMANIE. Thus recalled to recollection, it is impossible for me ever to forget the
warm and generous manner in which the greater
portion of this PARIS- ROXBURGHE CLUB fêted our
venerable President and myself at Paris, in the year
1820. The respect of this Club for our late President induced them not only to elect him an Honorary Member, but to offer his vacant seat to his Son,
the present Earl ; an offer which was graciously and
promptly accepted. And here I must take leave to
make my best bow to the whole Corps Bibliographique of this Society for the honour conferred upon
me also, in having elected me an Honorary Member
of the same : the more so, as the books which they
publish—in a royal octavo form—are very limited
in number, and of the most beautiful description in
regard to paper and printing ; each volume having,
in the title-page, an admirable wood- cut, in profile,
of DE THOU, the ever-popular Collector of France
under every shifting and changing of book-fashion.
In point of splendour, the three English Clubs must
doff their bonnets in readily admitting the superiority of the productions of the Bibliophiles Français. In some other respects that fraternity may also
claim a superiority. Their pieces are usually taken
from manuscripts : but the question is, are these
manuscripts, or the portions which they select
478 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
S.
Berare
crarel
BIBLIOTHE
hecher Artaud .
deLiartitat
F.euillet defonches
Walchinaw
l'institut der
44. deChateaugiron
d'urban lemquis defortia
del'institut
L'abbé -j.Zaboudevie
EQUE
DEA
LYON FT
3771
. -7.687 *
Grafts. ] ROXBURGHIANA. 479
from them, of importance ? Doubtless they have
erred more than once or twice in their selections * .
The literature of the ages of Louis XIV. and Louis
XV. has been sucked to its very dregs. There is
scarcely one more drop of its juice worth the suction. The Pompadours, the La Vallieres, the Montespans, and Maintenons-together with the Voltaires and Diderots-may now as well be left to
an undisturbed dormitory. It is even questionable
whether, of the enchanting Sévigné, one letter be now
left deserving of publicity ? But of Piron-let us
have no more : he has had his day—and a long one
it has been. The wit of one age is not the wit of
another. Rabelais is beginning to be loathed ; and
no Englishman of a well- ordered mind can read a
second time the filth of Swift, or the equivoques of
Sterne. It is SHAKSPEARE alone that lives for all
ages and all countries.
But the French Bibliophiles have done very much
deserving of the most unmixed commendation. They
have brought to renascence, as it were, many a curious fragment in the shape of the drama, a morality,
or a mystery. They have favoured us with old poetry,
and with historical anecdotes, personal and local ;
and now that they have set themselves resolutely to
embark upon an ocean of black letter lore, we may
* On the OPPOSITE PAGE appears a fac-simile of six AUTOGRAPHS of
the Members of the Club of the Bibliophiles Français, who have done me the honour to become Subscribers to these " Reminiscences." Four
of these Members, as will be seen, are of the French INSTITUTE. The
names of all the Members of the Club in 1829, will be seen in the
second edition of the Tour, vol. ii. p. 275.
480 ROXBURGHIANA. [Roxburghe
expect great things in the natural order of time * .
They cannot be insensible how closely and intimately
allied the destinies of BOTH COUNTRIES have been in
times past-yea, are, in times present : and that
any narratives connected with their Louis XII. ,
Francis I., and Henri IV. , must of necessity meet
with a ready sympathy among ourselves. And then,
what STORES these enterprising French Bibliophiles
have to resort to ! What a LIBRARY-be it regal,
national, or both-immense, inexhaustible, and of
endless variety ! Long may these rivalries continue
between two such countries as England and France : -
between all countries ! Without the slightest tinge
of an irreverend feeling, be it permitted me to indulge the fond hope that spears may in due time be
turned into printing presses, and swords into volumes of instruction ; and that a desire to develope
the literature of past ages, as a spur to that of the
present, may
"Growwith the growth, and strengthen with the strength"
of ALL civilised countries, which have the " peace
and good-will" of their fellow-creatures at heart.
But it is time to draw the curtain upon these
ROXBURGHIANA-which have, I fear, been elongated
* They have now published six or seven volumes ; and on any public
sale of them, they unite vigorously in keeping them from the touch of
vulgar hands and so scarce is the first volume become, that at a sale
in Paris, in 1829, a copy of it could not be procured under the sum of
201. sterling. See a list of the contents of these volumes in Brunet's
Nouvelles Recherches.
Grafts. ]
ROXBURGHIANA. 481
to an unconscionable extent. If, however, they serve
no other purpose than a demonstration of right and
honourable feeling towards the living-and of respect and attachment towards the memories of the
greater number of the deceased-Members of the
Club, they will not have been penned in vain. In
whatever way-as the accidental Founder, and an
anxious Vice-President, of this Association-I may
have been mixed up with its labours, it is neither
affectation nor insincerity to avow, that such intermixture has been productive of some of the most
pleasurable, and, I will hope, not unprofitable, moments of my existence. Whatever be the ultimate
destiny of that Vice- President, he can have but one
straitforward and kind-hearted feeling for the prosperity of THE ROXBURGHE CLUB.
I I
482
CHAPTER VIII.
THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
"Not all, that sit beneath a golden roof,
In rooms of cedar, O RENOWNED LORD !
Wise though they be, and put to highest proof,
To the sweet Muses do their grace afford ;
Which, if they did, the like would them accord,
The mighty Poets to eternity,
And their wise acts in living verse record,
And build them up, great heirs of Memory ;
Which else shall in oblivion fall and die.
But THOU--that like the Sun, with heav'nly beams
Shining on all , dost cheer abundantly
The learned heads, that drink Castalian streamsTranscendant Lord, accept this verse from me,
Made for all time ... but yet unfit for THEE."
LORD THURLOW.
IF the late LORD THURLOW, author of the above
masculine sonnet-"To the Right Honourable THE
EARL SPENCER, Knight of the Most Noble Order
of the Garter"-had not written one single verse in
addition, he should have been gladly and gratefully
included by me in the Corpus Poetarum Anglicanorum. It is some fifteen years ago, as I seem to
think, that this very sonnet, incorporated with other
pieces of poetry, by the same noble hand *, and
* The above sonnet is taken from Lord Thurlow's " Defence of
Poesy," p. 3. The noble author, who was the nephew of the first Lord,
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 483
beautifully printed in a slender duodecimo volume,
was deposited by me as a sort of Christmas gift to
the noble owner, in the library at Althorp.
"But my design." I must now trespass upon the
indulgence of the reader to go back with me some
twenty-three years ; namely, from the date of the
demise of the above illustrious nobleman, to the
year 1811 , when my more familiar intercourse with
him began, and when my first visit to Althorp took
place. Ever since the publication of the first edition
of the Introduction to the Classics, I had vehemently
desired an acquaintance with THE SPENCER LIBRARY-in all its wonderful varieties ; and more
especially with that portion of it then deposited at
Spencer House, in St. James's Place. There could
be no question of the most entire admiration on my
part for the character of the Owner being mixed up
with an attachment to his Book-Treasures. The
pages of the Bibliomania * bear decisive proofs of
was passionately addicted to old books and to old English literature.
Indeed, in many of his pieces he seems to have unnecessarily trammelled
himself with the style of our old Masters-so as to have clogged his
freedom of thought. Very many of his smaller poems were printed
abroad ; and very many are distinguished for delicacy of sentiment and
purity of diction. His " Althea, " and his " Moonlight "—the former
addressed to his Wife, and the latter, descriptive of his uncle-the
first Lord Thurlow-are perhaps among the best of his productions.
+ The lapse of twenty-four years has not tarnished one featureone lineament—in the representation : and I envy not the pencils of
Reynolds, Copley, Phillips, and Clint, in what the walls of Althorp
display in another deparment of portrait painting-connected with the
same distinguished character. The whole passage is as follows.
"We raise the column to the hero who has fought our battles by sea
II 2
484 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
this. Within a month of the publication of that
work, I cast about me to accomplish a design of
publishing an octavo volume of some 500 pages—
under the title of BOOK RARITIES—which might
contain a good descriptive " Catalogue of curious,
rare, and valuable Books of an early date, " in the
libraries of several eminent collectors, but chiefly in
that of Earl Spencer ; and it seemed to me that
some Italian books, of great rarity and cost, stood in
especial need of a careful and elaborate description.
or land, and we teach our children to look up with admiration and reverence towards an object so well calculated to excite the best sympathies
of the human heart. All this is well : and may it never be neglected !
But there are other characters not less noble, and of equal glory to a
great nation like our own ; and they are those, who, to the adventitious
splendour of hereditary rank, add all the worth and talent of a private
condition, less exposed to temptation, and suited to the cultivation of
peaceful and literary pursuits. Such a character is GEORGE JOHN, EARL
SPENCER. A Nobleman, not less upright and weighty in the senate,
than polished and amiable in private life : who, cool and respected
amidst the violence of party, has filled two of the most important offices
of state, in a manner at once popular and effective ; and who, to his
general love of the fine arts, and acquaintance with classical literature,
has superadded the noble achievement of having collected the FINEST
PRIVATE LIBRARY in EUROPE. The reader has already met with sufficient mention of this collection, to justify what is here said in commendation of it. In the deepest recess of Althorp Park-where the
larch and laurustinus throw their dark yet pleasing shade—and where
....
....
66 pinus ingens, albaque populus
Umbram hospitalem consociare amant
Ramis-"
let the Doric temple be raised, with its white marble columns, sacred to
the memory of this ILLUSTRIOUS NOBLEMAN ! Let his bust, in bassorelievo, with appropriate embellishments, adorn the most conspicuous
compartment within : and peace and virtue, and filial affection, will, I
am sure, be the guardians of so cherished a spot ! "-Edit. 1811 , p. 702.
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 485
With this view I wrote to His Lordship to allow
me to introduce myself to some of his rarer Italian
books-imparting to him my design of instituting a
close examination into the Valdarfer Boccaccio of
1471 , then quietly reposing on the shelves of the
Roxburghe Library. His Lordship observed in
reply, that whenever I liked to call for the purpose
of inspecting any of his books, Mr. Ocheda (his
Lordship's Librarian) would with pleasure attend
me. "If (continued he) you treat of the early
Dantes in your proposed work, you must not omit
the three editions printed in the year 1472, all of
which you may see here ; and all of which are extremely rare. My Boccaccio without date, and the
Duke of Roxburghe's, by Valdarfer, in 1471, are, I
suppose, the two to which you allude ; and an accurate description of them, taken from the books themselves, will be a valuable Bibliographical document. ”
Accordingly, I availed myself of this privilege ;
and within a month from the date of His Lordship's
letter, had completed my brochure of thirty-four
printed pages, entirely devoted, with two exceptions,
to an account of the early printed Dantes and Petrarchs at Spencer House. This brochure was entitled Book Rarities ; and its object is best unfolded
by a transcript of the brief and quaint " Address "
prefixed to it *.
* It may be as well to prefix the title at length. Book Rarities ; or
a Descriptive Catalogue ofsome ofthe most curious, rare, and valuable
486 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
It was no sooner printed, than, as in duty bound,
Books of early date, chiefly in the Collection of the Rt. Hon. GEORGE
JOHN, EARL SPENCER, K. G., &c. &c. &c. Thirty-six copies only were
printed. The title-page is followed by the
66 ADDRESS,
" THE preceding and subsequent pages will give my friends some general idea of the work, a specimen of which is here presented to them.
With the exception of the first and last articles, all the editions described
are in the library of the distinguished Nobleman whose name stands in
the opposite leaf.
66" I have presumed to think that a volume of about 500 pages, devoted to a description of some of the rarest books of early typography,
and of which no similar description has been yet published, may be
considered an useful acquisition to the general stock of bibliographical
knowledge : especially if such a work be executed from actual inspection
of the volumes described. In the present instance this rule will be invariably followed ; and I indulge the hope that the possessors of rare
and precious books will have the kindness to permit me to add a description of their treasures to those in the collections at Spencer House and
at Althorp.
"The present work will be adorned with fac- similes of ancient cuts,
printers' devices, and other curious and beautiful ornaments ; which
relieve the dryness of catalogue composition, delight the eye of the
reader, and impress upon his memory a more durable idea of the books
described. No pains, as this specimen evinces, will be spared in rendering the typographical execution worthy of the celebrated press from
which it issues.
"Those who know the importance of describing rare and curious
works with exactness, will not be offended with the minuteness of detail
discoverable in the ensuing pages. Such have been my efforts to be
correct, that I am almost inclined to hold detection of errata at defiance;
at least, those of my friends who discover my vulnerable parts, will do
me the kindness of pointing them out to me, over a home-cooked beefsteak, lightly sprinkled with snow- white horse radish, and flanked with
the best lettuce my garden can bestow. More sumptuous fare may
easily be procured ; but a more cordial reception shall no where be experienced.
Kensington, Aug. 19, 1811 . T. F. D.
I now forget whether my " note of defiance " brought any combatants
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 487
I sent one of the very earliest còpies of it to the
Noble Owner whose library had furnished me with
such copious and accurate descriptions. Lord Spencer's immediate reply to my letter was one of the
most gratifying and interesting which I had ever
received : partly, ofcourse, from personal considerations, and partly for the very curious intelligence
with which it concluded.
" DEAR SIR,
"Wimbledon Park, Oct. 6th, 1811.
" I RETURN you many thanks for the very beautiful
specimen you were so good as to send me with your letter
of the 1st inst. , ofyour intended work, which if continued
in the manner in which you have begun it, cannot fail to
be an acceptable acquisition to the curious in Bibliography.
I have looked over it with great pleasure, and as far as a
perusal without verifying by a comparison with the articles
described, can enable me to pronounce, I think it appears
to be the best example of Bibliographical description I
have ever seen. You do me great honour in annexing my
name to it in the manner you have done ; and I beg you
will believe me when I assure you, that so far from needing
within the arena ; or how many " beefsteaks" were cooked to meet the
self-invitations of critics and annotators ; but it may be as well to observe, that the first article, the Valdarfer Boccaccio of 1471 , was incorporated into the Supplement of the Bibliotheca Spenceriana, 1822, p.
53, &c.; it having become the property of the Noble Earl by a somewhat singular train of events briefly recorded at page 357, note. In
this Supplement, the collation of the Valdarfer Boccaccio with that of
Deo Gratias and the Mantua edition of 1472, occupies not fewer than
twenty pages ; a perusal of which cannot fail to be interesting to the
learned in Italian Bibliography.
488 THE SPENCER LIBRARY .
any apology for so doing, I am much flattered with the
compliment you have paid me.
" I regret to hear that your health had suffered by your
application to study, but I hope your excursion into the
country has re-established it. I shall be glad to have the
two books you mention at the price assigned for them, and
am much obliged to you for pointing them out, as well as
for sending me the thick paper Rastell's Chronicle *.
" I have had a great piece of black letter fortune within
these few days, having added to my collection of Caxtons
the three following, viz., the first edition of the Game of
Chess, a perfect and very fine copy ; the History ofJason,
perfect and pretty good as to condition ; and the History of
Reynart the foxe, perfect and very fine. All acquired from
the same quarter, and at the same time. I think you will
allow this to have been a PROUD DAY for the library. The
books are in Herring's hands at present, to be new bound,
but I hope you will call in St. James's-place, and see them
as soon as they come home.
" I remain, dear Sir,
"Yours truly,
" SPENCER."
Of course I could not long debar myself from the
tempting gratification of examining such Caxtonian
treasures, and within the same month of October I
* This was a reprint of the very rare and curious book published by
JOHN RASTELL, the Printer, under the title of The Pastyme of People:
The Cronycles of Divers Realmys and most specyalls ofthe Realme of
England, &c. 1529, folio, of which a long account appears in the Typog.
Antiq. , vol. iii. p. 91-97. Fac-similes of the large, coarse cuts of the
Kings of England, were also given in the reprint-of which I was the
Editor. There were (to the best of my recollection) only six copies
upon fine or thick paper. See a curious anecdote about this book in the
Bibliog. Decameron, vol. i . 205, note.
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 489
held the three volumes in my arms ! They were,
and are, most delectable copies of most rare impressions ; and, as is now pretty generally known,
were purchased, through the instrumentality of the
late Mr. Edwards, of the Dean and Chapter Library
of Lincoln Cathedral. It was an immense stride to
have made in the Caxtonian arena ; and had such
copies of these books been sold in the Roxburghe
Library, a thousand guineas had been the least sum
they would have produced. Meanwhile, I continued
sedulously to enlarge my " Book Rarities " —and on
reporting my progress to His Lordship, he was
pleased to observe, in a letter of the 3d November,
1811, dated from Holkham, that " he was delighted
to find that his Library had afforded me so much
occupation and amusement ; and that he had no
doubt he should be much gratified in seeing the result ofmy labours in it. " The year 1812 was entered
upon, and I still continued in the fixed resolution to
make one volume of my work, under the title so frequently mentioned. Mr. Bulmer had printed the
SPECIMEN in a style of surpassing beauty, and it was
but fair that he should be consulted upon the VoHis reply was as follows. LUME.
" DEAR SIR,
" Cleveland Row, Fast Day, Feb. 1812.
"I HAVE devoted an hour towards making a calculation
of the probable expense of printing your Book Rarities,
490 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
and the following conclusions present themselves ; viz. supposing the 8vo. volume to make 450 pages, the
Printing and hot-pressing 500 copies will be £168
Ditto, for 75 copies in 4to.
51
£219
But you must " beware of steel traps and spring guns ; ” for,
in the above calculation, there is no reservation made either
for alterations-printing in red, blue, or yellow-or indeed
any extra or fanciful propensity which a gentleman of fertility of genius may be pleased to indulge in, by way of
bothering the poor printer. That you may have further
data to go upon, the paper for the 8vo. (supposing the
quantity of pages above stated to be correct) will take
twenty-eight reams, and the seventy-five copies of the 4to.
will require about nine reams.
I am, dear Sir,
Yours very truly,
Withlenses
It should seem from Mr. Bulmer's estimate, that
the work in view was still to assume the name first
announced ; or that, had it been otherwise, I had not
imparted to him the altered title. I cannot, therefore, expressly say at what precise point of time it
was that I had finally determined to concentrate all
my researches within the Library of Earl Spencer,
and to devote my intended work exclusively to the
composition of a descriptive Catalogue of the trea-
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 491
sures of that matchless collection. Certain it is,
that within a month after the receipt of his Lordship's letter, just laid before the reader, I was exceedingly busied in the library at Spencer Houseamongst the theological books ; and received some
instructions from His Lordship as to the direction
of my labours *. And not less certain it is, that,
within little more than a month after the date of
Mr. Bulmer's estimate, it was finally determined
between the noble owner of the Library and myself,
that the work should assume that title under which
it afterwards came forth before the world.
Accordingly I was not long in making the public
* In a letter dated Althorp, Nov. 28, 1811 , his lordship thus observes,
"When I see you, I must talk to you about another Bible which I have,
but which, as the copy is imperfect, it is probable that Mr. Ochéda did
not show you ; but in a list of my ancient Bibles it ought not to be
passed over. It is in a larger Gothic character than that usually known
bythe Mazarine Bible, and the same as was used by Albert Pfister,
at Bamberg. Another very curious book in my possession, containing
the histories of Joseph, Daniel, Esther, and Judith, with wooden cuts,
printed in 1462. As this latter book is a sort of extract from the Bible.
it might, without impropriety, be included in the class you are now
about ; and when I return to town (if you have not already seen it), I
shall be happy to show it to you, together with the Letters ofIndulgence
of Pope Nicholas V., and the Block Books."
It is gratifying to be enabled to add, that, within a twelvemonth
of the date of this letter, ALL these articles, added to many others,
were described in print with a fidelity and minuteness-aided by
numerous fac-similes-such as the Public had not before seen, and
forming the earlier portion of the first volume of my work. At this
time his Lordship's copy of the Pfister Bible was not complete ; but it
was afterwards perfected by means of a copy of the third volume in
the library of the present Earl of Liverpool, which had been graciously
conceded, in exchange for some other book, with this view.
492 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
announcement of it which will be found in the subjoined note * ; and I devoted all my energies towards
* That announcement thus describes the nature of the work. "This
Work is intended to be a Catalogue Raisonné of that portion of the
EARL SPENCER's Library which comprehends Books PRINTED IN THE
FIFTEENTH CENTURY, and FIRST EDITIONS of many distinguished Authors. It will commence with an account of Books printed, from
WOODEN BLOCKS, about the middle of the fifteenth century ; from which
many extraordinary Specimens of Cuts will be given, as tending to illustrate the HISTORY OF ENGRAVING during the same period. This
division will be followed by THEOLOGY : comprehending a list of some
of the scarcest Latin, German, Italian, and Dutch BIBLES printed in the
fifteenth century ; with notices of the first Editions of the Polyglott,
French, English, Polish, and Sclavonian Bibles. These will be followed by an account of some celebrated PSALTERS, MISSALS, and BREVIARIES, executed within the same period. The INTERPRETERS OF
SCRIPTURE, and many of THE FATHERS, will close the department of
Theology.
"CLASSICAL LITERATURE will succeed. The Authors will be arranged
alphabetically, from Æsop to Xenophon ; and the notices of rare and
valuable editions, in this most extensive and most valuable department
of his Lordship's Library, will be found more copious and interesting,
it is presumed, than any with which the reader is yet acquainted.
“ MISCELLANEOUS LITERATURE, in the Latin Language, including
Didactic and Moral Works, Writers upon the CANON and CIVIL Law,
HISTORIES, and CHRONICLERS of the MIDDLE Ages, will form the
fourth division.
"ITALIAN BOOKS, including some remarkably scarce early-printed
volumes of Poetry, will compose the fifth division.
" ENGLISH BOOKS printed by CAXTON, WYNKYN DE WORDE, and
PYNSON, as well as the ST. ALBANS BOOK of Hawking, Hunting, and
Coat Armour (of which latter, the only known perfect copy is in this
Collection) will form the sixth and concluding department.
"Neither pains nor expense will be spared in the execution of the
Work. It will be printed with a newtype in the Elzevir-form, and in the
best manner, at the SHAKESPEARE PRESS, upon paper manufactured
purposely for it ; and no difference will be made in the press-work, or
quality of the ink and paper, between the Small and Large Paper
Copies. In regard to the intrinsic value of these volumes, it is hoped
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 493
-
the execution of a plan, which, of its kind, seemed
to me to be the most splendid and complete that
had yet been devised. I had just then launched
the second volume of myTypographical Antiquities ;
at the end of the preface of which ( dated Nov. 1811 )
I had in a measure announced the probability of the
they will be found deserving of the approbation of the Public. Many
rare and valuable ancient publications will, for the first time, be made
generally known ; and the deficiencies and errors of preceding bibliographers supplied and corrected where found necessary. By means of
cuts, and fac- similes of types, a number of books will be more satisfactorily described than heretofore ; and, consequently, will make a more
lasting impression upon the memory of the reader. Of the extraordinary value of the Library here described, it is hardly necessary to
apprise the classical Student and Collector. It is the wish of its Noble
Owner, that a collection, which has been obtained, at a very great
expense, during a series of twenty-two years, should be faithfully made
known to the Public : and if either his Lordship, or the Public, experience any disappointment at the present attempt to carry such a wish into
execution, the Author is exclusively responsible for such failure.
"Kensington, March 31, 1812. T. F.D.
"To be published in Three Volumes, Super- Royal Octavo. Price
to Subscribers, 71. 178. 6d. Fifty-five Copies only will be printed upon
Large Paper, at 187. 188. each Copy. The impression of the Small Paper
will be limited to 550 Copies." It should however be noticed, as a literary
curiosity in its way, that the work was first announced as coming out
in TWO VOLUMES, as the following advertisement in the Gentleman's
Magazine for April 1812 proves.
BIBLIOTHECA SPENCERIANA.-A Descriptive Catalogue of
the early printed Books, and of many important First Editions of the
Library of George John Earl Spencer, K. G. &c. &c. &c., accompanied
with copious Notes, Plates of Fac-Similes, and numerous appropriate
Embellishments. To be published in Two Volumes, super-royal 8vo. ,
price to Subscribers, 57. 58. Fifty Copies only will be printed upon
large paper, at 127. 128. each Copy ; nearly the whole of which latter
are already subscribed for. The impression of the small paper will be limited to 500 Copies.
494 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
appearance ofthe Bibliotheca Spenceriana * . I now
began to work in right earnest. Sleeping or waking,
the library in St. James's Place was always before
my eyest. My visits there were daily. My occupations during those visits were severe and of long
continuance. One part of the day I was tracing
with my crow-pen, or camel-hair brush-feeling my
way through crowds of demons, winged spirits, monsters, and non-descripts, with which the pages of
the Block Books abounded ‡ : at another part of the
same day, collating, transcribing, comparing-lost
and at times bewildered in the wonderful varieties
of editions of the same work... were it a Bible or a
Classic. The very spirit of Bibliography seemed to
be brooding within the walls of the room assigned
* "My dream at night" appertained to THIS LIBRARY. When intensely busied with the earlier Bibles, I contrived so to dream, that I
fancied myself to be Fust at one time, and Pfister at another. For many
months, sound sleep fled my pillow ; and when I reached the article
CICERO, among the " Ancient Classics,” I seemed to be busied in dragging Cataline out of the senate-house at one time-and helping to seize
Verres, to bring him to public justice, at another.
+ To the best of my recollection, the first fac-simile which I executed
was that at page 19, from the Ars Moriendi, among the block books :
sufficiently appalling to unstring the most tightly set of nerves. The
WHOLE of the embellishments in the first volume are from my own
tracings ; and, where the originals have been free from colour or stain,
I think their general fidelity may be safely relied upon. Those
of St. Christopher and the Angel, between pages 2 and 3, have scarcely
one inaccuracy ; and they are fine, as well as extraordinarily early,
subjects into the bargain. In the whole, including those of types, there
are NINETY fac-similes in this first volume. Some of those connected
with the block books were of excessively toilsome execution.
See page 285, ante.
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 495
to me for my operations. That room, which is
backwards, and looking upon the stables, had been
the Nursery. Not an echo of a child's foot was
now heard in it. All that had ever trotted along its
floor were occupied in traversing a larger and more
perilous arena. Lord Althorp, now Earl Spencer,
had not then very long taken his seat as a Member
of the House of Commons. His lordship's two elder
brothers, under the gallant Sir Benjamin Hallowell,
were ploughing the salt seas. His youngest brother
was in a junior form at Eton. Afew pleasing little
prints, such as both nurse and children love to gaze
upon, yet maintained their original position on a large
screen... but in other respects the room was divested
of every living creature but myself, from sunrise till
sunset. A few shelves, filled with books of ordinary reference, skirted the upper extremity of it ;
where, for three successive years, I was more or
less in the habit ef concentrating my operations :
having ready access to all parts of the Library below*, where I was in the frequent habit of pursuing
my researches in the autumnal months-stealing a
sidelong glance through the window, which opens
upon the terracet, upon that beautiful verdure
* The KEY, which opened all the book-cases, was given to me by the
late Earl Spencer, when I began my researches in 1811, and it is YET
in my possession. His ancestor, Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough, could
not have been more reluctant to part with her gold key of Queen Anne's
closet, than I should be to part with this very simple, and worn key of
iron.
† A view through this window forms the copper-plate vignette at the
end of vol. i . of the Bibliotheca Spenceriana.
496 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
which by day is covered with cattle, and towards
evening is more plentifully sprinkled with human
beings.
I have said that for three successive years, during
the progress of the Bibliotheca Spenceriana, I was
in almost constant attendance at Spencer House.
If the supplemental volumes of the Edes Althorpiance and the Cassano Catalogue be taken into consideration, another year must be added to the foregoing. I cannot look back upon the years thus devoted, without the most unmixed satisfaction : not
so much from their having brought me in contact
with some of the choicest BOOK GEMS in the world,
as from the necessarily frequent presence and conversation of HIM who called them his own. During
those conversations, I derived as much instruction
(especially in the earlier part of my career) as I did
gratification in other respects ; and more than once
or twice, did I gather the noble owner's firm determination to possess himself of certain volumes,
with a view to the completion of his library, at any
price should an opportunity present itself. Among
these Libri Desiderati, I remember to have often
heard him name the first Hebrew Bible, the Mentelin German Bible, the Italian Bible of September
1471 , the Greek Aldine Hora of 1498, the Roman
Virgil and the Adam Virgil, each of the date of
1471 ; the Boccaccio of 1471 ; and above all Classics, the HORACE of 1474, printed at Naples by
Arnoldus de Bruxella. Among CAXTON's, he desiderated chiefly the second Chaucer, perfect ; the
THE SPENCER LIBRARY . 497
•
Morte D'Arthur, and the Esop* . He lived to see
three-fourths of these wants supplied ; and it was
* Eventually he became possessed of the Morte d'Arthur, wanting
eleven leaves, by the purchase of Mr. Lloyd's copy at the Wygfair sale,
in 1816 ; but not under the sum of 3207. I have been insane enough,
in the Decameron, vol. iii. pp. 140-2, to call this " a not inordinately
extravagant sum ;" I beg leave to retract that expression ; and to say,
that, considering four years had then elapsed since the sale of the Roxburgh library, it was a frightfully disproportionate sum ; for an hiatus
of eleven leaves, although now supplied by the unrivalled skill of Mr.
Harris, is still a huge hiatus ; nor could that supply have been yielded
under an additional sum of fifty pounds sterling. This acquisition was
made too late for its appearance till the fifth volume of the Bib. Spencer.
(or the second of the Ædes) had been published. Of the second edition of Caxton's Chaucer a very smart correspondence ensued between
his lordship and Mr. Hatchard, the bookseller, who possessed an imperfect copy which would have materially contributed to the perfection of
Lord Spencer's. Mr. Hatchard sold it to Mr. Heber, but whether below
the price offered by his lordship, I know not. It produced 797. at the
sale of Mr. Heber's books, and I do know that his lordship would have
given 847. It was in the year 1814, that Lord Spencer became the purchaser of the first edition of Caxton's Chaucer ( described in the Bibliotheca Spenceriana, vol. iv. p. 288 ), wanting only five leaves ; but at a
sum little below that given for the Morte d'Arthur. I believe two of
these desiderated leaves have been since supplied by duplicates found in
the copy of this rare book in the library of Merton College, Oxford.
Of the Æsop his lordship was never fortunate enough to obtain even
a fragment. How extraordinary, that the only known copy of this,
doubtless once popular, and therefore, in consequence, abundantly scarce
book, should be entirely perfect ! It is in the private library of his
majesty.
My noble patron's anxiety to increase the number of his CAXTONS
was incessant. In a letter, of the date of Sept. 27, 1813, he thus observed to me, in reply to my notification as to the number of Caxtons.
which the famous Lord Oxford possessed :-" Your extract from Lord
Oxford's letter is curious ; I think ( if you allow the Siege of Rhodes to
be by Caxton) that I already beat his lordship ; for I think, from memory alone, I can reckon up FORTY-THREE in my collection, and I have
some little idea that one has escaped my recollection." This letter is
dated from Ryde. But in this number must be included a very recent
K K
498 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
my happiness, as well as good fortune, during my
Continental Tour, to be instrumental to the supply
acquisition (indeed only a fortnight before) made by His Lordship of a
Caxtonian volume, containing ANOTHER TRIO ( see p. 488, ante) , from
the press of our venerable first typographer. His account of it from
London to me, (when I was on a visit at Stamford), is exceedingly interesting ; as betraying all that liveliness and satisfaction of feeling so
perfectly characteristic of himself in all book-researches. It forms the
latter part of a long letter, dated 11th Sept. 1813.— 66 Though I am a good deal pressed for time, I cannot conclude without acquainting you of a most valuable acquisition I have made this
very day. Mr. Cochrane, of Fleet-street, brought me a volume, the
contents of which surpass, by a good deal, that of the volume you mention to me in your last : no less than the Curial of Alain Chartier, by
Caxton, the Cato Parvus, by the same Printer, and, what is still more
extraordinary, the Book for Travellers—all bound together-with some
other books of no value, printed in the 17th century. Unfortunately,
these other books were in quarto, and the Procrustes of a binder has cut
down all the Caxtons, to accompany them, so unmercifully, that the
Book for Travellers is actually cut close to the bottom line of the page.
The condition is also rather dirty ; but upon the whole the leaves are
sound. You will probably anticipate what I have done with this
volume ; but I must premise, that the Alain Chartier wants the first
leaf; the Cato is perfect ; and, alas ! the Book for Travellers, on collating it with mine, appears to want the five last leaves, having twenty
leaves only. The two first I have lodged safely in the Bibliotheca
Spenceraina, the last I have offered to my nephew, the Duke of Devonshire, for one-third of the price I have given for the volume*. Thus I
have had the satisfaction of erasing two articles out of the little list of Caxtonian desiderata, which you once wrote out for me. This I look
upon as a good morning's work in BIBLIOMANIA ; and I hope it will
encourage you to add to it, by getting Mr. Gilchrist's Life ofour Lady
for met. I must also mention, that I have received the Apocalypse from
Mr. Horne [see p. 353, n. ante], and, on comparison, find it perfectly
* His Grace readily assented to this proposition.
+ See mention made of this book in a note at p. 386, ante. It
eventually became His Lordship's, and was procured of Mr. Gilchrist
during my visit at Stamford, his place of nativity and his residence.
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 499
of the second, fourth, fifth, and sixth of the wants
here specified. How well do I remember on quitting the boudoir, or inner apartment of the library,
and taking leave of his Lordship-his farewell wishes
and instructions as to the Greek Hora and the two
Virgils: and yet more vividly is impressed upon my
memory his language in the correspondence which
ensued when I was at Munich-upon this subject !
But it was not only from frequent personal discussions that my path-sometimes doubtful, and at
all times hard at foot-was cheered and rendered
more encouraging. The numerous letters that passed
between his Lordship and myself-confined to Book
subjects exclusively-proved the very deep interest
which he was pleased to take in my pursuits connected with his library. Although he was usually
different from mine, which you have so accurately described in the Bibl.
Spencer. I shall therefore keep it for an article in the Supplement.
" I forgot to say that in this said volume above-mentioned, there is a
very curious MS. note, apparently of a verp old date. It appears to be
a list of books ; and if it means a list of books printed by Caxton, would
be very interesting indeed to a typographical antiquarian. It is on the
recto of the blank leaf, preceding the Cato, and I have copied it as well
as I can make it out, on the inclosed piece of paper. You will immediately know how much might be inferred from this, provided it be genuine
and cotemporary ; of which, I cannot help thinking, there is every appearance ; but, as I have no more time or paper, I will leave you to
make your own reflections upon it, and am, dear sir, yours, &c."
These Caxtons will be all found described in the 4th vol. of the Bibl.
Spencer. , where we may observe not fewer than FORTY-EIGHT CAXTONS ;
a number, never before possessed by any collector. To these must be
added the Four Sons of Aymon, described in vol. vi. p. 298, mentioned
in the very curious MS. memorandum noticed by His Lordship, and to
which I shall call the reader's attention in a subsequent page.
K K 2
500 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
seven months out of the twelve in London, yet, when
away, not fewer than one hundred and fifty letters
passed between us, from the year 1811 to the close
of the year 1816, chiefly upon the same subject. One
cause of frequent communication was, the transmission of packets of MS. copy of the work for his
inspection and correction. This was a great source
of advantageous help. His Lordship not only looked
forward to the arrival of these packets with an apparently keen relish, but returned them quickly,
delivering his opinions with frankness and delicacy ;
pointing out errors, and suggesting improvements,
with equal regularity, zeal, and discrimination.
Early, late-in his carriage, in his yacht-in his
book-room, and in his bed-room-these packets were
frequently received, and instantly perused * . And
* I select a few specimens from the correspondence of his Lordship
in proof of the above remarks, with which the reader cannot fail to be
gratified.
"Althorp, 1st Dec. 1812.-That you may not be uneasy for a moment as to the safety of the valuable MSS. you send me, I trouble you
with a line to inform you of the safe arrival of the packet, containing
from Justin, without date, to Livy, 1478 [ vol. ii . p. 109-28], which packet
I hope to be able to return speedily, as the weather is at present better
calculated for bibliographical than for sporting researches."
Within four days of this letter came the following, also from Althorp.
" I have now to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of yesterday ;
but as no MS. packet has arrived, I suppose it was not sent in time for
the post. I shall now not get it till Tuesday, or rather, as I shall be out
on a visit all Tuesday, I shall not get it till Wednesday evening. I
will attack it as soon as I receive it, and return it with as little delay as
possible." In a P.S. it is added, " You must not be alarmed if you do
not receive an account of your Lucretian packet till Friday, when it is
not improbable that I may be able to return the packet itself." In the
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 501
when " the points at issue " between us were gone
through, the noble writer would institute inquiries
letter immediately following, of the 10th inst. , his Lordship says, " On
myreturn hither [ Althorp] last evening, I found the Lucretian packet
and perused it last night with great pleasure and satisfaction."
On the 13th of January following, from the same place, " I hope you
returned safe to town, and shall be very glad soon to receive another
MS. packet from you. I am now confined to the house by a severe cold
with rheumatism, so that I shall have leisure to peruse it."
66
I was but too happy to receive from him the following testimony,
written accidentally on my birth-day : —“ Ryde, 30th June, 1813. I
enclose you by this day's post the last MS. packet : a most interesting
and satisfactory one it is. I think this division of the Bibliotheca will
make a capital feature of the work ; and I am happy to see that you
have buckled to it with such zeal and spirit, and ( as it is needless to
add) success, which invariably attends on works executed, like yours,
con amore." But one more extract of this description :- London,
11th Sept. 1813. I arrived here yesterday from Ryde, on my way
towards Northamptonshire, and in the chaise I beguiled the tædium
via* very agreeably by going through your MS. packet, containing
Belial, Breydenbach, &c. [see vol. iii . p. 181-228]. I have carefully
sealed it up, and left it here in my room for you on your return to town. " I was then at Stamford, as noticed in a preceding page ; and
the latter part of this very interesting bibliographical letter contained
the intelligence imparted at page 498, ante.
It is now but due to the memory of my Noble Patron to afford evidence of his competency to impart useful instruction, of his retentive
memory and his general acuteness, and of the interest taken in the points
agitated between us. I begin with one of the most striking confirmations of this position.
"Althorp, 3d Dec. 1813.-In going through the manuscript packet
66
* The travelling carriage of His Lordship was, however, occupied at
times by reading matter of greater " pith and moment" than my MSS.
In a letter of the 27th Sept., the noble writer says " Mr. Walcot (late
of Oundle) brought me a small volume of the Homilies, by Whitchurch
(I think), which is in very pretty condition, and admirably printed (in
the black letter) for the period. I brought the book with me in my
post-chaise, and read part ofthe Homilies on the journey ; and I never
read in a pleasanter type."
502 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
respecting approaching book-sales ; importations of
rare books from the Continent ; or, if there happened
nowin my hands, I perceive that you have fallen into an error, in which,
it seems, by an observation in Brunct, you have not been singular ; viz.,
that of taking the Codex of Justinian for his Institutions. They are,
however, quite different works ; and though I am not quite enough of a
civilian to explain to you the exact nature of their difference, a very
cursory look at them will convince you of the fact. The edition ofthe
Codex by Schoeffer, 1475, is the first ; and as this article will want recasting, I thought it best to send it you separate, which I do by this
day's post, under another cover ; and as the weather is not very favourable for out-of-door sports, I do not despair of being able to send you
the rest of the packet by the same post ; but, at any rate, it shall go by
that of Monday next.
" P.S. I perceive in the Merley Catalogue, at No. 150, a copy of
St. Augustin de Civitate Dei.Spira.1470. I do not find that edition in
my alphabetical catalogue ; and I see that, in page 254, note of theBib.
Spencer. , you say it is wanting in my collection. Yet I have some idea
that I have a copy of it ; and I think it was one of the few Latin Alchornes which were accessions to my series. If so, nothing need be
done ; but if I am mistaken in this, which you may easily ascertain, I
think the circumstance of its colophon would make it advisable for me
to get it, if I can at a price not too extravagant-say about 107. or 121.
I mention this to-day, as it is in the first day's sale. The Duke of
Devonshire has a copy of this edition of St. Austin upon vellum, and
another upon paper ; so he will not be a competitor for it."
His Lordship was quite correct. He possessed it among the Alchorne
books ; and it is described at vol. iv. p. 447. In the immediately following letter, of the 5th inst., he again observes upon the Codex Justinianus :
"Onthe subject of the Codex of Justinian, you will find it described
in sect. 3 of the introduction of Blackstone's Commentaries. The
Corpus juris civilis, collected by Tribonius, by order of the Emperor
Justinian, was composed of four parts. 1. The Institutiones, of which
the edition of 1468 is the first ; 2. The Pandecta ; 3.The Codex, or new
Code, as Blackstone calls it-of which the edition 1475 is the princeps ;
and 4. The Novellae, of which I possess the first edition in Greek, but
I have it not in Latin."
There are few of his Lordship's letters which afford a more correct
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 503
to be a fine library in the mansion whence he wrote,
he seemed to take a pleasure not less in describing
specimen of his bibliographical sensibility and good judgment, than the
following, dated 13th July, 1813, from Ryde.
66 DEAR SIR,
" By this day's post I return the manuscript packet, containing the
editions of Lascaris, &c. [ See vol. iii . p. 76, &c. ] , which makes a very
interesting class of the GRAMMARIANS. I have ventured a few remarks
more particularly relating to the French and Bréton Dictionary, to
which I am inclined to think you have given more distinction to scarceness than it merits ; and I believe you will find it in Debure and Brunet; most probably also in Panzer*. I am not sure whether I am right
about Isidore, as it is possible that the works I allude to are not in his
Etymologicon ; but if they are, their omission must have been of some
consequence in this class.
"I have lately been so much upon the water, that I have not had
much time for writing, and have consequently delayed answering your
last letter thus long. I will now avail myself of a few minutes before
bed-time, to run over its contents, and notice what may occur upon them,
as I go along. The Speculum Humane Salvationis has, if I mistake
not, occurred once at least, if not oftener, since I have been a Collector ;
but till of late I was very indifferent as to the acquisition of BLOCKBookst; and even now I should be much more tempted by articles
* His Lordship afterwards retracted his doubts as to the supposed
non-rarity of the volume under consideration. On reading my enlarged
account of this most curious and intrinsically valuable book, in the
B. S. vol. iii. p. 55-8, he admitted that its " scarceness " was indisputable,
in fact, neither Debure, nor Panzer, nor Brunct, had ever seen a copy.
+ But his Lordship afterwards became possessed of a famously rare
block-book in the Chiromancy of Dr. Hartlieb―obtained by him at the
cost of 100 guineas ; and fully described in the Bibliographical Decame¬
ron, vol. i. p. 143-7. He afterwards obtained three block books, bound
in one volume, with the date of 1462 upon the exterior of the binding :
a volume of extraordinary value in more senses than one-and of which
the early date of its binding caused the noble owner to retract much of
his former doubt as to the early period of the printing of these books,
504 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
the book rarities in that mansion, than in anticipating mygratification on reading his descriptions. He
more in my genuine line of collection. I have some notion of there
being a copy of it (or perhaps some other of the block-books) in Mr.
Willet's Library."....." I had before had some intimation of the probable sale of Mr. Willet's books. I have not an exact recollection of the
catalogue of them, but I know there are many curious ones. My duplicate Psalter of 1459 is among them, but it is a very indifferent copy *.
The Orologium Sapientiæ, if really printed by Caxton, is indeed a SURPRISE to me, as I do not remember having read anything about it. Whatever it is, I conclude it will follow as I despair of getting any more
CAXTONS except by private contract.
,
" Believe me, dear Sir,
"Yours very faithfully,
" SPENCER."
There were few books, in any approaching sale, which excited so much
"sensibility" with the noble lord as this Orologium Sapientiæ; the
Duke of Devonshire having expressly made it known to him that he
would certainly become a competitor. "As the day" of sale approached,
(Dec. 1813) his Lordship observed, that " he really trembled for the
Orologium; and wished much that Mr. Leigh's alphabetical arrangement had admitted of its coming on earlier in the sale, as he knew by
experience howthese high prices inflamed the ardour of the buyers, and
what an accumulation of mania there was in the latter part of the
conflict. He still, however, should adhere to his original price." The
book was, in the end, purchased by me for his Lordship for 1947. 5s.
How could it be otherwise ? In the last letter received from his Lordship on this exciting subject, his request was peremptory. It is written
from Holkham-" Since I wrote, I have looked into Herbert's Ames,
which is in the library here, and on perusing his account of the Orologium Sapientiæ, I have determined in my own mind that not only 1607.,
but not even 2007., or still more, shall carry it offfrom me." BookChivalry like this must, and DID, necessarily bear down ALL OPPOSITION.
On acquainting his Lordship with the result, he observed, with his
usual urbanity and disposition to be well satisfied with all his purchases, "that he was well-pleased to possess it, even at such a price. ”
And in a letter from Althorp, soon after its acquisition, he said, “ he
* It produced, however, 557. at the sale of the Merley library.
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 505
has one or two notices of Mr. Coke's library which
may find a place in the note below* , to the certain
entertainment of the reader. There was also one
thing eminently distinguishable in my noble patron's
manner of endeavouring to secure such rare and
precious books as he seemed to stand in need of,
and which might enrich the pages of the work then
under execution. He would never miss the object
felt very desirous to see this famous Orologium before anything was
done to it, and therefore he should beg the favour of me to bring it
down with the Cato Parvus (see p. 498, ante) when I came there, that
we might then have a consultation upon its mode of binding," &c.. It
is a small quarto volume of some 300 pages, of most excessive rarity ;
and will be found fully described in the B. S. vol. iv. p. 329, &c. , under
the title of DIVERS FRUYTFULL GHOSTLY MATERS.
* In especial was His Lordship so good as to describe to me the
beautiful Pliny, of 1476, in the Italian language, printed by Jenson,
UPON VELLUM, and decorated with coeval illuminations, of great beauty
and propriety. This very book it was afterwards my good fortune to
see and to handle, at Holkham, in 1832, when, in company with my
late dear friend, Capt. Weltden, I spent an entire day there, with the
venerable and hospitable owner of the mansion. Then too I saw the
famous Boccaccio MS. , of which I hoped that a good use had been
made in my Decameron ; and upon the engravings from which, as I
told Mr. Coke, upwards of 100 guineas had been expended by me. I
also saw the famous vellum MS. of the Chronicle of the Counts of
Flanders, justly described by Lord Spencer as having " most beautiful
illuminations, exhibiting the costume of the times.” "Its date (continues His Lordship) must be soon after 1477, at which time the preface to it mentions it to have been undertaken at the command of the
Duchess of Burgundy, the same, I presume, who was the patroness of
Caxton." See also Mr. Roscoe's brief account of it in the second part
of the second volume of the Transactions of the Royal Society ofLiterature, p. 374. Of the valuable copy of the famous book ofArchbishop
Parker, De Antiquitate Ecclesiæ Britannica, 1570, folio, in the library
at Holkham, Lord Spencer was so good as to furnish me with one of the
most particular accounts of that very curious book which I ever saw.
It may appear in a subsequent page.
506 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
In many in view by giving a stinted commission.
respects he was bold and generous to excess ; for
when I received my final instructions respecting such
books as he was most desirous to possess from the
sale of the Merley library*, I was astonished at the
bravery of his commissions-which could not fail,
as it did not, to secure the treasures that he was so
anxious to possess. And in the course of our correspondence (after, as he said, he had received a
"most satisfactory, " as well as plentiful supply of
MS. , describing the early editions of Horace), he
observed, "though these articles are as ample as to
* During the composition of the BIBLIOTHECA SPENCERIANA many
important sales, abroad and at home, were going on : among the former,
those of Macarthy and Larcher were the most prominent-among the
latter, those of Mr. Willett (from his residence at Merley) , Colonel
Stanley, Mr. Towneley, Mr. Edwards, and the Duke of Grafton. Add
to these, the acquisition of the Lincoln Nosegay. In all his commissions,
as the reader may have been already induced to conclude, his Lordship
was most liberal. Even for an imperfect copy of Caxton's Royal Book,
of 1484, His Lordship says, in a letter, " I think I must allow you to go
as far as 1207. —though it ought to be recollected how much the price of
books is fallen since I gave that sum for the Dictes and Sayinges."
This in Dec. 1815. And his anxiety for the completion of his own
library, from the breakings-up of such collections, was unintermitting.
Not only on public occasions did this anxiety betray itself, but on all
private occasions where there was an opening to become possessed of a
desirable or costly book. His propositions to the late Mr. Heber, in the
way of book-exchange, to obtain possession of his very imperfect copy
of Caxton's Pilgrimage ofthe Soul, were liberal to faultiness. Nor, to
his dying day, was this exchange ever completely ratified on the part of
the owner of that Caxtonian volume. His purchase of the pseudo- Oxford Book of 1468, for 150l. , and of Mr. Wilbraham's Dante of 1481,
for the same sum (through a private channel) , are splendid evidences
of his spirit and generosity in the acquisition of similar objects !
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 507
bibliographical research (strictly speaking) as can
be wished, perhaps, in such an author as HORACE, a
little more room might have been afforded, had there
been more time, for the critical department ; by which
I mean notices of the existence of disputed or doubtful passages in these ancient editions- which would,
in regard to the principal Classics, be a most interesting part of such a catalogue as that which you
are making." This is most true. The article
" Horace, " however, has been subsequently fully investigated by the Rev. Mr. Babington, and a foreigner
of the name of Hartsner * ; but the execution of
the work, upon the plan suggested by his Lordship,
would scarcely have terminated at the present day.
Thus I continued my labours at Spencer House ; and
with such diligence, that, scarcely within a twelvemonth of their commencement, I had completed the
* The reader may see the fruits of Mr. Babington's collations of the
early editions of Horace, with that of Arnoldus de Bruxella, 1474, in
my Introduction to the Classics, vol. ii . p. 75-84, edit. 1827. Ofthe
fruits of the above mentioned German's collations ( I fear I am inaccurate
in his name) perhaps the following year may give us substantial evidence in the most elaborate edition of Horace ever likely to be concocted. I can never forget that foreigner's fag at Spencer House over
the Horatian tomes. It was unceasing : it threatened to be illimitable :
he seemed to devour all those editiones primaria as he spread them
before him. Of the ponderous labours of Acro and Porphyrio—a tome
which perhaps no single pair of eyes had ever before perused from beginning to end—he made absolutely nothing : running through the volume
with the same delight as children devour " Robinson Crusoe with cuts."
Wherever there was an old edition of Horace, there was Mr. Hartsner.
At Blenheim, at Oxford, at Cambridge, at Edinburgh, at Glasgow ...
but at SPENCER HOUSE his spade went deepest into the earth, and turned
up the most abundant fruit.
508 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
printing of the first volume, and a portion of the
second. My plan was this. To apply closely and
vigorously to the old editions to extract line by
line what seemed to give a better notion of their
contents to count leaves and lines, and signatures,
with scrupulous accuracy ; and to note well the condition and size of every book which I examined.
Then, bringing home my materials, I encountered a
whole phalanx of bibliographical writers in my own
library. I detected their errors, or confirmed their
fidelity ; expanded what appeared in them to be
meagre, and compressed what seemed to be unnecessarily diffuse. But my health had undergone a
severe shock in consequence of the severity of my
application. My whole frame was, in a manner,
shaken to pieces. The body had yielded to the mind.
I could walk but a sort distance, and that in the
most crabbed and snappish state of mind imaginable. I abhorred salutations, for to reply was a task.
I was still dreaming ofthe printing presses at Mentz,
Bamberg, Rome, and Venice ; and once awoke with
the thorough conviction that I was Prior of the
Monastery of Soubiaco, and had at last got a copy
of the Donatus pro Puerulis, which I was in the
act of packing up for Spencer House ...when the
footsteps of my children on the staircase dissipated
the delusion. It was evident that I could not long
hold together in this state, and immediate rustication
was peremptorily insisted upon by my friend Dr.
Maton. I was too prompt to obey ; for, in addition
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 509
to the foregoing miseries, I was suffering under an
elongation ofthe uvula, which, for the fourteen following months, continued to impede my breathing, to
wear down my spirits, and at times to render existence
scarcely supportable. The article CICERO, at the
end of the first volume, might have broken down
stouter mental energies than mine * .
In the month of September, 1812, I left home for
the sea side. I had visited Ramsgate some dozen
years preceding, and was resolved to renew my acquaintance with that most interesting of all watering
places. I longed for a stroll upon its sands, and for
the night breezes, by moonlight, upon its pier. But
I was resolved not to leave London till I had corrected the last proof-sheet of the first volume at
Spencer House, by a comparison with the originals—
my usual plan of operation. This finished, I took
my departure. But I was several weeks before I was
conscious of returning strength. There had been
such an unstringing such a prostration, as it were,
of mind and body—that it required much calm and
quiet, with a cessation from all labour, to be even
conscious of approaching convalescence. Idleness
was my horror-ennui had been an entire stranger
* That article occupies fourscore pages of the volume in question ; and
not fewer than thirteen Ciceronian articles are carried into the fourth,
sixth and seventh volumes : some of them of excessive rarity. There
are, in the whole, SEVENTY EDITIONS of CICERO described in the B. S. :-
editions, of absolute rarity and value ; leaving nothing of choice or
of scarcity to be desired. If a man set his heart upon having ALL the
editions of Cicero printed in the fifteenth century, he may as well at once
hire a house to receive them.
510 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
to me from boyhood. The weather was mild-the
sky was blue and serene. I strolled abroad, now
with Pope, now with Dryden, and now with Milton
as my companion. I sometimes diversified this line
of reading by the instructive page of Roscoe's
Medici, and the dramas of our immortal Shakspeare.
I would sit whole hours under an hawthorn tree ;
remembering how Burns had stamped the impress
of his genius upon that humble, but picturesque
shrub—and would gaze upon the near or distant
vessel, pursuing its noiseless course on (what Prior
has so prettily described)
"the smooth surface of a summer's sea :
99
its white or ochery sails gleaming in the sun-beam !
This was very sweet-soothing and refreshing ;
and in due course I became conscious of increased
strength .
.
I was resolved to put that increased strength to
the test. Within a stone's throw of Pegwell Bay,
the residence of Mr. Baron Garrow for the last
forty years, I seated myself beneath my favourite
thorn, and taking a blank copy-book and pencil with
me, I achieved, in five morning- sittings, a certain
poem-in a sort of mongrel blank verse-entitled
BIBLIOGRAPHY ; comprising some five hundred and
fifty verses, or rather lines. My plan was, to make
these verses mere pegs for the hanging of notes
upon. The reader will see a long extract from this
poem in a preceding page, which describes much of
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 511
my early college life *. It was afterwards printed
alone, for the sake of private distribution, at the
mere sum which it had cost ; but I have known a
copy of this original performance sell as high as
17. 18. Only fifty were printedt. Thus, even for
* See page 83, &c., ante.
+ I will merely introduce the " Advertisement," and the first six lines
of the poem-as it is called-to the reader's attention. The original
was throughout first written, as above intimated, in pencil.
66 ADVERTISEMENT.
" In the rough and rapidly executed sketch of PALERMO, the author
has drawn a picture (partly from the life) which enables him, in five
succeeding books, to lay down certain rules respecting Bibliographical
Literature. Much of the matter here detailed, will be repeated in the
ensuing books ; but so completely modified and enlarged, that while the
necessary connexion between these books is admitted, the reader will
perceive that very few points relating to Bibliography have been left
without illustration. The remainder of the work must necessarily,
therefore, assume the character of a Didactic Poem. In regard to the
versification, I am willing to admit that the ensuing pages contain anything but Poetry*. The 554 lines here submitted to the frank criticism
of a few friends, were composed with extreme facility, and are therefore, in all probability, very careless, meagre, and unpromising. Not
such, I trust, will be the character of the NOTES. They will be the result of much pleasurable toil and research, and will disclose some facts
and anecdotes productive both of utility and amusement. It was necessary to raise a scaffold to build the superstructure of these Notes ; and
when the reader has got within the latter, and is pleased with what he
sees about him, he is at perfect liberty to knock away the materials by
which they have been reared.
" Kensington, Nov. 1, 1812.
The first six lines are these :
"Of Books I sing. Of all that greets the eye,
And warms the fancy, and delights the heart,
And touches, by a thousand secret springs,
Congenial, the enraptured soul, in shape
Offolded leaves imprinted, the coy Muse
Willing, yet anxious, now essays to sing."
* " I am ill at these numbers." HAMLET.
T. F. D."
512 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
the purpose of mental relaxation, I considered BIBLIOGRAPHY as the only fitting occupation or amusement. Nor was this a singular instance of such
occupation by the sea-side ; for when I had retired
to Brighton, in the year 1810, to diversify my pursuits, and renew my spirits on the loss of a younger
son * , I contrived to put together that long note of
a "Catalogue of Catalogues of Libraries" which
occupies forty-eight pages of the second edition of
the Bibliomania. If idleness and ennui assume their
frightfully legitimate forms in any one spot more
than another, it is at a sea-side watering- place.
Having in a measure become reinstated in health,
I returned to town ; and re-assuming my Spencerian
labours, I transmitted to His Lordship a fresh packet
of manuscript or copy, beginning with the editions
of " Isocrates." His reply, on the completion of its
perusal, was very gratifying to met. Meanwhile, I
* See page 282, ante.
† On more accounts than one do I feel an extreme gratification in
copying a portion of Lord Spencer's letter to me of the date of Nov. 24,
1812 : ... " the packet of manuscript beginning with Isocrates, which
I found to-day with great satisfaction . The articles contained in it are
very interesting, and admirably drawn. I have ventured, as usual, to
make a very few trifling suggestions ; and in one place I have proposed
the substitution of the word subscription for imprint, merely because
the passage referred to, in that instance, does not mention when the
book was printed, and therefore I conceive can hardly be correctly designated by the term " imprint , " which I look upon as a technical
name for the colophon of any edition-designating the printer or place
where printed, or both. I cannot, however, return this packet without
expressing in strong terms the pleasure I derived from observing the
refreshed vigour with which you have resumed your labours ; for I do
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 513
had resolved upon having a very few copies of the
first volume put into boards, that I might see how my
progeny was likely to appear when in proper clothing.
I will frankly -and perhaps foolishly as well as
fondly-avow, that I had never before seen a book
which so entirely possessed and delighted me from
its typographical and graphical beauties of every description. It was also a grand octavo volume in
point of size : being of an imperial form-and the
paper was as good as the printing*. Gay has observed,
"Where yet was ever found a Mother
Who'd give her booby for another ? "
It may be so in fact, it is so. But as the Biblionot think you have sent me any articles more full and copious than those
contained in the packet : and the ' Josephus, sine anno,' will be a fine
addition to the decorative part of the volume." The reader may see
these articles in print, vol. ii. p. 96, &c. The fac-similes in the Josephus, p. 105-8, were executed by myself ; and I believe they are most
accurate.
* What gave an occasional beauty, as well as brilliancy, to the book
-giving to it also the impress of truth, by bringing the originals in a
measure before the reader's eye-was, the intermixture of RED INK ; as
in the Bibles of 1455, 1462, and the Greek Psalter of 1486, &c. &c. (see
pages 4, 11 , 70, 92, 127, 137, 139, 264, 281 ) ; and in the head pieces.
Mr. Bulmer, the printer, and the Jenson of his day, thus triumphantly
alludes to it, at the end of a note, in which he promises to take me
in his carriage to dine with him in the country where he resided. “ The
red ink shows its brilliancy in a most beautiful manner. I have stepped
out to look after your dirty brown." This was for an impression of the
original wood block ( I believe in p. viii. and ix. ) of an edition from the
Apocalypse, and eminently happy it was. Of all the specimens of red ink
printing in this first volume, that at p. 264 is the most striking and
beautiful. The attempt to introduce the red and black in the great
letter B, facing the Psalter of 1457, p. 107, after repeated trials, failed .
Nor has it succeeded with the copper-plate printer. The " S " in that
L L
514 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
graphical Decameron was not then in esse—although
in posse—I would soberly and safely challenge any
production, in the same department of literature, to
equal this first volume for the qualities just enumerated. Of its intrinsic value, I had yet to collect
the suffrages of the learned. Among the first to
whom I sent a copy on loan, was the late Mr. EDWARDS, then living at Harrow-on- the-Hill , and well
known as having been a bookseller in Pall Mall, of
great tact and taste in his vocation. Few men had
seen so many, and such lovely treasures, in the form
and character of a Book, as he. He merited all
the celebrity, and all the fortune, which he had acquired ; for his daring was great, and of the true
kind. He is said, on more than one occasion, to
have followed in the rear of Bonaparte's armiesand leaving that renowned warrior to the capture of
cities, and the discomfiture of armies, Mr. Edwards
preferred a conquest over a vellum Livy and a Capo
di Monte Vase.
The answer of that distinguished Collector and
Bibliographer was most gratifying to me ; and may
probably be well received by the reader. It is as
follows.
" MY DEAR SIR,
" Harrow, Dec. 12, 1812.
"Your splendid volume of the BIBLIOTHECA SPENCERIANA arrived safe on Monday night. It is undoubtedly the
fac-simile, and the whole of the text, was executed at the printing office,
the other part by the copper-plate printer.
* See Bibliographical Decameron, vol. iii. 14, 111 , 127, 439, &c.
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 515
ne plus ultra of typography ; and as far as I have yet seen
it (for a family have been staying with me last week) you
seem to have very judiciously referred to all extant authorities in the notes. Had it been less important I should have
immediately returned you my most hearty congratulations
on your success in producing such a monument ; but when
an object makes so near an approach to perfection, like a
true Englishman, I am disposed to criticise microscopically
-not for any public or private display—but merely out of
friendship to yourself: that, if you thought any one observation worth attention, you might avail yourself of it
before the book came before the public.
" It may show you how trifling are some of my notices,
when you hear that the print of the old man with ' Biblia
Sacra,' and the other at page 220, would, in my opinion,
be better left out. Before the end of the week I shall bring
back the volume to Mr. Payne's, and write you the few,
and perhaps very trifling, observations I may have made
upon it. Thus far, however, I must say the Bibliographical
and Bibliomaniacal World will owe you their best bow and
grateful praise for this truly magnificent production.
" I am, dear Sir,
"Yours very sincerely,
SatEdwards
I adopted the suggestion of my laudatory correspondent in the withdrawing of the first ornament,
but adhered, author-like, to the insertion of the
second : which, at the end of the article on Theology, represents Death as the stem of the tree from
which our first parents are plucking the forbidden
fruit. The conception, drawing, and composition,
LL 2
516 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
are good ; the execution is indifferent. Mr. Edwards's list of errata were accompanied by the subjoined letter *. Within a month after this (perhaps
premature) launch, I sent the volume to my friend
Mr. WILBRAHAM, (of whom honourable mention has
been made in a preceding page, 404), and to the
Rev. WILLIAM HOLWEL CARR—just elected a Roxburgher, and whose collection of Pictures had given
him a distinguished position as a Pictorial Amateur
in the metropolis. I annex their answers belowt.
* The note is without date, but it will be readily supposed that i
was almost simultaneously with the above letter.
66 DEAR SIR,
" From the adjoining list of trifling observations, you will see I have
gone through the vol. of Bib. Spenceriana ; and to your praise I must
own, it is filled with the most careful investigation, and the further I
proceeded, the more I was gratified. Your block leaf of the Apocalypse (p. viii.-ix. ) is very curious, and well struck off as to colour,
&c. &c. If you think that a plate from my original picture of Aldus
Manutius, by Giovanni Bellino, would be a proper enrichment, you are
welcome to the use of it. I suffered Mr. Roscoe to have one from it
for his Leo X., but it is very imperfectly executed. Pray let me have
this volume as soon as it is given to the public, and the following volumes
as they appear. I am, dear Sir, yours very faithfully,
"J.E."
† Atthe risk of the imputation of hardly pardonable vanity, I subjoin
the short notes of these once well-known individuals; reserving the more
particular TESTIMONY " of commendation from Mr. Wilbraham for a
future page.
66
66
MY DEAR SIR,
" Twickenham, Jan. 21, 1813.
" Our friend Mr. Isted will come to me next week, and if you can
spare me a day, for instance Friday, I shall be particularly happy in your
company. I will endeavour to call for you, though am not quite certain ; but will let you know in the interim. I am sorry to delay even for
an hour the production of the Spencer Catalogue of books, which
THE SPENCER LIBRARY . 517
But my greatest satisfaction arose from carrying a
copy of this volume, and a portion of the second,
down with me to Althorp, at my Christmas visit of
1812 ; when, on my return to town, I received a
letter from the noble owner of the mansion containing this notice. "Dr. Charles Burney has been perusing the first volume, and a fragment of the second,
of the Bib. Spencer. , which you left here in print ;
and has expressed very great satisfaction with the
work. " This was, indeed, the " laudari a laudato viro "-and I not only resolved to push on
my operations with unabated vigour, but to live in
a manner " mihi carior" in consequence.
Thus the year 1813 was one of the most intense
interest and arduous occupation of any which I recannot fail of doing you great honor, as one of those few Writers who
can enrich the dull matter of a catalogue with solid instruction and
entertaining discourse.
66 DEAR SIR,
" Yours truly,
" R. WILBRAHAM."
" Devonshire Place, March 4.
" I return you the Book, which has more charms, and is of greater
interest to me, than the one so called, and which is soon to be before the
House of Commons*. I must beg also to return with it my best thanks
for the favor you have done me in lending it. All the notes that I could
make on it would be notes of admiration. Lord Spencer's library will,
I hope, be an antidote to the poison your two volumes have infused ;
and as there is no possibility of rivalling him, I shall content myself
with being his superior in another department, and shall have great pleasure in shewing my PICTURES to you whenever you pass this way.
“ I am, dear Sir, very truly yours,
" W. H. CARR."
* In the matter of Mrs. Clark.
518 THE SPENCER LIBRARY .
member to have entered upon. It was also full of
hope and anxiety : for, strange to say, although I
never delayed for a week the progress of my Spencerian labours, yet I was collaterally occupied in
seeking embellishments for a work which at some
future day I was resolved to bring forth under the
title of " THE BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DECAMERON ; " and
for three consecutive years was the preparation of
the materials for that work silently, but sedulously,
carried on.
The greater part of my gains from the
second volume of the Typographical Antiquities,
was devoted to the payment of artists for wood- cuts
for the Decameron ; while the very high price at
which large paper copies of the two volumes (all
then extant) of the " Antiquities" were sold *,
served secretly and certainly to assure me that my
future labours were not likely to be in vain. I now
therefore set resolutely to work to make the remainder ofthe Spencer volumes worthy of that which
had been submitted to the notice of a few private
friends. I braved what the world might say, if I
could only carry my intentions into effect. My
printer went hand in hand, gallantly and vigorously,
with me. He put all his " best men upon the
work ; but " the man of men" to whom I was
chiefly indebted for many an ingenious conjecture,
99
* I own it to have been a proud day in the chequered calendar of
my life, when I saw a copy of these first two volumes, upon large
paper, knocked down at the price of THIRTY GUINEAS. See page 285,
ante.
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 519
as well as for the most careful correction of the text,
was the late Mr. Thomas Turner * —well known to,
* The late Mr. THOMAS TURNER, a native, like Mr. Bulmer, of
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, was the principal corrector of the Shakspeare
Press. He was a man admirably adapted for the office which he so ably
filled, being a fair good linguist in the French, Italian, and even German
languages ; and by no means slightly informed in the Latin and Greek.
I am doubtful whether there were two correctors of the press in London
besides himself, who could have seen through the reprint of Richardson's Persian Dictionary. My friend Mr. RICHARD TAYLOR, “ Typographus doctissimus," as Erasmus designates his friend Froben, (see
Bibliog. Decameron, vol. ii. p. 170-5), shall yield to no living printer
in a knowledge of the dead languages. He equally rejoices in Chartularies of crabbed Latin contractions, and periods of the full flowing
eloquence of Livy. To return to my departed friend. There have
been better furnished heads than mine, which have owed him much
during the progress of their labours at press. My own obligations have
been very considerable. Ever since the year 1808 (during the printing
of More's Utopia at the Shakspeare press), my intercourse with him
was as incessant as it was sincere and gratifying. But he had the most
sorry lodgment or quarters, imaginable, at the office of his employers ;
which I believe in a great measure to have helped to hasten his
departure.
He sat up one pair of stairs, in a cupboard-like room—“ lulled by
soft zephyrs through the broken pane.” But in winter, these zephyrs
were converted into whistling gusts which made his flesh creep ; for there
was no fireplace, and the holes in the panes were patched up with
proof-paper. Then his table or desk was covered with proof-sheets,
some wet and some dry ; of which the fetid odour was enough to convert
red blood into black. With what a calm temperament did he endure
all this ! How punctual, early and late, in the fulfilment of his duties !
and what lovely books, in his time, had passed under his eye ! Knowing so much as he did, and being perhaps in three instances out of five
better informed than the " poor author," upon whose talents he was
called mechanically to exercise his own, he was among the most modest
men whom I ever knew. He was in fact, till the later years of his
life, kept down in his situation. If any man-especially encumbered
as he was with a large family-merited, from his talents and worth, a
good 500%. per annum, with a four-story house to live in, it was my
amiable and well-informed friend Mr. Turner. To be sure, his later
days were soothed much by the friendly attentions, and the more liberal
520 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
and justly appreciated by, abler judges of his talents
than myself. He answered all my queries satisfactorily, and endured all my sallies of impatience
with the calm intrepidity of a philosopher. Froben
could not have been more patient or better informed.
Add to this, I rose in the summer months with the
lark, to execute the fac-similes, so that the press
might not be delayed for want of them ; and Lord
Spencer always permitted me to take home such
volumes as were necessary for their execution. I had
done with demons ; and turned my attention almost
exclusively to types, devices, and more interesting
embellishments * .
remuneration, of Mr. Bulmer's successor. Nor since the grave has
closed over him, have those attentions and assistance, from the same
quarter, been withdrawn from his depending family. The deceased
has left behind him ONE SON, at least, to my own knowledge, who will
not suffer the name of his father to go down to later times with undiminished reputation. I preserve somewhere a note from this " deceased,"
touching one of the very heavy sheets of the Decameron, in which he
says, " Pray, dear sir, send me no more such sheets, for they will break
my heart as well as turn my head."
* Among these embellishments in the second volume, the fac-similes
from Horace and Terence, of 1496-8, are profuse to excess. They are,
doubtless, too lavishly selected, especially in the Terence. What prices
these editions brought about this time !-perhaps a good deal in consequence ofthis notice of them. I have known a dozen guineas refused for a
copy. Now, afourth of that sum will readily obtain one. In the third
volume there is more variety, as well as a greater abundance of ornament, in the way of fac-similes, than in either of the two preceding ;
but, not corrected by the errors of the Horace and Terence in the second
volume, I became yet more extravagantly lavish in the treatment of the
Nuremberg Chronicle, and called forth such an assembly of MONSTROSITY Out of its rarely-opened leaves, as induced the curious to rush
with avidity towards the acquisition of any copy of that most marvellous
volume which presented itself for sale. To the best of my memory,
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 521
The manuscript copy continued to be regularly
submitted to the Noble Owner of the volumes under
description ; and his anxiety to receive it, and alacrity in the dispatch of it, continued unabated.
Every inch of canvas was now spread before the
wind. The year was verging to its close, when the
second volume being finished, the third was far gone
into-and I thought myself justified in announcing
the progress of my labours in the Gentleman's Magazine for November, 1813, in the subjoined manner*. It will be seen that more than an oblique
Mr. Grenville gave not less than sixteen guineas for his beautiful copy of
it. LordSpencer's copy is uncut, and so is his copy of the German text,
with the same cuts, of the same work. Presently it seemed as if this
book were brought upon our shores in herring-shoals. Copies, once rare,
appeared everywhere :-and I will venture a trifling wager, that, at this
moment, LONDON possesses more copies of it than Nuremberg did at the
expiration of the first year after its publication. How my late worthy
friend, Mr. Douce, loved to open its leaves, to read its arid text, to smile
and growl alternately at the credulity of the historian, and to gaze, with
unmixed satisfaction, upon its THOUSAND AND ONE grotesque embellishments ! But the articles Brant, Breydenbach, Hyginus, and Valturius,
in this same third volume of the B. S., are, questionless, very curiously
treated, in the way of graphic illustration, in this third volume.
* I will trust to the reader's kind patience to endure this notification
of the work, altered and abridged, with a view of giving a tolerably fair
notion of its contents. It will be seen, from its conclusion, that afourth
volume was pretty strongly hinted at, at the time. This "notification"
appeared in the pages of my excellent old friend Sylvanus Urban, in
November, 1813.
"BIBLIOTHECA SPENCERIANA. The Rev. Mr. D. has finished the
printing of the two first volumes of his Descriptive Catalogue ofthe
Early Printed Books, and of many Valuable First Editions, in the
Library of Earl Spencer ; and is considerably advanced in the press
with the third Volume. This Work is divided into the following heads.
-I. Block-Books, or Works executed in the infancy of printing ; which
compartment comprises not fewer than twenty-eight fac-similes-and
522 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
hint was thrown out that the work might extend
to a fourth volume. Indeed, in that same month,
which may be considered both a supplement to, and correction of, Heineken's disquisitions upon the same subject. Among these fac-similes, is
an impression, executed in bistre, from an original block of a portion of
an edition of the Apocalypse. -II . Theology ; comprising embellishments, or fac-similes, from most of all the scarcer Bibles, Psalters, Theological Disquisitions, and the Fathers. The Mazarine Bible of 1455-6,
and the Psalter of 1457, are among the books thus illustrated. -III. Ancient Classics, in alphabetical order. This division comprises a portion
of the first, and the whole of the second volume, and may be fairly said
to contain the most copious descriptions, and curious embellishments,
connected with the history of scarce and early printed books, which have
yet been submitted to the Public. -IV. Collections of Writers, agricultural, military, &c.-V. Grammar and Lexicography ; involving
perhaps the most difficult, but not the least interesting and useful questions relating to bibliographical literature.-VI. Miscellaneous Authors,
chiefly in the Latin language. This will probably be the most amusing
department to the generality of readers ; and is accordingly enriched
with an unusual number of fac-similes. It comprehends, also, all the
scarce and early-printed books in the canon and civil laws ; and those
who love splendid decoration, will be gratified by the embellishments
bestowed upon the Translation of Breydenbach, the Nuremberg and
Cologne Chronicles, the Stultifera Navis ofBrant, and the earlier editions of Hyginus, Turrecremata, and Valturius. This sixth department (forming the third volume) is much more extensive than the fourth
or fifth ; which may render it doubtful whether the third volume may
contain the whole of the ensuing divisions. -VII. Books printed in the
Italian Language. Among these will be found the most copious descriptions yet extant, of the scarcer volumes printed in the fifteenth century ; and the works of Dante, Petrarch, and Boccaccio, in particular,
will not fail to be noticed with proportionate minuteness and accuracy.
The decorative fac-similes bestowed upon the Hypnerotomachia of Poliphilus alone, renders the disquisition upon that curious and beautiful
volume, a Commentary not less amusing than instructive. -VIII. The
last, but not least in estimation, is this eighth department-devoted to the
account of Books printed by Caxton, and to those executed by Wynkyn
de Worde and Pynson, in the fifteenth century. The St. Alban's and
Tavistock presses are also to be included in this division ; which will
receive additional illustration, both in the way of ornament and description, as the Collection here described is the most perfect in the king-
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 523
having imparted this hint to Lord Spencer, his Lordship observed in reply : " I am rather afraid of a
fourth volume, but I suspected it might be so. " The
event proved this fear to be but too well founded.
However, the entire manuscript copy for the completion of the work, in three volumes, being now
finished , and sent to head-quarters, at Althorp, I
received a letter of the date of Jan. 9, 1814, in
reply, in which was the following consoling paragraph. " I congratulate you sincerely on the completion of the MISCELLANIES,' which was a very
tough jobt ; and make you my compliments on the
estimation to which your book is already arrived.
dom. The whole will be terminated by very copious and particular
Indexes.
"The Work is executed in a delicate but clear type, having a full
page and ample margin ; and neither pains nor expense have been spared
in the ink, workmanship, or paper. As it is, on no account, the Author's
wish to hurry any article, or to give an hasty or superficial description
of any volume which may merit an ample or a particular detail (especially as there will be no sevond edition of the Work) he does not pledge
himself to confine the Work to three volumes—although the three volumes will certainly be published in the ensuing Spring. A fourth (if
needful) will succeed, as other avocations may enable him to complete
it."
* His Lordship was thus pleased to express his opinion upon the
subject. " The MANUSCRIPT of the Bibliotheca Spenceriana will be a
valuable and interesting deposit in the Althorp Library, and forms a
testimony, which cannot but be highly satisfactory to you, of the industry
with which you occupy yourself. With the sincerest wishes for your
continued success in such occupations, and for your being enabled to
pursue them without injury to your health, I remain, dear sir," &c.
The MS. of the fourth volume was subsequently deposited by the side of
its companions ; and ALL FOUR now take up their permanent residence
at Althorp.
+ The third volume concludes with the article " Miscellanies."
524 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
I do not see why you should be so vexed at it, as
every one must of course know what the original
price was." The fact was, that the original price,
71. 17s. 6d. , was obliged to be raised to 81. 8s.: but
the last 150 copies were all subscribed for at 97. 9s.
per copy ; and on quitting Mr. Bulmer's printingoffice, not one copy, large or small, remained unbespoke. The large paper were charged at 187. 18s.
per copy. The delivery took place in the second
week in April, 1814.
But in the furtherance of perhaps this most important event in the literary annals of my humble
life, it was essential to see that the whole of the introductory part, by way of Preface, was worthy of
the materials of the work. I had at first meditated
a sort of Précis of the library in London and at
Althorp ; but this plan was abandoned, partly because I seemed to have a presentiment that a day
might come when more deliberate justice might be
rendered the latter, and partly because such an
"avant propos" might invade too much of the volume and of the reader's patience. I resolved, therefore, upon the composition of a short, terse, unostentatious Preface, such as the reader now sees prefixed
to the work ; and may fairly say that few compositions, of such limited extent, ever gave me half the
trouble and anxiety in its execution. A portion of
it (the four concluding paragraphs) may not unfitly
be reprinted in the present place.
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 525
“ Of a LIBRARY justly considered by one of the most
celebrated of modern Bibliographers to be the richest
private collection in Europe *, it was proper that the Catalogue of so material a portion as that contained in these
volumes, should be equally splendid and accurate. If I
have failed in the attempt to render it justice, it has not
been from a deficiency of zeal in the cause of Bibliography ;
since one-third of my life has been devoted to this congenial,
and, I will add, useful, although laborious, pursuit. In the
present instance, the Noble Owner of the collection has uniformly aided me by an examination of my manuscript, by
suggesting many improvements, and by supplying many
important corrections. The freest access to his library, and
the most liberal use of the volumes described, have been
always granted. The failures, therefore, are entirely my
own.
" I have other obligations to acknowledge. The manuscript memoranda of the late COUNT REVICZKY, and those
of the late BISHOP OF ELY, (the former supplied by Earl
Spencer, and the latter by the late learned author of them) ,
have been occasionally of material service to me. The
observations of the Count, although less luminous and concise than those of the Bishop, are more extensive ; and were
intended, by their author, to form the chief materials of a
new edition of the Catalogue of his own library.
"But I should be wanting in a due regard to the memory
of a distinguished character, if I omitted this opportunity of
paying a feeble tribute of respect to that of the late Dr.
THOMAS DAMPIER, Bishop of Ely ; a prelate not less beloved for his frank and affectionate disposition, than respected for his classical and philosophical attainments. In
bibliographical knowledge he had few superiors : his discern-
* 66' Bibliothèque probablement la plus belle et la plus riche de toutes
celles que possede actuellement aucun particulier.”—Renouard : Annales
de l'Imprimerie des Alde, vol. iii. p. 8.
526 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
ment being quick and accurate, and his conclusions correct
and instructive. His Lordship lived to examine only a few
ofthe printed sheets ofthe present work; offering his friendly
aid to superintend the whole of the remainder. What,
therefore, has been lost to me, in this respect, by his decease,
can be easily conceived ; but the remembrance of his good
opinion, and of his encouragement to proceed as I had
begun, has constantly served to cheer me in the progress of
my labours.
66 My acknowledgments are due to the ingenious Artists *
who have so effectually contributed towards the splendour of
this publication ; and still more so to the celebrated Printer
in whose office it has been executed. Those who are able
to appreciate the care and skill requisite to render volumes
of this nature beautiful and accurate, will readily admit that
the present are executed in a manner worthy of the high
reputation of the SHAKSPEARE PRESS."
Two splendid copperplate decorations accompanied this introductory part : one, the quarterings
(one hundred and thirty-four in number) of the
SPENCER SHIELD of Coat Armour ; the other, the
DEDICATION within the Collar ofthe Order ofthe
Garter-to the Noble Earl himself, in the following
lines :
-
* Mary, Ebenezer, and John BYFIELD.
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 527
TO THE
RIGHT HONOURABLE
GEORGE JOHN, EARL SPENCER,
KNIGHT OF THE MOST NOBLE
ORDER OF THE GARTER,
ONE OF HIS MAJESTY'S MOST HON. PRIVY COUNCIL,
A TRUSTEE OF THE BRITISH MUSEUM,
A GOVERNOR OF THE CHARTER HOUSE,
PRESIDENT OF THE ROYAL INSTITUTION,
LL. D. F. R. S. F. S. A.
ETC. ETC. ETC.
THIS WORK
IS RESPCTFULLY DEDICATED,
BY HIS FAITHFUL
AND OBEDIENT HUMBLE SERVANT,
THE AUTHOR.
The Spencer crest, cut in wood, is in the centre
of the title-page, thus :
The day of publication, or rather of delivery,
arrived in due course ; and never did the bibliomanical pulse of the British public beat with a live-
528 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
lier throb. The Allies had just then, in a manner,
taken possession of Paris. The bells had scarcely
ceased to ring, and the guns to be fired . A dozen
hackney coaches, in all directions, were filled with
the Spencerian tomes. Even the young men at No. 39
in the Row seemed to be speculating in the concern.
They gave their nine guineas, and would have given
another to boot, readily and cheerfully, regretting
that I had no more to dispose of. Before sunset on
that same day, I have reason to know that a copy
of this work-although obviously in an imperfect
state was sold for 127. 12s.; and before that day
three months a copy had reached the sum of 157. 15s.
As to the Large Paper, the price galloped up
quickly to Forty Guineas ; just double that of the
publication. Had I listened to the suggestions of
one individual-of all men among the most subtle
and longheaded-I had realised a large profit * .
But I shut my ears upon the voice of the charmer,
charm he never so wisely; " being resolved to avoid
everything which bore the semblance of mystification. I can with the solemn truth aver, that the
most profitable, as well as the proudest, result to
me was, that I had put forth such a Catalogue of
such a LIBRARY.
* The expense of printing these three imperial octavo volumes, in
large and small paper, was about twelve hundred pounds sterling.
THE SPENCER LIBRARY . 529
The success of my three volumes was naturally
the great spur to the commencement and completion
of the fourth ; and by the end of May, 1815, that
volume was also ready to be launched upon the ocean
of public opinion*. It is the bulkiest, and ought to
have been, to English feelings, the most acceptable
of the whole. The first 60 pages are devoted to the
completion of the Miscellaneous Department ; the
next 110 pages to the Italian Books ; the following
260 pages to what may be called the History of
Printing in England during the fifteenth Century,
by such specimens of the presses of CAXTON and
of others as were in his Lordship's library t. Then
* While this " launch" took place, the announcement of the BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DECAMERON, on the yellow coat of old Sylvanus Urban,
was made public in June 1815, in the following manner. The reader
will observe that, as in the instance of the Spencer Library, my FIRST
intention was to publish the work in two volumes.
To be printed in Two Volumes, Royal Octavo, in the first style of
elegance, at the Shakspeare Press, price 77. 178. 6d.
THE BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DECAMERON ; or, TEN Days
PLEASANT DISCOURSE upon the Early State of the Fine Arts, Antient
and Modern Typography, and Bibliography. Embellished with numerous Engravings. The same Characters will be introduced as in the
BIBLIOMANIA ; and the Scene will be varied at the respective residences
of the Parties. The impression will be limited to the same number of
copies as were printed of that Work; and willalso NEVER BE REPRINTED.
Gentlemen desirous of subscribing are requested to advance One
Third of the Subscription Money-to be paid into the hands of the
Publishers, or of the Author, Kensington, free of expense of Postage.
+ There is in fact almost every book of importance printed in this
country, during that period, most particularly described. But while I
admit the very copious extracts from the Caxton volumes to be singularly curious and interesting to the Antiquary, I am free to confess that it had been better had they occasionally suffered amputation.
M M
530 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
ensue 150 pages of Supplement, Additions, and
Emendations. Two copious Indexes of Authors
and Printers close this elaborate volume * . I have
ventured to lay before the reader a good portion of
the preface prefixed to the first volume. I will here
take leave to lay before him the concluding sentence
of that of the fourth volume.
" I cannot terminate my present labours, or shut the door
of the Library in which I have passed so many hours with
equal instruction and delight, without addressing its Owner
and chief Ornament in the language of a distinguished
Bibliographer towards a Nobleman†, whose treasures were
laid open to the grateful Eulogist with the same readiness
and liberality as those of EARL SPENCER have been to
myself.
" Tu primùm (says the author to his Patron) stimulos
addidisti ; in frequentibus quæ tecum nunquam habui, quin
instructior abirem, colloquiis sæpius me submonuisti, unde
lucubrationibus meis plurimum momenti et lucis accederet :
crebrò tua, quod nescio an in ullâ aliâ repererim, suggessit
bibliotheca ; ad TE, et ad HANC, facilis semper patuit aditus."
The immediate sequel to the publication of this
fourth volume, and thus to the completion of my
Spencerianlabours, is of amixed nature ; but perhaps
* The embellishments, by way of fac-similes, are very abundant ;
but those which, in the Italian Books, accompanythe Bérlinghieri Dante,
1481, Monte Santo di Dio, 1477, Poliphilo, and Ptolemy of 1478, are
of essential importance in illustrating the volumes themselves.
+ MATTAIRE to the EARL of PEMBROKE, in the Dedication of his
Annales Typographici, 1719, 4to.
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 531
not the less interesting on that account. Pleasure
and pain are amalgamated in all our pursuits. I will
begin with the former. I had resolved to mark so
important an era in my life, by the assembling together of a few Roxburghers, who had uniformly
afforded the most indisputable proofs of their best
wishes for success during the progress of mylabours.
They were summoned by an especial invitation to
cluster round my limited table on the 6th of June,
to commemorate the day of the publication. The
invitation ran in the following strange language :
Right trustye and mine herty
goode Frende,
Ye shal knowe that sundrye choice Spirits and
comon Frendes intend to dine with me on Tuesday the 6th daye
of June, at aboute 17 minutes after 6 of the Clocke : —to
celebrate ye finishinge and publyshinge of a certain werk
ycleped BIBLIOTHECA SPENCERIANA. Ye are hereby requested
and desired to find yourself in ye numbre of such dainty
Frendes-on paine of incurringe our wrath and sore displesure: And so I do commende me right lovyngly vnto you :
being,
Withoutfeigning,
Thy Friende and Seruant,
May, 1815.
Kensington ; the Topof
Hornton-St. (North End thereof).
P. S. Ye shal finde homely fare, but a herty welcominge
MM 2
532 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
therwith : Dan Horace havinge described the nature and
method ofthe drinke ofour table in this following metre :
Vile potabis modicis Sabinum
Cantharis : [ Lib. 1. Ode xx. ]
Yet a wiser and more aunciente Clerke than Horace hath said :
' Better is a dinner of herbs where love is, than a stalled Ox
and hatred therewith.' [Prov. xv. 17.]
I cannot recollect to how many this invitation
extended ; but I am pretty sure that my kind and
approved good friends, Sir Mark Sykes, Sir S. E.
Brydges, Sir Francis Freeling, and Mr. Baron Bolland, were of the number-together with Mr. George
Hibbert, Mr. I. D. Phelps, Mr. George Isted, Mr.
Wilbraham, and Mr. Haslewood. I now possess a
very few only of the characteristic Replies ; of which
the following two may afford amusing specimens.
First, for that of Mr. Hibbert :
My Singuler good and lernidd Friend.
After my most hertye comendac^ons, this shal be to
adv^yse ofthe recept ofyor right welcom l're, the sight wherof,
w^ the adv^tisment therin—that you have finished that nobyll
werke ycleped Bibliotheca Spenceriana-hath so co^ffortyd
me, that Ipray God to gyve mee sume occasyen to doo you
sume sich plesure as ye doo to othurs ; and I shall wayte on
you, God willing-the 6th ofthe moneth coming—and, until
that daye, moost hartely fare you well ! from Clapham this
28 of Maye.
To myveray good Freind
Yor moost assury'd
The Reverend Thomas Frognall Dibdin.
GEORGE HIBBERT.
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 533
The second is that of the late Mr. Haslewood. It
was topped by a wood-cut, representing two oxen
looking back upon the countryman as he is about to
unyoke them from the plough ; and, like its copy
here, was printed in the black letter.
WORTHIE AND KYNDE FREND.
THE Husbandemann delytethe, as the oxeyne looke
backe to be unpokedd, that hys laboure ys at ende z He
opynnith hys wyne presse and callyth yn hys neyboures to
be merye. So ryghte wel dothe the Authoure of thatt moche
faimyd wurke, hight BIBLIOTHECA SPENCERIANA, nowe, on beholdynge the curyous colophoune
of hys pryntere, to instytute hys reuels, therebye knowynge
hys tople ceacithe. Nor wyll anie trbe Bibliomaniac yncur
wrathe and sore displesure bie not beyng readie for the banquit xxíb momentes ere the dyal poyntith xvii minits after
bi of the clocke vpon the bź daie of June: Go to thenne,
ande
Beelarge in myrthe : —anonn, we'll drynke a mesure
The table rownde.
xxx Waie,
mdcccxb.
Thyne fapthfullie,
Wytness thys íímpress ,
JOSEPH HASLEWOOD
The following, from the late ROGER WILBRAHAM,
Esq., of whom so much has been said in a pre-
534 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
ceding page * , although attired in the modern garb
of phraseology, is not the less gratifying on that account ; as it is directed to the general character of
the work, and supported by his own very particular
commendation.
" MY DEAR SIR,
“Stratton-street, May 29th, 1815.
"It is unfortunately not in my power to obey your very
kind and friendly summons for the sixth of June. I am not
the less sincere in congratulating you upon the occasion of
your festivity, most heartily wishing that the termination of
this labour of yours may be attended with as much solid
advantage as it will do you real credit as a literary performance. If Lord Spencer's Library may vie with any private
library in the world, it is most certain that no Catalogue of
any private or even public library, can at all compare with
that which you have just published, in beauty and splendour
of every kind. Here it is facile princeps ; and I have no
doubt it is equally so in useful information and correctness ;
but to judge accurately of these points would require the
lynx's beam of a Heber, and not the dull curtain of
"Your very faithful and obedient humble servant,
RogerWillbruckam
I believe we assembled to the number of some ten
or twelve. It was a day throughout of heart-felt joyaunce ; " dies ille albo lapide notandus." There are
few " REMINISCENCES" in life's thorny path more
* See p. 404, ante.
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 535
gladsome, and let us hope more rational, to dwell
upon, than those of the present description.
But of all the attestations to the creditable execution of my work, few-none-pleased me more
than that of Mr. Roscoe at home, and of COUNT
D'ELCI, abroad. I seemed to be pretty fully impressed with a notion that the Bibliotheca Spenceriana was not precisely that sort of dainty dish to
furnish matter for Reviews-and especially for the
Edinburgh and the Quarterly. True it was, that Mr.
Maurice, of the British Museum, had furnished the
Times Newspaper with rather a spicy, as well as
eloquent notice of the work-commendatory to excess * . But a thoroughly raisonné Review, in whatever journal, must necessarily have claimed great
attention and exacted great labour. These volumes
could not be dispatched as whip- syllabubs. They required training in the individual who would grapple
* I will extract only the commencement and conclusion of this
notice ; adding, that all the commendation bestowed upon the late Owner
or Possessor of the SHAKSPEARE PRESS, may honestly be transferred to
the present, Mr. WILLIAM NICOL. That I may not seem to 66 reckon
without mine host," in thus comparing the Successor with the Predecessor, of the Shakspeare Press, I refer my reader with infinite satisfaction to the typographical execution of the Ædes Aithorpianæ, and the
Catalogue of the Cassano Library: -being supplemental volumes to the
above-executed " NICOLO REGNANTE." The Press in question has
been recently grafted upon a soil which seems to be more congenial with
its growth-I mean its immediate contiguity to what is now known as
the British Institution, but formerly as the Shakspeare Gallery. The
"oratio paracinetica ” of Mr. Maurice begins and concludes thus :
"BIBLIOTHECA SPENCERIANA.-A Phenomenon of a very
curious and interesting kind has just made its appearance in the literary
536 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
with them. No off-hand touches ; no strokes of
wit ; or flashes of merriment. And although the late
world under this title, being a display of the rarest and richest portion
of the treasures, of inestimable value, contained in the library of EARL
SPENCER ; a library certainly unrivalled by the collection of any individual, under the rank of a crowned head, in Europe. Whether we
contemplate the lucid arrangement of this surprising work, the beautiful
and spirited execution of the ornamental part, or the fidelity and
accuracy of the historical narration, we are alike struck with admiration
at the ingenuity that planned, and the patient perseverance that completed it. In a regular series of elegant illustrations in these elaborate
volumes are exhibited all the wonders of the typographical art, from the
rude letters and uncouth figures engraven by a barbarous age on WOOD,
in the early period of the fifteenth century, to the richly finished and
highly varied characters and designs, in METAL, of improved taste and
skill in later periods, collected at an immense expense by the noble
owner from every quarter of lettered Europe. The classical reader here
delighted traces the gradual progress, in refinement, of that DIVINE
ART, which has proved the means of preserving from oblivion all other
arts, and of consigning to immortality the most illustrious names in
every walk of science and fame, that, otherwise, might have perished
amid the wreck of time, and the revolution of empires. From every
quarter collected, we say--but principally gleaned from MONASTERIES,
those august and venerable fabrics, erected in ancient times by pious
zeal and princely munificence throughout Europe ; but in this country
desolated with such unsparing vengeance by the atrocious despot,
HENRY VIII., under the plausible pretext of religious reformation, &c.
"We cannot conclude our strictures on these volumes without observing, that by a publication of such pre-eminent beauty and splendour,
immortal honour is reflected on the SHAKSPEARE PRESS, whence it issued,
and of which it may justly be denominated the CHEF D'ŒUVRE. It is
equally honourable to our country, and gratifying to the learned, that
in the metropolis of the kingdom a press exists, where works of unrivalled magnificence and expense, though attended in the execution
with the greatest difficulty, yet can be brought to completion by the
energy and spirit of him who presides over it. On this subject, however, it is wholly unnecessary to dilate, as Mr. BULMER's fame in typographical matters is so widely diffused, and as the highly finished
specimens of the SHAKSPEARE PRESS have long been the admiration of
book- collectors in every quarter of the world.
M.
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 537
Bishop of Ely, in the early warmth of his encomiastic
feelings, had pronounced the work to be in a manner
a NATIONAL one, yet it was allowed to pass by without the slightest notice *. I cherished, therefore,
the opinion of Mr. Roscoe with redoubled delight.
That opinion was communicated at the commencement of a long letter of ten pages-in which many interesting critical remarks and bibliographical quæres
were embodied ; and a most pleasant little controversy was in consequence superadded respecting the
Pazzi Conspiracy, as noted by Politian in his Miscellanies, of 1478. Mr. Roscoe's good opinion is expressed in the following language.
" DEAR SIR,
" I had the pleasure of receiving, on Tuesday last, from
Messrs. Arch, the three volumes of your Bibliotheca Spen-
* I am called upon in gratitude to except the lengthened, and really
dissecting, review of the B. S. which appeared in the pages of the Gentleman's Magazine for September, 1814 ; of which it strikes me that my
old friend Sylvanus Urban himself-attired in his favourite suit of
"Lincoln-Green"-must have been the author. It was carried on (as I
seem to remember) through three consecutive numbers of that really
gentlemanly journal. I have unfeigned pleasure in transcribing the
opening compliment to the late Noble Possessor of the Library. " It is
a circumstance of proud exultation to this country that, in the person
one Illustrious Peer are united taste, wealth, hereditary honour, and,
above all, old English probity and liberality. That such a Nobleman,
with skill and discernment to appreciate their value, and generosity to
give for them a liberal remuneration, should possess the most choice
collection of early printed books that has hitherto fallen to the lot of any
individual, is, we repeat, an honour to that country of which EARL
SPENCER himself is so bright an ornament."
of
538 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
ceriana ; a pleasure for which I had waited for some time
with the true bibliomaniacal anxiety. My expectations
were at length amply gratified ; and I have ever since had
the work almost constantly in my hands. To say that it is
the most splendid and most interesting work of the kind
which the world has hitherto seen, is only a part of its commendation. Independent of the elegant arrangement of the
volumes, the accuracy of the fac- similes, the beauty of the
engravings, and the excellence of the paper and printing, it
exhibits a diligence of research, an acquaintance with previous writers, an acuteness of observation, and a liveliness of
style, which give it substantial and permanent value, and
render legitimate those ornaments by which it is so highly
decorated. Undoubtedly you have been peculiarly fortunate in having so fine a subject for your researches ; but this
could only be an advantage to one who was capable of availing himself of it. The descriptions of the rare and numerous books from wood- blocks are peculiarly interesting ; and
the original print of the Apocalypse is inestimable, and
stamps a great additional value on the work. The short time
that I have had to peruse the descriptions and references
with the attention necessary on such a subject, prevents me
from entering into very minute particulars ; but I could not
refrain, even at this early moment, from stating to you the
general impression which the publication has made on my
mind, and I have no doubt but similar sentiments will be
communicated to you from other quarters of much greater
authority, and in much warmer terms, &c.
"WM. ROSCOE *."
* The above criticism relates to the first three volumes. On the publication of the fourth, and on the announcement of the Bibliographical
Decameron, Mr. Roscoe wrote thus :
66 MY DEAR SIR,
" Allerton, 26th June, 1815.
I have been much gratified by the fourth volume of Bibliotheca
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 539
But great as my respect was, and ever has been,
for the good opinion from such a quarter, yet my
gratification was rendered still more complete by the
transmission, from Earl Spencer, of the commendation of the First Bibliographer upon the Continent
-in his Lordship's estimation-I mean, the late
COUNT D'ELCI ; who, in matters relating to the
history of foreign printing, in the fifteenth century,
had certainly no equal * . That erudite and disSpenceriana, which is not less beautiful, and is more interesting to me,
than any of its predecessors. What spots it has, and there are no human
productions without, are few in number, and of less importance, perhaps, than in the former volumes ; and would scarcely deserve notice in
a table of errata. On the whole, as you have had the FINEST SUBJECT,
so you have certainly produced the finest and most interesting bibliographical work that the world has hitherto seen.
"What is yet wanting to bring us acquainted with the rest of the
rare and splendid works of the fifteenth Century will, I presume, be found
in your Bibliographical Decameron ; to which I must beg you to put
me down as a Subscriber for two Copies of the common paper : and inclosed is a 57. Bank Note, being as near as I can remit, one-third of my
subscription. And I assure you I shall cheerfully comply with any
further calls you may find it convenient to make on your Subscribers
towards completing your work. ”
* Earl Spencer and the late COUNT D'ELCI were, for a series of years,
pretty active correspondents on topics almost entirely bibliographical,
carried on in the French language. Perhaps they were at the time the
two first Bibliographers in Europe. Their respective resources, upon
which they fell back in case of doubt and need, were always sure to
supply them with abundant materials for a vigorous renewal of the
contest. The Count, a Florentine by birth, lived a good deal at Vienna;
and between Vienna and Florence his sojournings and routes were
usually directed in the accomplishment of one particular object-the
possession of the parent-texts of every classical author. He was indefatigable, and upon the whole fortunate. All his strictures, both in his
letters to Count Reviczky and to the Noble Lord, were written with
a close severity of research and fidelity of description which could not
540 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
tinguished foreigner had given great praise to the
first three volumes ; but on the receipt of the fourth
be surpassed. But, in the extent, variety, costliness, and splendour of a
library of early printed books, his was not to be mentioned in the same
breath with that of his Noble Correspondent. See an interesting letter
ofCount D'Elci to Lord Spencer, in the Decameron, vol. iii . p. 197.
When Lord Spencer was in Italy, the Count unluckily happened to
be at Vienna-but, apprised by His Lordship of his intended trip, the
Count desired that the key of his Library might be put unreservedly
into his Lordship's hands. Among the first uses made of that privilege
was one, for which I was most unfeignedly thankful-it being nothing
less than the transmission of a particular account, by the Noble Visitor,
of some of the treasures of the collection visited. The reader will, I
feel persuaded, be in a measure thankful, if I place before him a portion
only ofthe banquet with which I was myself treated.
66 DEAR Naples, Feb. 1 , 1820.
SIR,
" I SHALL now proceed, according to my original plan, of extracting
from my memorandum book, such intelligence as may be interesting to
you ; but instead of keeping the regular order, as I at first proposed, I
will go immediately to Count ELcr's collection-which unquestionably
is that which to me appears the most interesting I have seen, although
others may contain some few detached articles of greater beauty and
magnificence. But as a collection of Editiones Principes—made with a
perfect knowledge of the subject, with a sufficient degree of selection as
to fine condition of copies, and with opportunities of acquiring what he
wished to have such as no other collector can possess the view ofit
is certainly one of the highest treats that a bibliographer, curious in that
particular branch of the science, can enjoy.
" It is not easy in the compass of a letter to describe his library. I
was nearly four hours looking it over, but I had not time to see half
enough of what I should have wished to do, being necessarily occupied
in observing most particularly those articles which are wanting in my
own collection. With regard, however, to the Latin books, the Duke
of Cassano has furnished me with the means of being more minutely
acquainted with them, as he is possessed of a MS. catalogue of them,
given to him by D'Elci himself, and that recently. He was so good as
to lend it to me, and I have extracted from it all those books which
either were not in my collection, or which I was uncertain about. In
Greek,first editions, I apprehend he is complete, as far as Classics go;
but the only book in that language which I noted in my memoranda
THE SPENCER LIBRARY . 541
he writes thus to Lord Spencer, from Vienna, Nov.
4, 1815.
was, the Aldine Septuagint of 1518, of which his copy is uncut, and, as
I believe, on large paper. In the Latin classics his great strength lies
in TERENCE and JUVENAL*. In Juvenals I have nothing to envy
D'Elci, except one, which is certainly most enviable. It is a small 4to. ,
containing that poet alone, in the small character used by Ulric Han in
his Cicero de Oratore. This is, without question, the real EDITIO PRINCEPS of Juvenal, and it is the only copy I have seen or heard of, except
one in the Duke di Cassano's library here, which the duke bought
under the idea that it was printed by Sixtus Riessinger at Naples ; but,
on possessingit, he ascertained that it was by Ulric Han—which fact
D'Elci, who had it not, stoutly disputed ; but having got a copy for
his own collection, he now allows it to be so. I have no scruple in
saying that I should much prefer this little volume even to the Naples
Horacet.
" His two Virgils, by Sweynheym and Pannartz, have been a good
deal doctored, and smell very strong ofthe shop. He has a most beautiful copy on vellum of the Spira Virgil, 1470, and another of the
common paper, so large, that it would almost appear like large paper.
His Azzoguidi Ovid is fine, as far as it goes, but it wants several leaves.
Just before I heard from Mr. Grenville that he had bought one, I had
received from D'Elci a letter, inviting me to join him in purchasing that
very copy of Tripolo, at Venice, which he asserted would complete both
our copies. Among other things, D'Elci has a most magnificent copy
of the Soncino Bible, 1488, and a very fine Complutensian Polyglott
He has also a Hebrew Testament, without date, but which he says was
printed in 1476, and esteems as the greatest rarity in his collection, and
* This is followed, in his Lordship's letter, by a list of fifteen editions of Terence, of an early date, but without any indication of year,
and of the greatest rarity ; among which there appears to be only one,
that in the type of J. P. de Lignamine, which is not in his Lordship's
collection. He describes the Count's copy of the Mentelin edition,
"the real first edition of Terence," as a very fine one.
+ It will be seen, eventually, that his Lordship, by the PURCHASE of
the entire collection of the Duke di Cassano, became necessarily in possession of both the Juvenal and the Horace here designated.
542 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
"Enfin, étant retourné à Vienne, la première chose
quej'ayfaite a été de parcourir le Catalogue de vos
livres. Je n'ay jamais vú rien de plus magnifique
quant à l'éxécution typographique ; rien de plus
choisi et de plus riche quant aux articles qui y sont
contenus ; et rien de plus savant et de plus instructif
quant aux notices qui s'y trouvent."
to Chw."I"Elci
So much of the "
SEQUEL," just alluded to, of a
gratifying result. I now come, in few words, to
notice a very singular, if not painful, issue. The
fourth volume of the B. S. had not been published
many days, before symptoms of a refractory spirit
as quite unique. The condition of his books, as far as I had time to
observe them, is wonderfully good ; and what most surprised me, when
I saw them, was, I think I have no where seen so magnificent a suite
of the books printed by Sweynheym and Pannartz, both for soundness
of paper and breadth of margin : many of them being as it were on
large paper. They are all (with few exceptions) bound at Vienna, and in
a better style than you would expect, but still à allemande ; and each
volume has a pasteboard case of its own, in the shape of a book, lettered
at the back, with all the particulars of the edition, as editio princeps,
editio forsan princeps, editio primaria, sine anni notâ, &c. &c.
"His plan is to have all the doubtful first editions, and all the first
editions with a date, and he has carried it to a degree of detail and
minuteness which is surprising ; and makes a morning, passed in his
library, quite a study for a bibliographer. So much for D'Elci at present. I observed to you above, that he has had opportunities which
never could occur to any other collector. Besides being constantly on
the spot, during the dispersion of all the monastic libraries, he has, by
means of his interest at the court of Vienna, procured orders to be
allowed to make exchanges in all the public libraries of their dominions."
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 543
betrayed themselves in a quarter whence anything
but a mutinous disposition could be supposed to prevail. Orders were counter-ordered ; the seal was
essayed to be torn off the bond ; and nothing remained for me but protestation and submission * .
In consequence, very many copies, actually bespoke,
were thrown back upon my hands. I summoned up
all the courage of which I was master. Dreading the
issue of law proceedings—as involving a terrible expense at every step taken and resolving that my property should not be debased by a paltry sacrifice to a
pettygain-I announced ( I forget nowin which paper
or magazine) that certain copies of thefourth volume
should be BURNT... by such a day, if not claimed.
Count Rostopchin could not have been more determined on the burning of Moscow, than I was of
some sixty or hundred copies of my favourite volume.
This announcement roused the spirit and kindled
the generosity of ONE bookseller, who stepped boldly
forward, as he informed me by letter, " to prevent
this BURNING SHAME. " That spirited individual
was Mr. JOHN MAJOR, then living under the gateway of St. Bartholomew's Hospital-enamoured of
a select collection of really sterling articles, which
were always sure to meet a ready sale. His reply
necessarily led to a personal conference. We were
* This subject is more than indirectly hinted at in the Decameron,
and is again alluded to in a note attached to the Preface of the Cassano
Catalogue.
544 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
not long either in discussing preliminaries or drawing
conclusions. It was evident that two kindred spirits
had met for the first time ; and a bargain was made
on a basis so liberal and satisfactory, that Mr. Major
became possessed of all the remaining copies of the
fourth volume, with the determination of not selling
one copy under the price of its publication. I believe that not more than half a dozen copies now
survive this determination.
Thus, on the arrangement of this business, I saw
my Spencerian labours fairly launched, as before
observed, upon the ocean of public opinion ; and
immediately turned my whole attention to the production of the BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DECAMERON ; a
work which, for the next two years, engrossed all
mytime and attention, and absorbed all my " floating
capital." But of that work, in an ensuing chapter.
Yet, at the end of the year 1816, I contrived to
bring out the third, and most generally interesting,
volume of my Typographical Antiquities ; of which
mention has been made in a preceding page*. In the
year 1818, I went abroad ; and there, having been nine
months incessantly occupied in the examination of
public and private libraries for the collection of
materials for another publication, I returned home,
resolving to bring forward that publication under
the title of a Bibliographical, Antiquarian, and
Picturesque Tour. While this work was in con-
* Page 286.
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 545
templation, Lord Spencer went abroad, with his Countess, to France and Italy*. Meanwhile I had laid
* It should seem from His Lordship's first letter to me from Naples,
Dec. 20, 1819, that the sound of his " chariot-wheels " had preceded his
personal appearance in Italy. The "good folk " had not only imagined
that everything which he wanted must be of excessive scarcity, but that
his means of acquisition were inexhaustible. Nothing was more ridiculously absurd than, in some instances, the prices demanded and the
conclusions drawn. It was, however, singular enough that, in the first
bookseller's shop which his lordship entered at Rome, he found the
Swynheym and Pannartz Martial of 1473—“ a book not be to found in
any of the libraries in Italy, with the exception of that of the Duke di
Cassano, which Audiffredi had never seen, and which had been inquired
after in vain at Paris and at Milan." I believe he gave £20 for the copy ;
but on its becoming a duplicate, on the acquisition of the duke's library,
it was disposed of to Mr. Van Praet, on his return, in exchange for some
Libri Desiderati. In this letter Lord Spencer speaks also of the acquisition of a few other subordinate articles ; but in his last letter, after the
purchase of the Cassano collection, he dwells with particular satisfaction
on having got “ a Petrarch by Aldus, of 1501 , ON VELLUM ; the very
copy which I should find described by Renouard in his Annales, &c.
as having belonged to Cardinal Bembo, with all the curious notes he
mentions, and the epigrams in Bembo's handwriting at the end of it."
In one of these letters, I was much gratified by Lord Spencer's
account of the library of Count MELZI, at Milan. He mentions having
seen those of the Marquis de Trivulzio and Signor Reyna, at the same
place, but dwells only upon the former, thus : -" Since I left Paris ( says
his lordship) nothing worthy of mention offered itself till I got to Milan.
There I was much pleased with several fine and curious books in three
private libraries [ those of the individuals just mentioned. ] In Count
Melzi's I saw some very beautiful copies, but as a complete collection of
the valuable editions of the fifteenth century, it is not to be spoken of.
The only articles which I think I should have much coveted were, an
edition of Ovid's Epistles in 4to., without date, in the character of
Laver at Rome ; and the owner very provokingly shewed me two copies
of it, one of which had been very recently promised to Count D'Elci,
otherwise I might have had it ; Claudian de Raptu Proserpinæ, in the
character of the Lucretius of Ferandus ; Juvenalis per Jacobum Fivizanum; Euripides, Litt. Majusculis, Florent. UNCUT ; Livy, VinN N
546 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
"9
the foundation of the Edes Althorpiance, and of a
Supplemental volume to the Bibl. Spenceriana. I
went over to France again in 1820, and met my Lord
and Lady on their return, at the Hôtel de l'Empire
at Paris. But, in the mean time, " A DEED of Note
had been done by my Noble Patron. He had purchased, at Naples, the whole of the CASSANO COLLECTION. His correspondence with me upon that
subject, is among the most particular, instructive,
and gratifying of his letters.
delin de Spira, ON VELLUM ; Biblia Italica Mense Augusto, ON VELLUM,
magnificently illuminated ; Virgilius Aldi, 1505, ON VELLUM ; Cicero
Epist. Familiares Aldi, 1540, ON VELLUM ; Boccaccio Decamerone, genuine edition of 1527, Large Paper; Dante, 1481 , twenty plates. He
has also lately purchased the first Virgil, by Swynheym and Pannartz,
a fine copy, with one leaf manuscript, and wanting the Priapeia ;
also a perfect copy of the Brescia Lucretius, printed by Ferandus.
This last I did not see, as it had not yet come home. The Count has
besides a great collection of very fine books in all classes, and a great
many of the rarest large paper classics of the English, Dutch, and
French editions, and many very rare Italian books which I had not
time to examine."
It is pleasing to add, that Count Melzi's books (with the exception
of all those printed in the Italian language) were purchased by the late
Mr. Payne, the bookseller, and of him by Frank Hall Standish, Esq. , of
Duxbury Hall, Leicestershire. I had often the pleasure of examining
this limited but precious collection when it was lodged at Mr. Payne's.
The vellum Livy was indescribably beautiful and sound. Since this
acquisition, Mr. Standish has become the owner of the Complutensian
Polyglot, upon vellum, purchased at the sale of Mr. Hibbert's library.
But of all the books above described by His Lordship, I feel persuaded
that the Italian Bible Mense Augusto, 1471 , was THE ONE of which he
would mostly covet the possession. That edition is, indeed, necessary
to render the early biblical series complete in the Spencer library. To
be sure, the Aldine Virgil of 1505, upon vellum, would be a glorious
addition to the Aldine Vellums in the same collection.
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 547
I mention thus briefly these important events in
my life, that the reader may see that it is with the
view of introducing methodically the subject-matter
which immediately follows, as connected with the
preceding. I therefore propose to myself to say a
few words upon the Supplemental volume above alluded to, and upon the Cassano Catalogue, as being
part and parcel of " THE SPENCER LIBRARY." Of
the Edes Althorpianæ, in the ensuing chapter. It
was during my preparation of the supplemental volume that Lord Spencer was at Naples ; and it was
first thought questionable whether the Cassano Books
might not be incorporated in that volume. But there
were peremptory reasons why this plan should be
abandoned and I heartily rejoice that it was so *.
As it appears to be somewhat difficult, if not im-
* His Lordship's words (Naples, 7 April, 1820, ) are, “ I think that
your idea of making a supplement, entitled ' THE CASSANO CATALOGUE,' will be a good plan, particularly as it will enable you to postpone the completion of it till the last thing of all before your book goes
to press ; as I should very much wish that you could read with attention
the duke's manuscript Catalogue Raisonné of his books, before you
describe them. It is done with great care, and especially in the part
which consists of books printed in the kingdom of the Two Sicilies,
which contains a great deal of curious and interesting bibliographical
erudition, much of which was before quite unknown to me, and will, I
believe, be new to the generality of bibliographers. It is of course a
little more laboured than is necessary, and puffs off the condition and
rarity of the copies rather too much like a sale catalogue ; but the real
matter in it is very valuable, and makes an interesting branch of typographical history of the fifteenth century." In the formation of my
Catalogue of the Duke of Cassano's collection, I did, of course, as I was
requested to do; but found very little material assistance in the notes
alluded to.
NN 2
548 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
practicable, to notice any particulars connected with
this Supplemental volume separately from that of
the Edes, with which it was published, I proceed
at once to the account of
THE CASSANO LIBRARY.
Of this Library, how little could the Noble Owner
have entertained the idea of its possession, when, in
a letter from Althorp, of the date of Dec. 11 , 1814,
he seemed fearful that his nephew, the Duke of
Devonshire, might become the eventual possessor of
it. It will be seen, in an extract from one of His
Lordship's letters to me, in a preceding page * (respecting Count D'Elci's collection), that he had at
that time seen two of the most tempting classical
volumes in the Duke di Cassano's Library. These
were the Juvenal, printed in the first and small
roman character of Ulric Han, without date, but
published in 1468 ; and the far-famed Horace of
1474, printed by Arnoldus de Bruxella, at Naples.
The first idea of Lord Spencer was, to obtain these
two books only-for which, he says, he actually did
offer the Duke 3000 ducats ( equal to about 500%.
sterling), which was declined. Of these two books
it seems that the first had greater claims upon his
attention, and upon his purse, than the second.
This surprised me : as, of the second, no other copy
is at present known ; of the first, two other copies
* See page 541 , ante.
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 549
are known* . However, my surprise and my delight
were equally indescribable, when, early in 1820, I
received a letter from his Lordship, dated Naples,
4th Feb. 1820, beginning thus :
" DEAR SIR,
" THOUGH I think you will have considered my last
letter ofthe 1st of this month rather interesting†, I cannot
help flattering myself that the present will be more so. I
promised you to appropriate it to a description of the
Quattrocentisti (as they are called here) of the DUKE DI
CASSANO'S LIBRARY, and I fully intended to keep my promise ; but (whether fortunately or unfortunately I will leave
you to judge) I am precluded from literally keeping it—for
these, like all riches, are so liable to make themselves wings
and fly away, that between the writing of my last letter and
this present date, they have ceased to bear the above-mentioned denomination ; and tired, I suppose, like the other
residents of Naples, of the unpropitious weather we have
had here this winter, they meditate an emigration to more
northern skies—and before this letter reaches you, will, I
hope, be on their way to England, on board of H. M. S. the
Rochefort, of 80 guns, from which they will be landed at
Portsmouth. But what is to be their ULTIMATE destination ? You naturally anticipate it—and therefore, without
preface, they are now ALL mine !!!"
The Noble Writer might well immediately add :
" I fancy I can see your astonishment when you
read this ; and conceive the eagerness with which
* Both volumes are particularly described in the Cassano Catalogue,
pp. 55, 63.
ante.
The latter descriptive of COUNT D'ELCI'S LIBRARY : see p. 540,
550 THE SPENCER LIBRARY .
you will be writing to impart this important fact in
the history of the BIBLIOMANIA, to all your friends
in London ; but I must desire of you to check your
ardour, and must absolutely insist upon it that you
will keep this intelligence within your own breast
till I shall permit you to divulge it—or at least till
the said Books are safely lodged in Spencer House* ."
Then follows a long list, in three pages, written in
his Lordship's smallest hand, descriptive ofthe GEMS
in the Collection...and designated with a precision
and accuracy peculiar to the writer. On the very
next day of the date of this letter, his Lordship was
so good as to continue the congenial subject by an
enumeration of such duplicates as would necessarily
occur in consequence of his purchase. He prefaces
his letter of five pages by the following exordium.
" Though I wrote so lately, I am anxious to pursue
the interesting subject of my last letter ; and there-
* It was not a little singular that, on my first call at No. 81 , Pall
Mall, after the receipt of the above letter from Lord Spencer, I found
Mr. Payne alone, and extremely disposed to ask many questions respecting Lord Spencer's book acquisitions, actual and in prospect,
during his stay in Italy. " I learn (added my amiable inquirer) that
he has got scent of the Duke di Cassano's library, and will certainly be
the purchaser of it—at least they say so at Paris." I felt the blood
mantling upon my cheek, and just as I was about to stammer a vague
answer, some gentleman entered the room, to whom Mr. Payne thought
it necessary to pay immediate attention. This afforded me the opportunity of sidling out, and of making a shabby but timely retreat.
When I was at last authorised to communicate the fact, Mr. Payne
rose up, as if astounded, from his chair-dropped his snuff-box in the
act of rising--and ejaculated, in a deep, but long-drawn tone, the emphatic monosyllable " Zds!"
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 551
fore avail myself of a leisure evening, between two
royal shooting days * , to complete my account, as far
as appears at present to be necessary, of the Duke
di Cassano's late Library, by enumerating the principal articles which will be Duplicates in consequence
of the transfer, of which my letter of yesterday's date
will have informed you."
In due time the CASSANO TREASURES arrived ; and
within a twelvemonth of their arrival a sale of the
Duplicates took place at Mr. Evans's-containing
volumes of such rarity and value, that a few of the
more curious articles, with the sums which they
brought, may be seen belowt. In due time, also, my
* This was at Casenta; a regal villa, a short distance from Naples. I
remember hearing the late Countess Spencer describing a small Psalter,
shewn her by the late King of Naples, from the royal collection, of
which the embellishments or illustrations were really and truly by the
hand of GIULIO CLOVIO. She observed, that nothing which she had
ever seen (and her ladyship was no indifferent judge) could pretend to
rival those exquisite embellishments for smallness of subject, minuteness of touch, and extraordinary lustre of colour.
† Before the coming on of the sale-indeed before the embarkation
of the books on board the Rochefort-his Lordship was fully aware of
their general condition, and induced to put a proper estimate accordingly upon their probable produce at Mr. Evans's. He observes, " I
fear that, on their first appearance, they will look a little rough to eyes
accustomed to the handiwork of Charles Lewis."
The sale took place on the 1st of March, 1821, occupying four
days. A few of the rarer articles, above alluded to, together with the
prices they brought, may be thus briefly noticed :-
Ausonius, 1472, editio princeps .
Biblia Latina, 1462, Mogunt. folio, 2 vols., a most beautiful and magnificent copy, UPON VELLUM, with illuminations of the time. Purchased by H. R. H. the Duke
of Sussex
1476, printed by Jenson, folio, UPON VEL-
£ 54 12 0
· 94 10 0
552 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
Catalogue ofthe Library made its appearance-in
one volume, to the full as beautifully executed as any
LUM, slightly defective in the first and third leaves. A
beautiful book .
Boccaccio la Theseide, Ferrara, 1475, folio, prima edizione. Of excessive rarity*.
Catholicon, 1460, folio, two leaves wanting
Cicero de Oratore, Ulric Han, 1468, folio. A very fine
copy of an exceedingly rare book •
Tusculana Quæstiones, 1469, folio
Dante, la Comdaia, 1472, folio, prim. edit.
folio
Col. Comment di Landino, 1481,
Hist. August Scriptores criptores, 1475, folio, edit. prin.
Horatius, edit. prim. sine anni notâ, 4to.
21 0 0 24OO
· 117 12 0
• 15 15 0
27
1928286
61
900
∞
6
·
224
52 10 0
12 17 0
49 17 0
Juvenalis, Ulric Han, litt. major, folio 24 13 6
Lucanus, 1469, folio, edit. prin.
25 4 0
Manilius, Reiogmantus, Nuremberg, 4to. 12 12 0
Martialis, V. de Spira. folio, edit. prin. 18 18 0
Sw. and Pannartz, 1473, folio (see page 546,
10 50
copy 28 7 0
73 10 0
14 0 0
note, ante) .
Monte Sancto di Dio, 1477, folio. A fine and complete
Ovidii Opera, Sw. and Pannartz, 1471 , folio, editio secundo. Purchased by the Rt. Hon. Thos. Grenville.
de Arte Amandi, Zainer, 1471 , folio
Plinius, I. de Spira, 1469, folio, edit. prin. A fine and
perfect copy
leaf
" Jenson, 1476, Ital. , UPON VELLUM, wanting one
Silius Italicus, Sw. and Pannartz, 1471 , folio, edit. prin.
39 18 0
32 6 0
31 10 0
* This book was bought in by His Lordship, to present to Mr. Hibbert, in exchange for that very rare edition of the Boccaccio, without
date or place, described in vol. ii . p. 299-301 , of the Ædes Athorpianæ,
which had been presented in turn to Lord Spencer by Mr. Hibbert. Mr.
Hibbert had obtained it of Mr. Singer at the price of 100 guineas ; but
the above volume, which he received in exchange, produced, at the sale
of his own library, the sum of 1607. It is of most tremendous rarity.
See Bibl. Spencer. vol. iv. 84.
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 553
of its precursors ; but destitute of all embellishment.
It concludes with a copious Index of all the " Authors and Editions " described in that and the six
preceding volumes. It was published at the price
of 17. 1s.; and Messrs. Payne and Foss and Mr.
Evans were the publishers. A short preface of eight
pages pointed out the leading features of this extraordinary Collection. The commencement and the
conclusion of the Preface may not be irrelevantly
introduced in the present place. The former is as
follows.
" For the fourth and last time, I present myself to the
Public as connected with the MAGNIFICENT LIbrary, the
treasures of which are in part disclosed in the present and
six preceding volumes. The Noble Owner of these treasures might have been well satisfied in setting all competition
at defiance even before he had made himself master of the
collection, which now, under the title of the CASSANO LIBRARY, for the first time claims the public attention. But
his zeal, taste, and liberal spirit, in the prosecution of that
pursuit to which he has devoted the last thirty-five years of
Suetonius, I. P. de Lignamine, 1470, folio, edit. prin.
Sw. and Pannartz, 1470, folio
·
•
Tacitus, sine anni notâ, folio, the supposed edit. prin.
Valer.us Flaccus, 1474, folio, edit. prin.
Valerius Maximus, Mentelin, edit. prin.
Virgilius, Sw. and Pann., 1469, folio, edit. prin. four
leaves wanting, with the whole of the priapeia. It was
otherwise in a very tender condition. Purchased for
the Bodleian Library
15 15 O
15 15 0
10 10 0
25 10 0
12 16 O
63 0 0
Upon the whole, considering the drooping state of the market, these
rare and valuable books brought fair round prices. Some of them,
such as the Ausonius, Horace, the second Ovid, and Silius Italicus,
were exceedingly well sold.
554 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
his life, forbade him to decline the acceptance of an offer,
by which the riches of his collection might be said to be increased even to repletion."
The latter runs thus :-
" On thus taking a final leave of these magnificent and
truly precious productions, of which the description has occupied nearly three thousand pages ( including the present or
seventh volume) , I might be allowed to indulge a feeling of
no ordinary or irrational triumph, were not that feeling embittered, in some measure, by a consideration of the caprice
of public taste, and of the poverty of public patronage. At
the termination of nine years labour ( more or less diversified
or interrupted) upon ONE WORK-of which I will fearlessly
predict its duration for the ordinary limits of human fame—
the principal consolation left me, is, the conviction that my
time and occupations have been honestly and usefully devoted. When the STUDY of BIBLIOGRAPHY shall be more
generally cultivated, its uses will be more generally acknowledged. It will be found to rank among those branches of
antiquarian research which are as conducive to correct taste
and useful intelligence as any other ; nor can that department of literature be considered as mean and unprofitable,
which has been dignified by the publications of such men as
MORHOF and FABRICIUS-names, that rank among the most
eminent of those of foreign Bibliographers.
" But mixed as may be my feelings on a reflection of this
nature, they are, in another point of view, gratifying and
pure. I have done everything in my power to establish, on
a firm foundation, the celebrity of a LIBRARY of which the
remembrance can only perish with every other record of
individual fame. I will say nothing of the high and honourable character of its NOBLE OWNER, either in his public or
private capacity ; but I may be permitted to remark, that
it is even possible for the names of COLBERT and HARLEY
to be forgotten, as Ministers, while they will be for ever
THE SPENCER LIBRARY. 555
remembered as COLLECTORS of MANUSCRIPTS and of
PRINTED BOOKS. -Kensington, May 1 , 1823."
The cold
Anote is subjoined, chiefly in observing upon the
strange and groundless attack of a foreign bibliographer and critic, the late Mr. EBERT, upon the
low state of Bibliography in Great Britain. Poor
Ebert perished untimely ; but in his vocation-and,
as it were, " on the field of battle * ."
phlegm of the German critic may be well contrasted
with the warm eulogy of another foreigner-among
the most diligent, exact, and distinguished of living
Bibliographerst. That eulogy is in part as follows : -
"Cet ouvrage, imprimé magnifiquement sur très beau
papier vélin, est sans nul doute le Catalogue le plus
curieux qu'on ait jamais publie."..." Ainsi, que
l'atteste ce Catalogue, la bibliothèque de LORD SPEN-
* He was mounted very high upon a ladder in the library, and
stretching out his arm to replace a book, he lost his balance, and fell
precipitously upon the floor, and, as I learn, scarcely breathed a second
time. His death was undoubtedly a loss, in its way. Ebert came from
Dresden to Wolfenbütel, where he was librarian of the public library.
Here he must have often had within his hands the Book ofFables,
with coarse wood cuts, printed by Pfister ; of which most curious and
uncommon book, replaced there, from Paris, by the victorious armies
of the allies in 1815, no other copy was ever known to have existed.
Ebert was of all gropers among books, rather than of bibliographers,
the most incessantly diligent and active ; but he was a snarler at heart ;
and may be classed among those doggedly and mechanically moving
bipeds, among his countrymen, whose shoes are always hobnailed,
and whose food is invariably sour-krout.
† BRUNET: Manuel du Libraire.
556 THE SPENCER LIBRARY.
CER, est la plus riche, peut-être, qu'ait jamais formée
aucun Particulier * "
It remains to add, that the whole of the SPENCER
LIBRARY is now concentrated at Althorp ; and I can
only, and most cordially, renew the expression—
before committed to the public press- BIBLIOT
LYON
$1802
" ESTO PERPETUA ! "
LYON
VILLE
DE
LA
DE
77711.5


107
