
THE BOOK FANCIER
OR THE
Romance of Book Collecting
BY
PERCY FITZGERALD
SECOND EDITION, REVISED
NEW YORK
SCRIBNER & WELFORD
743 BROADWAY
1887
GAN.
THE NEW YORK
PUBLIC LIBRARY
497789
ASTOR,
LENOX AND TILDEN FOUNDATIONS.
R
1912 L
ΤΟ
George AUGUSTUS SALA,
CRITIC AND CONNOISSEUR,
This volume,
ON A
SUBJECT CONGENIAL TO HIS TASTES,
IS
INSCRIBED BY HIS FRIEND
THE AUTHOR.
WIRELoftheas wedescritheFaracesattachrare ccolectTvor toourwriterfirst imatte Test
PREFACE.
WITHIN the last few years there has been a revival
of the old and elegant taste of the book-fancier,
as well as of that passion or faith which is
described with such amiable enthusiasm in the
little tract of the worthy Bishop Richard of Bury.
The history and pedigree of books, of printers, &c. ,
has always been a favourite study with the learned,
attested by the profound and scholarly treatises of
the Panzers, Hains, De Bures, Brunets, and our
own Lowndes. But this subject has its popular
graces also, and there is a sort of romantic interest
attached to all that is associated with books-the
rare old edition, the old printer, the blear-eyed
collector, the binder, the sale, and the stray survivor of a whole edition, by some miracle preserved
to our time. These topics seemed to kindle such
writers as the late Dr. Hill Burton-perhaps the
first in our time to deal popularly with such
matters ; Mr. Andrew Lang being the latest to
illustrate this subject from his abundant stores
vi Preface.
of knowledge. Having from the earliest date had
a taste for this fascinating pursuit-and when a
boy I formed a very respectable collection of
Elzevirs, and looked on auction days as festivals—
I have ventured to add my contribution to the
rest. This little volume will be found to contain
many curious and interesting things not readily
accessible, and deals in some fashion with almost
everything that is connected with " book." Due
allowance must be made for the enthusiasm of the
collector, who from the days of the excellent Dr.
Frognall Dibdin has been good- naturedly allowed
ever to see gold and silver and jewels in his
mouldy treasures.
For some curious information concerning bookbinding I am indebted to the papers of the late
Mr. Sanders of Oxford. Other obligations I have
acknowledged in the notes.
ATHENÆUM Club,
September 1886.
E
FA
EL11000E
TELE
CENT
CONTENTS.
OF BOOK COLLECTORS AND BOOK DEALERS
OF THE MAZARIN BIBLE . ·
• •
•
PAGEI
17
CONCERNING THE INCUNABLES OR CRADLE BOOKS
OF THE ELZEVIRS, PLANTINS, AND OLD PRINTERS .
OF CAXTONS AND OF THE ENGLISH PRINTERS
OF THE LIBRARY ·
OF BINDING AND ITS CURIOSITIES
CURIOSITIES OF PRINTING
OF GRANGERISING AND DICKENSIANA
BOOKS AND
32
47
· 67689
· 82
· 99
• 136
• . . 168
OF ILLUSTRATED " LUXURIOUS
EDITIONS ·
OF THE AUCTION- ROOM · •
OF THE SHAKESPEARE FOLIOS AND QUARTOS
L'ENVOI •
INDEX
• • 193
• 222
. 253
• 307
309
TH
persons,
master.
with
thesseems ashad
beconothingisSome sWrungtheranged wiknowsthadispersionthe
collec
THE BOOK FANCIER.
§ DE Book Collectors and Book
Dealers.
MY darling books ! " exclaims an enthusiastic collector, Silvestre de Sacy ;
" a day will come when you will be
laid out on the saleroom table, and
others will buy and possess you -
persons, perhaps, less worthy of you than your old
Yet how dear to me are they all ! for have
I not chosen them one by one, gathered them in
with the sweat of my brow ? I do love you all ! It
seems as if, by long and sweet companionship, you had become part of myself. But in this world
nothing is secure. "
master.
Some such pang or foreboding as this has often
wrung the collector's heart as he surveys his treasures
ranged within their glass-bound tenements ; for he
knows that, whatever securities he may contrive, their
dispersion is almost inevitable. The more precious
the collection, the more certain the temptation ; and
2 Book Collectors and Book Dealers.
there is even a grim legend of one library carried to
the saleroom, " by order of the relatives," on the
very day after the interment of the owner. Yet here
there is a righteous Nemesis ; for too often , indeed,
the " hobby " has been ridden at the sacrifice of
family comforts, and even family embarrassment, —
hence the pressing temptation to recover what is
thought to have been unrighteously abstracted .
Yet a cloud of pleasant romantic associations stili
envelops the amiable collector, often a man of simple
manners and tastes, whose holiday is a prowl among
the " old bookshops, " and whose triumph is his
return home with some mouldy but precious little
duodecimo. He will exhibit to you with trembling
glee his Elzevir Rabelais, secured out of a book- box
at the door, “ all at a shilling," or his rare Jenson
in folio, purchased from a “ country dealer ” for the
vast price of £10, but which “ he knows is worth
five times the money,”—as indeed it is. alas !
behind all this is the grim tragic idea of, as it were,
"writing in water," of gathering for dispersion, of
heaping up only for scattering, of that final, fatal
day when all shall be sold and others buy again !
He is but a bibliophilist Danaïd, vainly filling his
pitcher-the water running out at bottom !
..
The book- collecting passion was alluded to long
ago in Lucian, who asks : " Why do you buy so
many books ? You are blind, and you buy a grand
mirror ; you are deaf, and you purchase fine musical
instruments ; you have no hair, and you get yourself a comb. " This is perhaps the most bitter stroke
yet given to the bibliomaniac, More pleasantly
sarcastic, too, are the lines of old Brandt in his
" Ship of Fools, " where our maniac is ever a conspicuous passenger :
--
Book Collectors and Book Dealers. 3
" Still am I busy bookes assembling,
For to have plentie it is a pleasaunt thing
In my conceyt, to have them ay at hand,
But what they meane do I not understande. "
One might weep over the mad folly of old Magliabecchi-"the Glutton of Books "—who covered floor,
bed, and every portion of his house with books.
When he wished to sleep, he would throw an old
rug over any books that were on the floor, and
stretch himself upon them, or he would cast himself,
completely dressed, into his unmade bed, which was
filled full of books, taking a basin of coals with him.
Often he thus, quite unintentionally, set himself and
his bed on fire. Notwithstanding this confusion, he
could lay his hand on any book at any moment,
though buried under a load of disorderly volumes.
But most " untidy " literary men and scholars can do
this, to a great extent, in the case of their papers as 1 is of books. To the housemaid eye there
is a hopeless confusion.
No " hobby " is so old, so enduring, or respectable as this. Almost from the first days of writing
it declared itself, and down to this hour it has
flourished. The very literature of the subject is
enormous, and would fill a small library. There
is a dictionary on the subject of books that deals
with books that is, things of paper and print.
About printers and printing alone, its various styles
and forms, there are treatises without end ; grand
encyclopædic dictionaries written by the punditsHain, Panzer, De Bure, the greater Brunet, and
many more. There can be no doubt, indeed, that
a book falls within the domain of art, for it is a
thing of arrangement and disposition, and with such
elements it is obvious there must be one sort of
4 Book Collectors and Book Dealers.
arrangement or disposition that is mo e pleasing than
another.
Theordinary book-hunter, stall-ranger, or "prowler
has a store of joys and delight, even in anticipating.
their fruition , which he can gratify to the full in this
London of ours, as well as did old Monkbarns in the
"wynds " and purlieus of Edinburgh. He becomes i
character. " Of the old bookstall hunters," writes M
Sanders in his MS. , penes me, " Richard Smyth one
of the Secondaries of the City ofLondon from 16440
1655, was said to be so devoted to the pleasant toils of
book collecting, that he resigned his office (and emolu
ments of £700 a year) expressly that he might take
his rounds among the booksellers' shops, especially
in Little Britain. Dr. John North delighted in the
small editions of the classics by Seb. Gryphius. His
biographer says : I have borne him company at a
bookstall for many hours together, and minding hin
of the time he hath made a dozen offers before he
would quit.' Sterne was fond of looking over bookstalls, and writes exultingly of a bargain made b
Mr. Shandy, who had the good fortune to get Bruse
ambille's Prologue on Noses [ 12mo, Paris, 16121
almost for nothing, that is, for three half-crowns
' There are not three Bruscambilles in Christendom:
[said the stall-man ] except what are chained up in
the libraries of the curious. My father flung down
the money as quick as lightning, took Brucambile
into his bosom, hyed home from Piccadilly to Cole
man Street with it, as he would have hyed home with
a treasure, without taking his hand once off from.
Bruscambille all the way.' The Rev. Richard Farmer, D.D. , was a great lover of bookstalls. His
library sold in 1798 for £2210, his pictures for £500,
all of which, it is believed, were purchased by the
Book Collectors and Book Dealers. 5
Doctor for much under £ 500. The Rev. J. Brand,
F.A.S. , whose compact library of unique, scarce,
rare, and curious works ' was sold at the beginning
of the century for upwards of £6000, almost daily visited the bookstalls between Piccadilly and Mile
End-a rather extensive range-and generally returned from these excursions with his deep and wide
pockets well laden, and it is said his volumes were
chiefly collected in this way, and for comparatively small sums. The old Duke of Roxburghe wandered
industriously and zealously from bookshop to bookstall over the world, just as he wandered over the
moor stalking the deer. Madame D'Arblay mentions that Queen Charlotte, speaking of a book in her
library, said, ' I picked the book up on a stall.
Oh, it's amazing what good books there are on
stalls ! ' On which Mrs. Delany, fancying that her
Majesty was in the habit of exploring book stalls in person, expressed her surprise. 'Why,' said the
Queen, I don't pick them up myself ; but I have a
servant, very clever, and if they are not to be had at
the booksellers', they are not for me more than for
another.' Still Dr. Croly says that Queen Charlotte
was in the habit of paying visits, with a lady-inwaiting, to Holywell Street and Ludgate Hill , where second-hand books were offered for sale. In no
instance,' says he, was her Majesty recognised or
interfered with. ' Her Majesty's taste went further,
and it is not generally known that she had a private
press of her own. This we learn from a volume,
' Miscellaneous Poems, printed in 1812 by E. Hardy
for her Majesty Queen Charlotte, at the Frogmore
Lodge Press,' Only thirty copies were printed as presents for the Queen's select friends. Most of the
royal family had this taste for typography and books,
"
6 Book Collectors and Book Dealers.
and the author possesses some verses printed in red
ink by George Prince of Wales (afterwards George
IV. ) when a child. George III. at one time proposed setting up a press in the palace.
"
" How often, ' says Sir Walter Scott, speaking with
the voice of the old antiquary, Monkbarns, have I
stood haggling on a penny, lest, by a too ready acqui- escence in the dealer's first price, he should be led to
suspect the value I set upon the article ! How have
I trembled lest some passing stranger should chop in
between me and the prize ; and then, Mr. Lovel, the
sly satisfaction with which one pays the consideration
and pockets the article, affecting a cold indifference
while the hand is trembling with pleasure ! ' Southey
could not pass a stall without ' just running his eye
over for one minute, ' even, we are told, if the coach
which was to take him to see Coleridge at Hampstead
was within that time of starting. The great lawyer,
Francis Hargrave, is said to have formed his extensive library merely by picking up ' at bookstalls,
seldom, if ever, purchasing a volume at what is called
a ' regular' bookseller's. This library was purchased for £8000 for the British Museum. Charles Butler,
another lawyer of eminence, also ranged bookstalls ,
and many a rare book he has secured for a few shillings, worth as many pounds. This was his frequent boast. Lord Macaulay was peculiarly fond of rummaging the bookstalls, and scarcely a dusty old bookshop in any by-court or out- of- the-way corner in
London escaped his attention. No one so ready to mount a ladder and scour the top shelf for quarto
pamphlets or curious literary relics of a bygone age,
and come down after an hour's examination covered
with dust and cobwebs, sending for a bun to take the place of his usual luncheon, He was not ashamed
Book Collectors and Book Dealers. 7
to act as his own porter, and, like most of the eminent
bookworms, ancient and modern, was not above carrying a shabby old folio through a fashionable thorough- fare." The late Mark Pattison had a special fancy
for the little antique Latin pocket volumes pub- lished in myriads a couple of centuries ago. It is
curious to think of scholars " wise and old " issuing
their profoundest lucubrations in volumes about the
size of a small Prayer-Book or Pocket Testament ;
but such was the fashion. Long histories, such as
Strada On the Belgian War, a work as long as " Hume and Smollett," or even 66 Gibbon," were thus
squeezed into portable shape. Eyes in those days must have been stouter and clearer.
The bookworm, bibliophilist, or book fancier is a
favourite and almost dramatic figure, with his dim
eyes, rusty clothing, and eccentric affection for his
treasures. We have a sympathetic tenderness for
his lone, solitary ways, his self-denial and privations ,
his hungry ardour and prowlings after his " midnight
darlings. " If the truth were known, this sympathy
would be found to be thrown away ; for his greed,
akin to that of the miser, would make him sacrifice
all that is human to all that is of paper. He is likely
enough to be morose, snarling, grasping, and would
find the most exquisite pleasure in getting from some
poor but ignorant dealer for a shilling what was
worth guineas. This is the triumph of the chasse à
livres. The prospect of parting with his old friends
adds a new pang to death. Friends, relatives, he
can leave behind with indifference, but his dear books
"cannot bear him company. " Here was the departure of a late book lover thus quaintly portrayed :-" He had a quite human fondness for his
books ; nothing annoyed him so much as to hear one
8 Book Collectors and Book Dealers.
ofthemfall ; and dusting them, which he reduced to
a science, seemed to give him real pleasure. In his
last illness the sight of any of his favourites depressed
him greatly. ' Ah ! ' he would say, ' I am to leave
my books ; ' and sometimes, ' They have been more to
me than my friends. ' He would ask for them one
after the other, till he was literally covered almost
to his shoulders, as he lay, and the floor around
him was strewn with them. He used to say that
the sight of books was necessary to him at his
work ; and once reading how Schiller always kept
' rotten apples ' in his study because their scent
was beneficial to him, he pointed to some shelves
above his head, where he kept his oldest and most
prized editions, and said, ' There are my rotten
apples. ' " *
In the last century there flourished -if the term
be not too extravagant—a book hunter named Wilson, better and more ungraciously known as " Snuffy
Davy," who once picked up on a stall in a Dutch
town a small black-letter quarto, for which he paid
twopence. This proved to be one of the first Englishprinted books, Caxton's " Game of Chess. " He sold
it to a London bookseller, Osborne, celebrated for
being knocked down by Dr. Johnson with one of his
own folios , for £ 20. Osborne disposed of it to Dr.
• Mr. Gladstone is a diligent searcher of the stalls. The book fancier often comes on his track, and has seen a little parcel-a bit of old theology, a rare poet, a nice old edition of Lamb-set aside to be sent home to Downing Street. Some- times , when he is cheapening a book in a more public place than Holywell Street, a curious crowd will gather outside ,
staring in unmeaningly, as the vulgar gaper knows how to do.
This draws" the eminent virtuoso, who strides out impatiently,
the stall- man execrating the idlers , who, perhaps, have hindered a bargain. All catalogues are sent to him and read, and re- turned marked with orders.
Book Collectors and Book Dealers. 9
Askew for £65 ; and on his death it was purchased
for the Windsor library for £370. Atthe present time
the original twopence would have multiplied into a
thousand pounds. All your book hunters will tell us
that such surprises are part of the joys of their calling. Yet I fancy the loyal heart would feel a twinge
or scruple as he carries off from the humble and
ignorant dealer, for a shilling or two, a volume that
may be worth ten or twenty pounds. No sophistry
will veil the sharpness of the transaction, in which
profit is made of poverty and ignorance ; and it
would not be difficult to make an equitable decision ,
the buyer, as discoverer, being entitled to perhaps
the larger share, and the owner to the rest. Instances
of trouvailles of this sort are within the experience of
every book fancier.
A few lots that in 1807 were bought for £8, 1S. ,
produced at Heber's in 1836, £238, 175. At the
same time the " Chronica Gulielmi Thom " sold for
£85, having in 1807 changed hands for 12s. This
famous library consisted of 105,000 volumes. " The
Storye of Frederick of Jensen," Anwarpe, 1518, with
that of " Mary of Nemegen " and the " Lyfe of Vergilius," bound in one volume, cost the Duke of Roxburghe also 12s. , and produced at his sale in 1812,
£186, 145. Dr. Gosset had seen in his lifetime the
first Psalter of 1481 sold at Wilcox's for 5s. , resold to
Dr. Askew for 5 guineas, at whose sale it fetched 16
guineas. He had seen Dr. Farmer give 5s . 9d. for
Painter's " Palace of Pleasure, " and the same resold
for 20 guineas ; and at Brand's sale he saw a blackletter article, the original cost of which was 3s. 6d . ,
rise in a second sale to £100 and upwards. Of the
" Tragedy of Dido, Queen of Carthage," written by
Marlowe and Nash, printed by the Widdowe Orwin,
10 Book Collectors and Book Dealers.
quarto, London , 1594 , only three copies are known
to exist. The Duke of Devonshire's copy cost Henderson the actor fourpence ; it sold at the Heber sale
in 1834 for £ 39 ! Another was purchased by Malone
at Dr. Wright's sale, 1787 , for 16 guineas ; a third,
purchased by Mr. Reed for eighteenpence, of Mr. Flackton, bookseller, Canterbury, and presented by him in
exchange to Stevens, sold at the latter's sale in 1800
for £17. Again, Mr. Rodd, the eminent bookseller,
bought in the early part of this century a volume of
rare tracts for threepence three-farthings (being its
fair weight when put in the scales), which he sold
about 1830 to Mr. Heber for £50 ! And again, for
the "Mirror of Magistrates" (by G. H. ) , quarto, 1618,
a bookseller at Lancaster gave the sum of threepence
and sold for 10 guineas. It produced at Sotheby's
in 1857, £20, 105.
Malone, the Shakesperean scholar, tells of a
precious little collection bound in one volume, and
which contained some ten tracts of poetry by Daniel
and others, written circa 1590. " Its history, ” he
says, " is a curious one. The volume is just fit for
the waistcoat pocket-four and a half inches long by
three broad—pretty thick, well printed, and in good
condition. It was sold at the sale of Dr. Bernard's
books in 1698 for one shilling and threepence.
Afterwards, probably passing through many hands,
it came into the possession of a broker at Salisbury,
where, about thirty years ago, Mr. Warton found it
among a parcel of old iron and other lumber, and I
think purchased it for sixpence. Since his death, his
brother, Dr. Joseph Warton, very kindly presented
it to me ; and I have honoured it with a new cover,
and have preserved above the name of my poor
friend Mr. Thonias Warton, which was written at
Book Collectors and Book Dealers. II
the inside of the old cover, as a memorial of that
very elegant and ingenious writer. "
This would now be priced at thirty or forty
guineas. But a much more extraordinary illustration
of the " ups and downs " of sales was exhibited at
the Roxburghe sale, where there was offered no less
than ten " Wynkyn de Wordes, " with a " Pynson and a Wyer," which in all brought £538. Yet
these rarities had actually formed a single volume
when in Dr. Farmer's possession , and at his sale fetched but twenty guineas !
The system of " old book dealing " has been so
perfected or methodised, that the days for the patient
explorer going his rounds with the certainty of
"picking up," as it was called , some treasure or
rarity, seem to have departed. The value of everything really worth anything is known ; no hunting in
"book-boxes " or on the outside shelves of the stall
will discover a prize. The finding an old quarto
Shakespeare bound up with a lot of tracts is a
dream. Still the man of taste and judgment may
make his rounds, and find pleasure in redeeming
many a pretty and useful volume, worth much more
to him than the shilling or two he pays.
The " old book " sellers of London and of portions
of the country are an interesting class, many of
them enthusiasts , all knowing their business thoroughly, and some with that pleasant quaintness.
which has often come from living retired in dark
Rembrandtish shops, among their antique and musty
volumes. The amount of bibliographic lore they
acquire and spend over their catalogues is often
surprising. They maintain a correspondence with
half the literary men of the kingdom, and this adds
a tone to their minds. The latter rely on their
12 Book Collectors and Book Dealers.
humble friends and assistants, who, when these
patrons are in want of some special work, exert
themselves and put certain " sleuth-hounds "—well
known to the trade, with a strange faculty for
"nosing " books-on the track. Most littérateurs
will admit that they always find in good catalogues
agreeable and piquant reading, and there are some
-such as Ridler's of Booksellers' Row, Salkeld's,
Georges's, Bennett's of Birmingham -which are
really most entertaining as well as instructive. My
worthy ally of Booksellers' Row has a style of his
own, and I often envy his readiness of knowledge and resource. His bazaar has an antique look ; the
venerable boxes and shelves look into the street ;
within these are the darkened chambers where
volumes are stored and stacked , and old monks
might be at work. No enthusiast of printing could
sing with more appropriateness the merits and charms of his tomes. Here is an honest bit of enthusiasm :-
"ALDINE. - Hieronymi Opera, 2 vols. in 1 , thick
folio, rubricated throughout in red and blue (with the
exception of a slight water- stain) , a very fine large
copy of this noble volume of early typography, new
calf gilt, exceedingly rare, £2 , 12s. 6d. Venet. , A.
de Torresano de Asola, 1488. "
-
On which he comments : "This interesting
publication is connected with the early Aldine press,
the printer being the father- in-law and afterwards
partner of the elder Aldus. Dibdin says of this
volume- If the lover of fine and legible printing
wishes for a specimen of one of the choicest productions of the XV. Century, let him lose no opportunity of obtaining the present impression when a
reasonable hope of its possession is held out to him ;
nor is the work less intrinsically valuable than its
Book Collectors and Book Dealers. 13
exterior form is inviting. A nobler book cannot
grace the shelves of any collection. ' "
Or better still : -" MENTELIN'S PRESS, 1465.-
Conradi de Alemania, Concordantiæ Bibliorum, thick
roy. folio, first edition, black letter, the first page
surrounded with a broad illuminated border in gold
and colours, and illuminated throughout. A most
superb copy of this early monument of typography
in its infancy, printed by one of the secret workmen
of Guttenberg, handsome copy, bound in hogskin,
gold and blind tooling on back and sides, from the
Syston Park Collection, of the greatest rarity, fourteen guineas. Strasburg, J. Mentelin , 1465. First
edition and the first Bible Concordance ever printed .
Cost Sir John Thorold £30, 10s. , bought of Payne
and Foss, 1829. See also his MS. note ; not in the
Spencer Collection , ascribed by Panzer to the press of Mentelin. The birthplace of printing has been
hotly disputed : there are partisans who have endeavoured to prove that Strasburg was the original
seat of the invention , and assert Mentelin the real
inventor of the art, and describe Guttenberg as the
robber of his priceless secret, &c. See a long
account of this famous printer in Humphrey's History
ofPrinting. Any one wishing to possess a fine and
beautiful specimen of early typography could not require a more desirable book than the above. In
fact, a more noble volume could not grace the shelves
of the finest collection. "
Who would not be attracted by this glowing
language ? The praise of this book is like the taste
of rich ripe fruit in the mouth. For this enticing
treasure £24 was asked. Yet at a sale in 1827 ,
Herbert's copy sold for £1 , 135.
Most of these men can tell us curious and interest-
14 Book Collectors and Book Dealers.
ing incidents of their experience of buyers in the
olden days. So Mr. Stibbs , on allusion to Charles
Lamb, will relate how he had many of his folios—
"huge armfuls "—the " midnight darlings ” he bewailed, passing through his hands. He noted what
ragged veterans they were, how soiled, thumbed, and
generally dirty. His confrère, Wilson, has had
Cobbett, Leigh Hunt, and others of the time,
dropping in. Many of these men have been writers
themselves, such as Hindley, who has worked on
Catnach literature—street cries, ballads, &c. One
of the most interesting of this class was an old and
rather wizened man, who, when dealing, invariably
pointed his speech with a succession of short grunts,
increasing in intensity as he grew obdurate, disappearing wholly when the bargain was a very good
one for him. He lived in a little den of books, and
was usually interrupted when pursuing " his literary
avocations." He was easy to sell, but terrible to
the peripatetic vendor of a stray volume, whom he greeted with a sort of ferocity. Yet this man was
amiable, had a simplicity worthy of Goldsmithwrote in a charming, easy, unaffected style ; indeed ,
he had once been a schoolmaster. He collected
folk-lore, and at last made a collection of stories of
fairies, &c. , which he had picked up himself, and
which was published with much success. He signed
himself quaintly " Philomath. " He had never been
in London or the great cities , and once wrote to me
that he " could picture me sitting of some fine
summer's evening with a book under the trees in
Trafalgar Square. "
Foremost among them is the now celebrated Mr.
Quaritch of London, the very Napoleon of booksellers. His enterprise and daring has really had a
Book Collectors and Book Dealers. 15
He sug- momentous influence in stimulating prices.
gests one of those great financiers who rule the
market with a nod. He has brought books, as it
were, "within the range of practical politics." No
one who passes his rather dark and unpretending
place of business at No. 15 Piccadilly could guess
at the vast character of his transactions ; neither
would any one who sees at some great sale his plain
figure, somewhat of Jewish cast, with the ancient felt
hat to which his friends attach a sort of mysterious
and superstitious power, donned on great occasions ,
suppose that this was the careless bidder of hundreds
and thousands of pounds. In that repository of his
are stored away priceless volumes. * Lately inter-
"Mr. Quaritch is by no means an easy man to get at, unless you wish to see him on business. He was in his sanctum, a
small, dark room, almost filled with the table, a few chairs, and two or three bookcases, containing several thousand pounds'
worth of rare volumes, protected from the dust by glass doors.
He discoursed in a pessimistic strain of the decadence of the general buyer and collector, a sign of the materialistic age we live in. ' Book buying and book collecting in its proper sense is gradually declined since 1830. It was before that time that e great libraries were formed. 'At the Hamilton sale I spent
£40,000, and at the Sunderland sale £33,000 ; and most of my purchases are now in the house here. I have known well most of the collectors of my time ; three Dukes of Hamilton, for instance ; and there you see the portrait of one of my best cus tomers the late Earl of Crawford, whose body was stolen.
But, as I have said, the fashion has changed now-a-days. Col- lectors go in for first editions of Keats, Shelley, Thackeray ,
Dickens, and for the engravings of Cruikshank and Phiz. Then sporting literature is greatly in demand. Another very good
customer is the country gentleman, who generally aspires to have in his library the best books on his county history. But I cannot enumerate the demands and crazes. Show me a man's library,
and I will tell you his character and his attainments. ' He began business in Castle Street some forty years ago-never mind how old he is now. No one having talked five minutes to the Bis- marck of the book trade could fail to see that he had to do with
a keen trader, up to every move on the board, and to every trick of the trade. His hunting- grounds are all over the face of the
16 Book Collectors and Book Dealers.
viewed by an agent of the Pall Mall Gazette, he
communicated some very interesting information.
The great book dealer added the careless remark,
"Most of my purchases "-made in the great sales
two and three years ago- " are in the house here ;
these costly things lying there, as it were, at interest,
which the buyer may have to pay. But the market
for the greater books is scarcely in London,
There
are the grand collectors abroad, such as the Duke of
Aumale and Rothschild, makers of grand and costly libraries.
earth ; he gathers his harvest from the five continents, and stores it up in Piccadilly. Now will you come with me, and I will show you a few of the rooms here. And as we went, my guide pointed with pride to this case and that, to this pile and that.
Here was a bundle of Eastern manuscripts worth thousands,
there a case full of Mexican manuscripts written at the time of the conquest ; here was the ' pigsty, ' as he calls one of the rooms,
full of musty tomes and books as yet uncatalogued. Mr. Quaritch proceeded to expatiate upon his morocco bindings, his russia leather, his rare editions, his illuminated missals, his black letters, his manuscripts, his breviaries and psalters. He declares that he sells everything, and never refuses an order.
Each of these rooms contains priceless treasures, the value of which is known only to the great man himself, for he marks the price of each book. It is impossible to deceive Mr. Quaritch by anyflimsy pretence to book- learning. If I hear any one talk- ing about Elzevirs and Aldines, I know he is an ignorant ass. '
Mr. Quaritch speaks plainly, and this outburst was, I must confess, apropos of an unfortunate remark of my own concerning Elzevirs. Elzevirs and Aldines, indeed ! a pack of ignora- muses !' 'I suppose you like the excitement of a great sale?'
' No, sir ; there is nothing I abominate so heartily as the dreary hours I have to sit in those dreary auction- rooms. Once or twice one gets excited, and one's blood is up like the blood of a
gambler ; but how often? No. I am happiest here. '
"
The little intolerance as to the man who talks about Elzevirs and Aldines " being an ignorant ass is characteristic enough.
Many of this class are probably good customers. I fancy talking about Elzevirs and Aldines betokens a taste for rare things, and an amiable, well- meaning fancy to learn more. It was intended ,
no doubt, in the sense of the rebuke to those who "talked of
Coreggios and stuff. "
§ Di the Mazarin Bible.
HEN we think of our modern press, that
of books there is now no end, being
stacked away bythe million in the libraries, it is surely with a feeling almost of
awe and reverence that one calls up
the earliest of the kind-the primeval Adam and Eve.
But when we take in our hand the first of the "race"
of books, and think of its age and its necessary vicissitudes, this leaves a strange mysterious feeling. On
the eve ofthe famous Syston Park sale there were seen
in the Sothebys' modest auction-room half-a- dozen
volumes, laid out on the table under glass, on which
one of the " old " booksellers made this speculation,
not without point. " It would be a curious thing,"
he said, "to bring some of these country-folk who
are up for the cattle-show, and show ' em these, and
then put this question to ' em, ' What now would you
fancy was the value of these half-dozen plain-looking
volumes, and what are they likely to fetch ? '" The
rustics might think they were going ridiculously
high if they named £5 ; but how dumfounded they
would be if assured that £10,000 would probably be,
and almost was, the figure realised ! -the Mazarin
Bible, its successor the " Codex, " and some others
fetching near that sum. It was a strange feeling to B
18 The Mazarin Bille.
take the volumes into your hands, turn over the
leaves, admire the long " black-letter," the mellow
satin-like paper, and then reflect-" And this is the
first, or first known of all the books ! And it has
survived all the storms and troubles , the kings and
princes, and armies and revolutions, and rough usage.
And further, this sheaf of leaves, in its modest, rather
common leather binding, will to a certainty survive
to the end of the world. " A little volume might be
written on these now famous books, and it must be
confessed that there is a sort of flavour of romance
attached to them.
There is much disputing of a Dryasdust kind
over the origin of printing, the inventors and place whence the first book was issued. As no dates
were attached to the first printed books, there must
be always something speculative in the discussions
as to priority of issue ; but it is marvellous what
comparative certainty has been reached owing to
the ingenious exercise of wits. The matter lies between two or three of those pristine efforts.
There are some three or four great and famous
books of the world, which are progenitors of the
millions that now, like the human population, swarm
over the earth. But it is a su prise to think that in
workmanship these fairly distance the most perfect
specimens of the modern press. The history of this
well-known Mazarin Bible, which attracted such attention of late, deserves to be told , like that of some
well-known historical personage. Other works issued
by the Mayence press about the same time-so far as
can be speculated —as the famous Bible, are not of
the same importance, such as the " Durandus, " printed
about 1459, which exhibits the first specimen of the
smallest letter, and which a rapturous admirer de-
The Mazarin Bible. 19
clares " strikes one as the most marvellous monument of early printing. " This is indeed no exaggeration, and one does look with astonishment at the fancy
and elegance displayed in the design and cutting of
the type. Of the Mazarin Bible it is reckoned that
there are in the world nineteen copies- on paper,
mark; but on vellum, not more than five.
This grand book-the Mazarin Bible-was actu
ally discovered, dug up, as it were, like a piece of antiquity, by an accomplished bibliographer, De Bure,
In his own agreeable narrative he shows that this was
almost an accident. " Mere chance," he tells us,
"led me to the discovery of this precious edition, to
which we have given the title of The Mazarin Bible, '
and I do not hesitate an instant to give it the first
place, not only above all Bibles, but above every
known book ! When making some explorations in
the Mazarin Library, that is, of the College of the
Four Nations, we were not a little surprised to find
this first and most celebrated work of the press,
which a simple impulse of curiosity caused us to
open. " It should be said, however, that the existence
of such a book was long suspected, and there is an
actual allusion to it in the Chronicle of Cologne,
which speaks of the jubilee year 1450, when the first
book, a Bible " of the larger type," Scriptura grandiosi, was discovered.
It was at the Perkins sale, whose catalogue sells
now for two guineas, held in the great library at
Haworth Park in June 1873, that the grand copy
made its appearance, and was thus gloriously described by the auctioneers, a prosaic firm of landagents (Messrs. Gadsden and Ellis). Kept as a
bonne-bouche for the last lot of the last day, No. 864,
no wonder it was regarded with veneration , for it was
20 The Mazarin Bible.
the first best-known regularly printed volume in the
world.
" In
It is a rather happy tribute to Christianity that
this first printed book should have been the first issue
of the Scriptures. But let us hear the auctioneer :
" A most splendid and magnificent copy, printed
upon vellum, with the capitals artistically illuminated
in gold and colours, and in magnificent binding, with
clasps and bosses. " It was styled " Mazarin " from
the first discovery of a copy in Cardinal Mazarin's
library. It is printed in double columns, in large
letters, much like those used in the Missals.
contemplating this work," says our auctioneer, as
though speaking of a statue or picture, "the mind
is lost in astonishment that the inventor of printing
should by a single effort have exhibited the perfec- tion of this art." A very just remark, and what
always strikes us when looking at any of these early
works. Of the five copies known, all on vellum,
"not one is believed to be absolutely perfect." This
Perkins one was considered " the finest of the few
known copies, whether for amplitude of margin or
purity of vellum, it being as clean as the day it issued from the press. ' It however was declared by
Dr. Dibdin to want two leaves, which were " supplied
in facsimile by Whitaker," one of those amazing
persons who perform such feats, and so successfully
that, as the auctioneer tells us, " a very careful
examination has revealed one leaf which appears
doubtful, but has quite failed to discover the second. " * This copy came from the University
* There are in London now one or two persons who perform these feats. They seem amazing. I was shown lately by Mr. Toone of Leicester Square a little duodecimo of an old and rare Missal, but from which the title- page had been torn away.
One of these artists supplied the loss, reproducing the red and
The Mazarin Bible. 21
of Mentz, whence it was obtained by Messrs. Nicol. *
Three of the five vellum copies are in public libraries,
including one at Paris. A fourth belonged to Mr.
Grenville, who left it to the British Museum, and
the fifth came up for sale on this memorable day,
"unquestionably the most important and distinguished article in the whole annals of typography,
and a treasure which would exalt the humblest and
stamp with a due character of dignity the proudest
collections in the world. " Allowing a little for "high
falutin " here, there is no doubt a modicum of truth
in all this, as there is no one but must look with reverence on this true Adam of all the millions of
books that have followed. It was sold to Mr. Ellis,
in trust, for Lord Ashburnham, for the sum of
£3400 !
A copy on paper was next sold for £2690. It
was declared that "it is unquestionably the first
time, as it may with almost absolute certainty be the
last, that two copies of this work were sold in one
day. " It was strange that a copy of so world- famed
a book was not secured for some foreign state. But
the price was prohibitive, particularly, as the auctioneers said, truly, it was virtually a unique, and no
other vellum copy is likely to come into the market,
as they are secured in public libraries.
black inks, the woodcut in the centre, the faded tones of the ink, and nearly (but not so perfectly) matched the quality of the old paper.
* A Mazarin Bible was once sent over by Mr. Horne, and consigned to Mr. Nicol. Dr. Dibdin describes the illuminations as being "in a quiet and pleasing style. The volume is ab- solutely cased in mail by a binding of three hundred years'
standing, upon the exterior of which are knobs and projections in brass, of a durability and bullet- defying power which may vie with the coat of a rhinoceros. " The style of the Doctor, it will be seen, is vivacious and graphic.
22 The Mazarin Bible.
In the same year Mr. Quaritch was offering his
copy for 3000 guineas, describing it as " the original
genuine issue of the book, printed on paper, as distinguished from the second issue made by Fust and
Schöffer, to which all the copies on vellum belong, a
perfect and extraordinarily fine copy, of the full size,
most of the leaves being rough and uncut, so as even
to show the ancient MS. signatures and chapternumbers, as written down by Guttenberg himself
for the guidance of the binder and the illuminator ;
in blue morocco extra, from the libraries of Sir
Mark Sykes and Mr. Henry Perkins. Mentz, about
1455."
To appreciate this enormous price, we may trace
the career of another copy, known as Count Maccarthy's, and which is now one of the glories of the British Museum. These volumes were originally in
one M. Gaignat's library, and thence passed to Count
Maccarthy, who secured it for a bagatelle or "song"
of £85 ! At his sale, which was inevitable to take
place (the only sure protection against the billows
of prompt realisation being the safe harbour of refuge of a public library) , it was purchased for that
most elegant of collectors, Mr. Grenville, who paid
for it just £250. He bequeathed his fine collection to the English public, who can every day walk
through its spacious hall, lined with cases in which
are enshrined these treasures, all handsomely clad.
This monument passed with them, which had thus
in about fifty years advanced to nearly twenty times
its price.
On this romance of the Perkins auction , let us hear
that congenial and competent judge and true bibliophile, my friend Mr. Sala : —
"With perhaps only one exception—and even this
The Mazarin Bible. 23
is doubtful of the magnificent collection by Mr.
Thomas Grenville to the British Museum, the Perkins library has long been famous in Europe as the
finest private collection that has ever been amassed
by any English bibliophile ; and when on Fridaythe final and fourth day of the dispersion-the last
lot was knocked down for £3400, a buzz ran round
the room, which told that the entire proceeds of the
four days' sale had been upwards of £26,000.
"It seems incredible- 3400 for a single book !
The money would buy a small estate ; it would purchase a comfortable annuity ; it would cover the
expenses of a contested election. Yet the purchaser,
Mr. Ellis, is a happy man, and one to be congratu- lated. Twenty years hence the precious volume will
in all probability be worth twice or thrice the sum it
fetched last week. The costly book was none other
than a vellum copy of the famous Gutenberg and
Fust Bible the most important and distinguished
work in the whole annals of typography'the first
edition ofthe Holy Scriptures -the first book printed
with movable metal types by the inventors of the art
of printing. One such copy exists in the National
Library of Paris, and but seven others are known in
all, of which one, lamentably marred by the irretrievable loss of two pages, was sold in 1825 for no less
than £504. Even paper copies of this wonderful and
precious work fetch fabulous sums. Mr. Quaritch
bought one on Friday for £2690. Nor was the
price at all exorbitant. This very copy was pur
chased by the then Bishop of Cashel, and at his
death in 1858 it was knocked down to Mr. Perkins
for £596. It now fetches, in 1873, more than four
times the price paid for it by Mr. Perkins in 1858,
and fourteen times the price given by the Bishop of
24 The Mazarin Bible.
Cashel in 1843. What, then, the vellum copy, for
which Mr. Ellis has just paid £3400, will fetch in the
year 1900 it is difficult to conjecture. "
There had been, however, an earlier appearance
of this wonderful volume in the year 1847, when it
was thus introduced : -
"A remarkably fine copy of this splendid specimen of the typographic art. The margins of the
first page are filled with rich illuminated borders,
and the capitals throughout are finely rubricated,
2 vols. , old blue morocco, gilt leaves, without name
of printer, place, or date, but attributed to the press
of Gutenberg at Mentz, between the years 1450-55.
"It is printed in double columns, in imitation of
the large letters used by the Scribes in the Church
Missals and Choir Books.
"On our first acquaintance with this extraordinary
production [say the auctioneers ] we were inclined to
the opinion of Laire, that there existed two perfectly
distinct editions of this Bible, printed with the same
type ; but on a more minute examination and collation of the two so-called editions, we are perfectly
convinced they are essentially the same. They are
indeed the same book in different conditions of publication, occasioned by the cancelling and reprinting of certain sheets."
At Lord Gosford's sale, which took place a few
years ago, there was but a tranquil interest excited
by the appearance of what may be called an odd
volume of the Mazarin Bible. It was only the first
volume, and was arrayed in its old original monastic binding " in an oak case, with twelve brass bosses." It brought a price that rather surprised
the public, and was secured by Mr. Toovey of Piccadilly. This copy was sold for £500, so that we
The Mazarin Bible. 25
were then a long way from the days of huge prices.
To illustrate further its rarity, it may be mentioned
that the Duke of Sussex, who had an extraordinary
craze for collecting Bibles in every known tongue
and edition, had all his life been striving vainly to
acquire one on vellum. Alas ! he died, unhappily,
without attaining his desires, much as the late Earl
of Derby failed to secure the " Blue Ribbon of the
Turf." He had ruefully, we are told , to content
himself with a copy on paper, for which he gave
£ 100, and which at his sale in 1844 brought
£190. In Mr. Pickering's shop hangs a single.
leaf of this curiosity framed and glazed, a great
curiosity.
But it was now to figure in the most " sensational, "
as it is called , of modern book sales, and which rose
to the dignity of a struggle, viz. , that known as the
Syston Park Library, which took place on December
12, 1884. Sir John Hayford Thorold had indulged
his passion for books for nearly fifty years, from about
the time of the French Revolution to the date of the
Reform Bill. He had collected all the noblest
"monuments " of printing, with such success, that it
was said he possessed nearly all the " incunables,"
and certainly all the first editions of the Classics,
with the exception of only two or three. The result
was a grand and imposing collection , which, after his
death, slumbered peacefully for nearly fifty years at
his seat, near Grantham . These treasures -stately,
impressive tomes-were magnificent in their calm
dignity and rich but sober dress, and one could not
but admire the taste which brought together such
stately veterans of typography-notably that band of
"Editiones Principes "-conceived and brought forth
in days when the printer seemed to enter into com-
26 The Mazarin Bible.
petition with the artist or painter, and to apply the
canons of art to his page.
For two days these veterans were gradually dispersed, some to meet again on a new friendly
shelf ; but it was not until the fourteenth morn that
the " Mazarin Bible "-a work of which few had
even heard, but with which everybody became of a
sudden familiar-was to be contended for. The
bibliophiles and critics grew excited as they dwelt
with pardonable exaggeration on its charms. A
fevered excitement was in the air. It was described as
“a superb work, the printing on paper as thick and
rich in tone as vellum, with glossy ink intensely
black, and very uniform in the expression ; in double
columns, the letters large, and similar to those written
by scribes of the Church missals and choral books. ”
“After a preliminary fever of excitement, as the
wonderful book was passed with great solemnity up
and down before the two rows of professional and
amateur bibliophiles seated in front of the rostrum,
the first bid of £500 was made, and immediately
met with one of £1000 from Mr. Quaritch, who had
to advance on the biddings on commissions made by
the auctioneer's clerk, Mr. Snowden ; and so the contest went on by bids of £50 ; the excitement rising
higher and higher, as £3000 was called for Mr.
Quaritch, followed by £3100 from his opponent, while
each seemed to get fresher with the fight up to the
fifty- seventh round, when at £3650 the commission
was exhausted, and at Mr. Quaritch's bid of £3700,
everybody expected the hammer to fall. But here
Mr. Ellis, who had hitherto only watched the contest, joined issue with two or three splendid bids, and
a last one of £3850 , leaving it to Mr. Quaritch to
possess this splendid Mazarin Bible at the enormous
The Mazarin Bible. 27
price of £3900. There was a buzz of applause as
the hammer fell, and there was some minutes before
the excitement subsided. "
Talking over his purchases, the enterprising
Quaritch, then the hero of the hour, said : -" That
of five copies of the Mazarin or Gutenberg Bible known, three had passed through his hands. The
first he purchased when a young man in business,
for what was then an enormous sum, £590. He
had no commission for it, but offered it at the same
price to the Earl of Crawford. The Earl (who had
left a commission of £500 for the book) accepted
his offer, and was always after a good patron of his.
The present copy ' (the Syston), Mr. Quaritch
went on to say, ' I have also bought for my stock,
and it is purely a speculation of my own. I do not
expect to keep it long. A copy was sold to Mr.
Huth for £3500, he himself securing the paper copy
for £2690. This, from a bookseller's point of view,
is worth more money than the vellum copy, from the
fact that two of the five copies are on paper, the
remainder being on vellum. The sum of £3900 is
the largest ever paid for a book, the nearest approach
being the £3500 above. "
This extraordinary and extravagant price-which
suggests the Dutch tulip mania-had scarcely ceased
to be talked of, with much uplifting of hands and
eyebrows, when the memorable day of December
19 came round, revealing a more startling sensation. For now the " Psalmorum Codex "-a portion
only of the Scriptures , an older work, and fixed as
belonging to the year 1459 -was to be contended
for.
Now, great as was the fuss and excitement produced by the appearance of the Mazarin Bible, this
28 The Mazarin Bible.
was a yet rarer volume, and though only a Latin
Psalter or Codex, four years younger ; there are supposed to be some five copies of the Bible for one of
this volume, but the latter is somehow not nearly so
"sensational " a volume, and, like many a modest
man of merit, had not been put forward. Here is its official description :—
"Psalmorum codex, Latine cum Hymnis, Oratione
Dominica, Symbolis et Notis musicis, folio, printed
on vellum, very fine copy, with painted woodcutcapitals, in red morocco extra, borders of gold, gilt
edges, by Staggemeier, Moguntiæ, J. Fust et P.
Schoifher, 1459. This excessively rare edition is the
second book with a date, and contains the Athanasian
Creed, printed for the first time. In rarity it equals
that printed in 1457 , of which only eight copies are
known, and of this only seven, all printed on vellum.
The Schoeffer Psalter [ says Mr. Quaritch in his
Catalogue] (first produced in 1457 , next in 1459 ) is
the first and almost the only early example of printing in colours, the large initials being impressed, each
in at least two colours, from wooden or metal blocks.
Of the seven surviving copies of the 1457 edition ,
most are imperfect, and all but Lord Spencer's are
in public libraries. Of the seven or eight (two or
three of the ten formerly known having now disappeared) extant copies of the 1459 , all are in public
libraries except Lord Spencer's and the Thorold
copy. Hence it was not surprising that the collectors engaged in keen competition to secure the only
copy of the book that is likely ever to come into the market."
There has been much debate as to whether these
colours are hand-painted, but the best judges, with
the aid of magnifying glasses, &c. , have decided that
The Mazarin Bible. 29
at this early stage these wonderful printers were
equal to this most difficult art of printing in various
colours. *
The Codex was in vellum, and displayed five
painted capitals with initial letters in red, and also musical notes. The second book in our wide world
with a date, mark ! and, more interesting still , with
the Athanasian Creed which thus made its first appearance in print. At the end was the usual printer's
signature. There was no expectation of what was to
come. Very many were present : there was no excitement. But there were bibliophiles there who
knew what was involved.
There it lay-what perhaps is one ofthe earliest and
oldest of printed books ! Four hundred and twentyfive years had elapsed since Guttenberg had looked
on it. Its history was clear for nearly a hundred
years. It had been in Count Macarthy's collection ,
where it had been been bought by Sir Mark for only
£134, a great price : at the latter's sale it had fetched
£2 , 10s. more. Mr. Quaritch was heard to declare
that " in his experience of forty years he had never handled a copy. " The second book published with
a date. It was indeed one of the "grand old
men" of typography. Its grand splendid page
was noted and admired -its vellum, its " painted
capitals, its red letters, and musical notes. " It was
proclaimed as being " bound by Staggemeier, in red
morocco, and is in an exceptionally fine state."
Mr. Quaritch, the happy possessor of the latest sold copy now offers it-or did lately-among his numerous other costly treasures, for the sum of 4095 ! He thus seems to be paying about £150 a year-that is , loss of interest on the sum laid out -forthe custody of the treasure ; just as the late Lord Dudley,
who secured a famous pair of Sèvres jars for £10,000, was paying £500 a year for the pleasure of gazing on them,
30 The Mazarin Bible.
Again the same graphic enthusiast describes the
scene. " It was put up with a brief eulogy from the
auctioneer, Mr. Hodge, at £500, and the biddings
steadily advanced by fifties to over £2000, there
being only three competitors in the field , Mr. Snowden (the clerk), Mr. Quaritch, and Mr. Ellis (the
Bond Street bookseller) , who, however, soon far distanced the commission, and brought the biddings to
over £3000, while the audience looked on in dead
silence, wondering if it could possibly beat the £3900
of the Mazarin Bible. To the astonishment of every
one, this was soon not only reached, but surpassed
by more than £ 1000, Mr. Ellis gallantly bidding
£4900, Mr. Quaritch immediately topping it with
£4950, at which, after calling this enormous price
three times, Mr. Hodge raised his hammer for the
last time, and sealed the purchase of the famous Codex
to Mr. Quaritch amidst the loudest applause ever
heard in the room. "
There is yet another of this primeval company--
known as the " CATHOLICON " of Johan Balbi de
Janua-which is considered to be the fourth book
printed with a date, two copies of which rarity have
made their appearance recently. This distinguished
work, " The Catholicon, was printed and completed
in the gracious (alma) city of Mayence, of the glorious German nation , in the year of the incarnation of
our Lord, 1460. " This has been styled by an enthusiast, Lambinet, " souscription sublime. "
"The date and place, " says an enthusiastic auctioneer, Evans of Pall Mall, " are sufficient to excite
the curiosity of the collectors of rare and ancient productions of the press. " It is allowed by the most
eminent bibliographers that this is one of the very few
works printed by Gutenberg. It is interesting, too, as
The Mazarin Bible. 31
one of the works of his new press, after Fust had seized
on his presses and established , as Mr. Quaritch says,
"the second printing- office of the world."
Up to the year 1813 not three copies had been
seen in England for fifty years. The paper is of
surprising strength and beauty, making us acknowledge how little has been gained, or rather how much
has been lost, in modern manufacture of this article,
by having recourse to what is called chemical improvements. Mr. Stanley Alchorne, of the Mint, possessed a copy- sold in 1813 for £ 58. Mr. Quaritch,
some seventy years later, was offering " a superb copy
in old calf gilt, with the Royal Arms of Bavaria
stamped in gold on the side, " for £250 ; while at
Sir Mark Sykes's sale, about fifty years ago, it
brought but £50. Strange to say, within the last
four years no less than two copies of this rare book
have appeared. This, of the Syston Park sale,
brought 400 ; the second, at the Woodhull sale
-though boasting "painted capitals and bound
by Roger Payne "-fetched but £ 310.
curious caprice in these prices.
There is a
§ Concerning the Incunables or
Cradle Books.
ANY a "gentle " or unkindly reader,
while feeling due respect for these
antique books, has associated them
with something musty and dusty, something more curious than beautiful—
magis admirandum quam imitandum. A genuine old ecclesiastical library, where all the old calf
volumes are grown rusted and mouldy, with its rows
of vellum - bound things, mainly theological, their
names and titles written in large characters on their
backs, offers but a cheerless spectacle at best. But there are few who have seen and handled the
splendid productions of the first presses. To the
general they are caviare. Fewer will have seen
them when enshrined in some great library, like
that of Althorp, richly bound, waited on by guardians and menials, and sumptuously treated. But even
under less favourable conditions, it is astonishing
what splendid things these works are perfect
works of art, triumphs of unassisted genius, at a
time when everything had to be devised. We look
at them with wonder and admiration, as we would
at some graceful and elegant memorial in some old
Concerning the Incunables or Cradle- Books. 33
Italian city. And here is the further surprise.
While the first printed book of importance takes
rank also for design, execution, excellence of material, and price as one of the great books of the
world, viz. , the Mazarin Bible, all those that followed it within so short a space as twenty years,
are about the noblest, grandest works that ever were issued from the press. Vellum used for paper, with
magnificent effect, or paper almost like vellum in its
size and strength ; large and brilliant type, capitals
rubricated, and wrought by hand with a florid
variety ; other capitals " illuminated " in colours, and
golden miniatures with bindings to match-such were
the glories of the first printed books. Their size
was often two feet high, and as to their number, here is
one significant fact. In the Royal Library at the
Hague there is a collection bequeathed by a Flemish
nobleman, one Baron de Westreenen, and which contains no less than twelve hundred of the rarest
editions, all printed before the close of the fifteenth
century—that is, during the forty years from 1460 to 1500. The works of Virgil in the noblest folio
shape, printed in large type, expands over a vast
surface, and makes a huge volume, printed with
labour and expense : yet a single library-that of
Althorpe-possesses no less than fifteen of these
great Virgils, all printed before the year 1476.
Fifteen great editions of a classic in eight or ten
years ! Again, among the delusions of centuries
one is that we owe the publication of the Bible to the Reformation. But it is a fact that fifty years
before the Reformation there had been issued a
dozen editions in Germany, while over the world it was a favourite " venture " with publishers. Ko
burger issued editions as early as 1476 and 1478.
C
34 Concerning the Incunables or Cradle-Books.
It was natural, after so constant a use of vellum
for MSS. , that the same material should be adopted
for printing. Yet almost at once we find that, in printing the first books, only a portion of the impression was taken off on vellum, and another on paper. Το
the close of the century this practice was adopted,
and hence we find all the collectors of grand editions
disdaining any save those printed in this splendid
and costly form. In Lord Spencer's superb library
there are nearly one hundred of these vellum impressions, worth on an average from two to three
hundred pounds apiece. The National Library at
Paris is said to possess more than any other. The
expense of securing suitable parchment is an element
in the value, together with the difficulty of working,
drying, &c. In modern times we have occasionally
a few copies of small works taken off on vellum, but
this is merely a fantasy, and somehow, from the lean,
attenuated character of modern type, the effect does
not correspond to the trouble. The enthusiast, Dibdin, when publishing the magnificent Typographical Antiquities, on which no money was spared,
determined to have a copy taken off on vellum for
his patron's library, but after printing only twentyfour pages, was compelled to give up the task.
attempted it, " he says, " with every possible attention
to printing and to the material, but I failed at every
point. And this single wretched-looking book," adds
the disgusted bibliophilist, " had I persevered, would have cost me about seventy-five guineas." The
most important and ambitious attempt in this direction was made under the direction of an amateur
whom no one would ever have expected to see
figuring in such a capacity-no other, indeed, than Marshal Junot, Duke d'Abrantes. For this eminent
" I
Concerning the Incunables or Cradle- Books. 35
soldier, Didot, the great publisher, took off a whole
series of French dramatists on this costly material,
over thirty in number. Many have, of course, had
in their hands some small vellum MS. , say a " Book
of Hours, " which, from its small size and liability to
lie open and be crushed, will show much soiling and hard usage. But it is otherwise with a grand vellum
tome that has calmly reposed for centuries in the
libraries, and has been treated daintily, and petted,
as it were. The spreading leaves have acquired a
tone like ivory, and, indeed, seem of the texture of
some precious metal, so stout and enduring do they
appear. They are like veneer of ivory, and there is a golden mellow shaded tone over all. Then the
ink seems blacker, and glistens like polished ebony.
The gold and colours of the illuminated capitals and
borders secure more effect on this ground. There is,
too, the idea of costliness, of endurance, of skill and
care in the working, for the printing requires infinite art and trouble.
What strikes us in these early works is their
magnificent size and grand amplitude. They are.
indeed vast tomes, and it is curious that the first
editions, or Editiones Principes, should be the finest
of any. The publishers, in thus printing but one
to three hundred copies, looked on each volume as
a publication - it was a monument for the public library, or for the wealthy amateur, The miniaturist,
now out of work, was called in to fill up the spaces
left vacant for the initial letters ; while the scrivener,
with extraordinary diligence, " rubricated " each page
with a series of small "caps " done in a flowing,
dashing style, which gave quite a free artistic air to
the whole page. This decoration , while it added
seriously to the expense, imparted a separate indi-
36 Concerning the Incunables or Cradle-Books.
viduality to each copy. The front page was always
specially glorified with a fine border and arabesque
initial, and often had the escutcheon and devices of
the owner set out at the foot in gold and colours.
The sort of link between the fast decaying miniaturists' art and the new-born typographer is curious and
interesting.
In England, Caxton and his successors had not
the same tastes. Their books seemed conceived in
a timorous spirit ; they were small, thin, and comparatively inexpensive ventures, as though they feared
to run risk. Perhaps the truth was that those
splendid foreign publishers, Fust, Gutenberg, Jenson,
Vindelin de Spira, Aldus, Pannartz, with othersand what a melodious roll in their names ! —could
justly count the whole Continent as their customers ;
whereas Caxton, with his English and French works,
could rarely reach beyond the shores of his own country. Even now abroad Caxton's are regarded
with but a languid interest, and do not excite the
enthusiasm that the work of other printers do. The
same reasoning applies at the present time. English
works are printed for the English or Americans,
whereas costly books published at Paris or Berlin
have the world for a market.
It is wonderful to think that every incident connected with the making of a book was to be found
within ten years from the introduction of printing
almost exactly the same as it is now the watermark, the system of noting and registering the sheets,
binding, &c. This grandeur of treatment, which
made a book a sort of monument, left its impression
on the men who conceived and carried out the enterprise. Many a noble tome is associated with a story
of energy, perseverance, or romance connected either
Concerning the Incunables or Cradle- Books. 37
with the author or the publisher. In the days of
Gutenberg, or Vindelin de Spira, curious tales have
come down to us of struggles to raise money to complete some huge tome, as though one were striving to
complete a house. As is well known, the founders
of printing had to suffer cruelly. The story of the
publisher's life has often been told, always chequered
with a dogged perseverance, a generous ardour, if not
enthusiasm, aventuresomeness, combined with tact and instinct. All this seems to suggest the career of a
successful merchant.
The supremacy of German energy and enterprise
has never been so triumphantly shown as in this development of printing, and the obligations of the
world to this great nation are extraordinary. The
old controversy between Mentz and Haarlem for the
honour of the discovery may be considered as settled
in favour of the German ; but it is really the German
character of the early printing that is the most irresistible ofthe arguments. * It is calculated that there
* It is not known generally what escapes from destruction some of the MSS, of the classics have had. In a dungeon at the monastery of St. Gall, a writer in The Fireside tells us Poggio found, corroded with damp and covered with filth , the great work of Quintilian. In Westphalia a monk stumbled acci- dentally on the only manuscript of Tacitus. The poems of Propertius were found under the casks in a wine-cellar. In a
few months the manuscript would have crumbled to pieces and become completely illegible . Parts of Homer have come to light in the most extraordinary way. A considerable portion of the Iliad, for instance, was found in the hand of a mummy.
The Ethiopics of Heliodorus was rescued by a common
soldier, who found it in the streets of a town in Hungary. The Thurloe State Papers were brought to light by the tumbling in ofthe ceiling of some chambers in Lincoln's Inn. Theletters of Lady Mary Montagu were found in the false bottom of an old trunk ; and inthe secret drawer of a chestthe curious manuscripts of Dr. Leelurked unsuspected for years. One of the most singular discoveries of this kind was the recovery of Luther's " Table.
38 Concerning the Incunables or Cradle-Books.
were over one hundred German printers established
in the great cities of Europe within forty years of the
discovery of printing. In Venice and in Rome we
find the names of some twenty great German printers.
More interesting is it to see how native force is thus
tempered by local association and Italian elegance.
Thus as we look at one of those portly Bibles of
Koburger, the Nuremberg printer, issued in 1478 and 1480, we are struck with their rude stalwart
proportions, the rough stoutness of the paper, the vigorous "blackletter, " and blackness of the ink.
The leaves lie in close together, board- like and compact. There is a general air of " burliness," owing
to a lack of proportion between the thickness and other dimensions. But when we come to the work
of Pannartz at Rome, or Jenson at Venice, we find
a greater delicacy. The paging is laid out with more
beauty and elegance, and the size of the volume more
handsomely proportioned.
We are so accustomed now to this " Roman type "
—almost always in use in England, France, and Italy
—that we are apt to forget that the Germans to this
day have merely retained what was originally the
universal form of type, viz. , the smaller blackletter,
or "German text, " though it has lately become the
Talk. " A gentleman in 1626 had occasion to build upon the old foundation of a house. When the workmen were engaged in digging, they found, " lying in a deep obscure hole, wrapped in strong linen cloth which was waxed all over with beeswax within and without, " this work, which had lain concealed ever since its suppression by Pope Gregory XIII. We are told that one of the cantos of Dante's Paradiso , which had long been mislaid, was drawn from its lurking-place (it had slipped beneath a window- sill) in consequence of an intimation received in a dream. One ofthe most interesting of Milton's prose works-the essay on the Doctrines of Christianity-was unearthed from the midst of a
bundle of despatches, by Mr. Lemon, deputy-keeper of the State Papers, in 1823.
Concerning the Incunables or Cradle- Books. 39
fashion to issue scientific works in the Roman letter.
The earliest printed works, such as the famous Bible,
were in the elongated blackletter, which speedily
took the shape of the small German text, as we have
it to day, and which in that country has scarcely
changed in shape to this hour. It was so in Italy,
Belgium, and England. In the latter country the
old blackletter lingered on in Acts of Parliament
till a recent period. The bright, stout blackletter
of Caxton was almost the same as that used in
Belgium, and was brought by him from that country,
and became larger and longer in the hands of
Wynkyn de Worde.
It will not, perhaps, occur to many that these early
forms of type were merely copies or imitations ofthe
existing handwriting, as found in the MSS. Italy
was the first to adopt another form of letter, which
it had ready to hand in the abundant Roman inscriptions, said to be first used by the " eminent firm " of
Sweynheim, in 1467. It is wonderful to think that
only two years' practice should have resulted in the
magnificent works of the Brothers de Spira, which
shows a perfect familiarity with the handling of this
new-born type. More wonderful, indeed, is it to turn
the pages of their great Pliny, and think that the
style of type displayed was but two years old. The
well-known Aldine type-the original "Italic "-
was simply copied from the " running-hand " of the
time ; and it is said that it was Petrarch's handwriting
that formed the model. These elegant works deserve
their reputation, and the little thin quartos, with the
well-known anchor on the title, the pretty turns and
flourishes of the italic letter, are ever pleasing to the
eye. The greater massive folios of the same pub.
lisher-ponderous armfuls, each page " packed " with
40 Concerning the Incunables or Cradle- Books.
matter, yet clear and uncrowded-impress one with the sense of a magnificent power. We feel that one
of these grand volumes was a storehouse or magazine
of learning. It was to its surroundings what the
chained Bible was in the church—a tome to be read
from, for the benefit of all.
But would we dazzle the careless inquirer, and
show him one of the stateliest, most imposing efforts
of the early press men, we would exhibit two noble
tomes, grand folios, the work of Zainer, grown ripe
and mellow with age, though literally defying “ the ravages of time. " It came from his press, in
1474, and is a “ Pelagius de Planctu, ” “ thick Royal
folio." Here is Mr. Ridler's enthusiastic description :
" As large as the Nuremberg Chronicle, blackletter,
with woodcut borders, and large capital letters, supposed to be the first of their kind ever engraved.
SPLENDID COPY, the capitals filled in with red ink by
the rubricator, with old blue morocco extra, full gilt
back by Derome. A more glorious production of
the fifteenth century, or a more beautiful specimen
of early typography it would be impossible to produce. It is in the finest state imaginable, the paper
is of the firmest texture, and as clean as on the day
that it was issued from the press : it is so large a copy
that it might almost be emphatically called UNCUT.
—Thorpe's long printed article is inserted on fly.
leaf, which copy was priced £31 , 10s. ” As these
grand volumes are taken down and laid open reverently, we are struck by the beautiful proportions,
the noble margins of the natural size—not artificially
or studiously made large, the dazzling brilliancy of
the Gothic letters, the sobriety of the binding, and
the curious woodcuts flourishing around the capital
letters, delicately coloured by some artist,
Concerning the Incunables or Cradle- Books . 41
It would not be fanciful to say that the possession of such a treasure would have an elevating and
refining influence, and one would be almost bound,
like the possessor of the old china teapot, "to try
and live up to it."
One of the rarest of the early Greek books is the
" Lascaris Grammatica Græca, " thefirst Greek book
printed, the first edition, which is a small quarto,
printed at Milan 1476. Only five or six copies are
known. The one in the British Museum was picked
up by Mr. Pryse Lockhart Gordon in 1800 for his
friend Dr. Burney, and was after his death sold to
the British Museum for the extraordinary price of
£600.
As one dwells on these grand books and grand
printers, we seem to be dealing critically with pictures or other works of art. But it should be remembered that almost every copy thus had an individuality of its own, and was distinguishable, having
been " worked on, " decorated, and otherwise glorified
as a true work of art. There are, however, some
half-dozen grandly conspicuous works of this era,
which it is impossible to gaze on without admiration.
Apartfrom their typographical merits, there is a strange
feeling in the thought that these noble tomes are the
very first editions of Homer, Virgil, Horace, Dante,
and among them is the book that is second only in
popularity to the Bible, " The Imitation of Christ. "
It is extraordinary to think that these noble volumes
-the first appearance of their authors in printremain, strange to relate, the most dignified forms.
in which they have ever appeared. They are grand,
solid, substantial, well printed, and well edited (for
the time). Hear Mr. Quaritch on one of these
primæval volumes for which he demands the sum of
42 Concerning the Incunables or Cradle- Books.
one thousand pounds :-" Its first page," he said,
"is decorated with a magnificent border, on which
architectories and arabesque ornament are combined,
with exquisite figures of winged and wingless angels,
those in the bottom painted with camien blue, the
whole picture radiant with gold and lovely with harmonising colours of floreate scroll-work and ornamental vases, with entwined handles in green on a
gold ground. The initial to the first book "—and
this gives a good idea of the magnificent style in
which the threshold to one of these stately tomes
was decorated- " was a full-length figure of a warrior,
in pale blue, in a floreate letter in crimson, on a
golden ground ; in the centre of the right-hand margin
was a highly- finished miniature of a doge ; in the
corner a coat of arms upheld by Cupids -while some
of the epitomes were written in blue and gold. " There
is many an opening page thus set forth in this combination of pictorial and typographical splendour.
A short time ago Mr. Quaritch was in possession
of more book rarities than ever were found in the
hands of one single owner before. He was fresh from
the spoil of the Sunderland, Syston Park, Beckford
and Hamilton sales. There were to be seen the
Mazarin Bible, Psalter, Codex (before described) ,
and, above all, the first of the classics that was put
in print, namely, the Cicero of 1465. It is extraordinary all that is conveyed in this simple phrase,
for it was not only the first printed Cicero, but the
first of the classics printed. Then we turn the
catalogue of the British Museum, under the heading
"Cicero," and find some thousand editions. What a
leap ! He had also the first editions of Livy, and of
Bibles the first Polyglot, the first Greek Bible, the
first English, Latin, German, Icelandic, Swedish,
Concerning the Incunables or Cradle- Books. 43
Welsh, and American- Indian ; nine Caxtons ; the
(rarissimus) Boke of St. Albans ; the Shakespeare,
folio, fifteen of the quartos ; the first edition of
Don Quixote ; Blake's Works and other rarities,
to say nothing of all the great binding masters, and
a host of books that had belonged to kings and
queens.
Ofthe finest and most " desirable " of these patriarchs, and rarest of rare Aldines, is the Virgil of 1501 ,
an ordinary octavo of no striking merit. But mark !
" It is," says Mr. Quaritch, offering a copy,
" the first
book printed in italic type by Aldus Romanus,
slightly wormed, else good copy, in red Italian calf
extra, borders of gold, gilt edges. To find the first
Aldine Virgil in perfect condition is almost hopeless.
Neither Mr. Beckford nor the Duke of Hamilton,
who would have become purchasers at any price,
could ever secure even tolerable copies, those occurring for sale being defective. " A sad state of things,
but warranting the seller in asking for his small octavo
£112. But this should be further noted. Even in
these pristine days the forger and imitator was at
work, and so desired and " desirable " was the Aldine
octavo that there was issued at Lyons, to meet the
demand : " The Aldine Counterfeit, with facsimiles of
the title and last leaf of the real Aldine Edition, probably to pass it off for the original, the book being perfect without that imprint, red morocco extra, gilt edges,
with Aldine anchor in gold on sides, 1501 , £ 15, 15s. ”
This volume was the first issued by the Lyonese
forgers in imitation of the Aldine type, and is perhaps
quite as rare, if not even rarer, than the original.
Bishop Butler's copy sold for £22.
The next desirable of these grand old monuments
is the Livy of the De Spiras of Venice, issued in the
44 Concerning the Incunables or Cradle- Books.
year 1470 in two great felio volumes. Everything
stately and beautiful seems to have been lavished on
these noble tomes. Dibdin's tongue seems to " grow
wanton ” in their praise. " This great printer, ” he
exclaims, “ is praised , not because he produced many
volumes, but because he gave the world what was the
most beautiful and best. ” This was a work of supreme
rarity ; on vellum, probably not more than three copies
are known. It was one of the most superb works
offered at all the recent sales. It was arrayed in
contemporary oaken binding, covered with stamped.
leather, the first page of each volume exquisitely illuminated in choicest Italian style, and each chapter
heading illuminated in gold and colours. Well kept
and taken care of through four long centuries , richly
yet soberly dressed, these treasures repay the kindness with which they are treated, and might be well
enshrined in cabinets.
The sense of possession adds hugely to the power
of enjoyment of such treasures. Shown so rare a
volume in another's library, there is not time leisurely
to weigh and appreciate its merits . Somehow a book
in a public library seems to be beyond sympathies.
It is under government, under the care of officials—
not to be handled tenderly by one kind and anxious
master. When it is your own, however, you can cultivate its acquaintance day by day, and get to know it .
But to these grand “ Incunables " or Cradle- Books,
with their miniatures and capitals glowing with gold
and colours , the ordinary book forager hardly dare
raise his eyes. He may handle at auction-rooms
Jenson's Pliny-the " glory of his press ; " but £35,
the price at the Woodhull sale , is too vast. The companion Pliny of the Venetian De Spiras seems a
nobler and rarer volume, worth pausing over a few
Concerning the Incunables or Cradle- Books. 45
moments as it strikes the spectator with more astonishment and admiration than any other work of its
day. It would be difficult to give an idea of its sumptuous and noble aspect. It is one of the monumental
works, and might be laid apart by itself, on a great
reading-desk, as though it were a Bible or Missal.
There was a copy on vellum with " painted capitals "
in the Sunderland sale which fetched £82 ; but Jenson's Pliny at the same sale, in its blue morocco
jacket, brought no less than £220 !
One day exploring the shelves of a favourite old
book shop in Holywell Street, and groping in the dim
mysterious light within, I came upon a maimed imperfect copy of this De Spira Pliny. Leaves were
wanting at the end, it was grievously mauled and
soiled in places, and it was execrably clothed, by
some profane vandal of an owner, in the commonest
of modern jacket-oh ! vile profanity ! -in "half calf," with marble paper sides ! But there was still
left many a painted capital, richly dight, though many
a one had been cut out-beautifully designed things
-the larger letter in burnished gold, brighter even
than it was 420 years ago, and encircled with lacertine devices of an Irish pattern. These, I was
assured, if " cut out " and sold separately for mounting in books, would have brought money as little
works of art ! The glory of the whole, however, was
the front page-the threshold of the volume-encircled by a florid bordering with burnished gold and
flowers and arabesque. The date of this huge volume
was 1469, and it was to be noted that the leaves
were without numbers, but a scribe had placed a
number at the head of each page. More curious
still, as Greek characters had not then come into
use, and words in Roman letters were used cor-
46 Concerning the Incunables or Cradle- Books.
responding to the sound ; exactly as Jenkinson is
described in the " Vicar of Wakefield," when quoting
his cosmogony. Rudely handled as it had been,
I was glad to carry the old tome home, to pour oil into and bind up his wounds. He became mine for
something about three pounds, which it was well
worth. It is pleasant and refreshing to take him out
occasionally, and think of the eyes and hands of 420
years ago. Not less pleasant is it to show it to a
visitor as an illustration of what could be done in
those days. His surprise is great, for he expects
some rude and clumsy effort. Such "a find " as
this more than rewards the book fancier. But all the
De Spira books-and they are very few-have this
elegant and romantic air.
§ De the Elzevirs, Plantins, and
Did Printers.
CCASIONALLY in his wanderings the
old- book collector turns up in the book
boxes laid out at the stall-door a likely
compact little volume, about the size of
a small Prayer-book, but prettily printed
in close but brilliant type. This is an Elzevir, a
charming little pattern of book, full of artistic merit
in its title-page, " colophon," and in its paper, print,
and legibility everything that can be desired. This
famous house was a family of printers for many
generations, and flourishing for nearly a century and
a half. It began with Louis Elzevir, who was followed
by Bonaventure, Abraham, Isaac, and others. They
were originally fixed at Leyden, and a great deal of
their work was the routine University business, the
printing of theses, examination papers, and books
necessary for education. They afterwards moved to
Amsterdam, whence the more familiar imprint, Daniel
and Louis Elzevir, was issued. In time business
gradually fell away, owing to the neglect of members
of the firm, and it was noted that their works became
as remarkable for misprints and general carelessness
as they had before been for scrupulous accuracy.
48 The Elzevirs, Plantins, and Old Printers.
Towards the close of the seventeenth century they
ceased to work, or adopted the modern principle of
getting other printers to do their books for them.
What first brought them into notice was the simple
innovation of issuing small and portable editions of
the classics, instead of the vast and ponderous folios
formerly thought de rigueur. They went to the
opposite extreme, issuing little miniature volumes
handy and elegant. They brought thought, money,
and toil to the task, which was of enormous difficulty,
for such compression, as we have seen , might necessitate small and illegible type ; but they contrived by
the clearness and beauty of their letters, and by
bringing the rules of art and proportion to bear, to furnish all that could be desired. They imported
the finest French paper, and employed a skilful engraver, C. Van Dyck, to design their types ; and the
beauty of their work, and its hearty appreciation,
shows that their labour was not thrown away.
painter Meissonier has devoted himself to small
cabinet pieces, worked with an almost photographic
minuteness, yet it has been remarked that there is as
much dignity and " largeness " in the effect as if it
was on a great scale. There is much the same
result in this kind of printing , which, without art and
taste, becomes mean, petty, and unpleasant to look
at. The secret seems to be in avoiding the excessive
" spacing," or intervals between words and letters ,
which is supposed to give clearness. The letters are
put closely together, and each word has a massive
air. Again, each letter is well designed and has a
characteristic of its own, and there is an avoidance
of those unmeaning hair- strokes now fashionable.
There were also a great number of shapes of letters
and pretty forms which lent a variety. Above all,
The
The Elzevirs, Plantins, and Old Printers. 49
the paper was close and strong, ivory tinted , and velvety to the touch.
There are three little works, which are considered
their chefs d'œuvres, namely, the Pliny, the Terence,
and the Virgil. These bring great prices ; but the
eager connoisseur looks jealously at the Terence to see that it is the genuine first edition. For two followed which are held to be spurious ; that is, they
were issued bona fide by the firm and reprinted line
for line, but the old engraved title was used again to
save expense, and without alteration in the date.
The paper, of Angoulême make, for the three little
books was exquisite, and used in no others, which,
cries an enthusiast, "turns what is simply silver into
pure gold. " * Some idea of the operations of this great firm may be conceived from the list of their
works, which reach to some hundreds, including all
the Latin, French, and Italian classics, besides a
vast number of light and curious books of the belleslettres class. Here we find Rabelais, plays of Molière and Corneille, the " Provincial Letters, " books of
controversy, and some not very proper books.
few are ridiculously recherché. At one time it was
assumed that a reprint of a French cookery-book, the
"Pastissier Français," was truly " precious " and one
of the greatest rarities. It may be said, en parenthèse,
that this sort of rarity is often the creation of some
A
So with the Virgils, which a passage from Mr. Quaritch shows us how to distinguish. " VIRGILII OPERA, 12mo. The
genuine edition, with the two passages in red and buffalo head on dedication, vita and page 1 , fine copy, ruled, in red morocco, gilt edges, by Roger Payne. Lugd. Bat. Elzevir,
1636. -Also VIRGILII OPERA. The reprint with the two pas- sages in black, buffalo head only on the dedication and the errata.
fine copy, ruled, in red morocco, gilt edges by Roger Payne,
Lugd. Bat. Elzevir, 1636. " For the first twelve guineas were asked ; for the second , only four.
D
50 The Elzevirs, Plantins, and Old Printers.
rich bibliomaniac, who officiously announces that the
case is so, or gives some large price, which leads
eventually into the domain of ridiculous and fantastic
cravings, when the poor sufferer is more fit for restraint than many a regular Bedlamite.
There has at times been a "rage " for Elzevirs
akin to the Dutch tulip mania, but extending
only to the choice and rare copies, whose margins
were nicely measured in millimetres ; such as the
Montaigne, in three volumes, "thick 12mo "—it
is recorded that Beckford's copy sold for £200, and Benzon's for more. Wonderful to relate, a copy,
"6
a large tall one, " and bound by Courteval, and
whose only blemish was being " slightly wormed,"
could lately have been had for three guineas. These
fluctuations are marvellous. The craze will comeagain,
nay, is likely to come speedily. There is a literature
on this subject, and the History of the Firm, with
grave learned disquisitions on the merits of their
books, lists of every work, duly catalogued , has been
written several times. The judicious collector can
even now secure, at very low prices, charming specimens ofthese famous printers.
The fashion in which one or two of these little
volumes have attained celebrity has been revealed
to us. Thus of the "Pastissier François," one of
the oldest cookery-books, it is said that a bibliographer named Bérard was the first to give it a
reputation by declaring that he knew of only two
copies in the world ! Instantly the cry of rarity was
raised, with the result that in 1843 nearly ten copies
were discovered, while a later writer was enabled to
count up no less than thirty or forty ! Still this is
about the same proportion to existing demand as
the two copies were fifty or sixty years ago, and even
The Elzevirs, Plantins, and Old Printers. 51
now the matter is brought to a fair tert in a copy
being offered at the choice and wonderful sale of the
Syston Park Library, when two copies were sold at moderate prices.
The little Elzevir Cicero is also much sought.
But have a care, stall-fancier ! for some are printed
on a fine paper, the others on an inferior paper.
These little books are actually appraised by measurement, the finest copies, we are told, being from 132
138 millimetres high. Count D'Hoym, whose golden
library-stamp on the side of a book adds an infinite
value, was the blessed possessor of a copy bound by
Padeloup, and which sold for £400 ! Charles Nodier
tells us that the genuine Elzevir of the old catalogues
is beyond all price when it is large. Ahair's-breadth increases its value in the proportion of carats in the
case of diamonds. "We have seen, " he tells us, 66
Cicero, bound by Derome, sell for 600 francs, while next it was another scarcely worth 60 francs. In
this increase 300 francs was put on for three breadths
of white paper, and 240 francs for the binding. "
a
At this moment I have in my hand one of their
typographical feats, a small edition of Livy, to be
carried in the pocket. It is of 12mo size, and
the modern printer would lift up his eyes in wonder
at the problem successfully solved of compressing
into so small a space, as to be read with ease, the
contents of the vast closely printed folios which this
voluminous author fills. There are nearly 800 pages,
and each page contains 144 lines, or about 850 words. When it is considered that an octavo of our
day, with a well- filled page, contains about 30
lines, or 300 words, it will be seen what a feat has
been here accomplished. Yet the whole is brilliant,
clear, and can be read with comfort by ordinary
52 The Elzevirs, Plantins, and Old Printers.
eyes. The effect is very different from those painful
"diamond " editions which used to be issued by a
few of our publishers. The little thing which I possess is charming in every way, bound exquisitely in solid Mazarin blue morocco.
There is one antique printing house still standing,
whose history and associations add to the romance
of books. In the old printing city of Antwerp, close
to one of the new Boulevards, is an old, iron - grey,
picturesque building, with a tranquil air of monastic retirement ; not, too, without architectural merit.
This, for the visitor of taste, is the " sight " in the old
town which leaves the most pleasing agreeable impressions. It is the Plantin Museum, the offices of a
great printing firm that flourished for a couple of
centuries. Their chief function was supplying the
ecclesiastical world with those fine quarto missals
and office- books, printed in cheerful red and black,
which are still often found in old chapels and monasteries. Gradually the business decayed, though
it was continued until a recent period. The old offices
were left deserted until some amateurs, true artists,
exerted themselves to have the place purchased for
the town and preserved.
Theeffect of the grave, solemn place is extraordinary.
There is a strange tranquillity, a church-like shade,
that we never can forget. Never was printing so
housed before. The charming, spacious courtyard ; its
mullioned windows, struggling with leaves and nearly
obscured ; the creepers , the old vines, the ' scutcheon
-all on the iron -grey background-leave a soft contemplative impression . A Renaissance colonnade on
one side suggests some of the colleges at Cambridge.
"The aspect of this place, " as has been truly said,
"imprints a lasting impression on the mind of the
The Elzevirs, Plantins, and Old Printers. 53
thinker and artist. " The noise of the world outside
cannot penetrate to this solitude ; and yet it is not
the solitude of desolation, but an isolation which
invites meditation. Time has indeed left his mark,
but has altered nothing and destroyed nothing. This
is no exaggeration, and many a traveller wearied with
the official shows of the Flemish town has testified
to the extraordinary and ever- enticing charm of the
old printing-office . We enter to the same solemnity ;
the shade awaits us within , in the suitable halls rather
than rooms, through whose diamond- paned windows
the light comes shaded by the vines.
Here everything is preserved as if from yesterday
-the old " formes, " the black oaken desks, the types
and woodblocks, as if the workmen had but just gone
away. In these halls the dim light comes through
the diapered frames, and the greenery of the court flutters before the windows. It seems some old
monastic retreat. Our thoughts fly back to the
modern Babel of a printing-room, with the whirling
wheels , the noise of the machine, the white walls,
and the general manufacturing air. But here there
is the grey and revered tone of age ; and so completely in order is everything, that one almost expects
in a moment to hear the old bell ring out, the
tranquil dream to come to an end, and to find the
Plantin workmen busy once more at their cases and
"pulling proofs " at the old presses. The whole
is certainly unique.
The work-rooms have a charm and grace that
must have lent a dignity to the work, and are decorated with medallions, escutcheons, paintings, and
other ornaments of the most refined and pleasing
style. Plantin was the great Catholic printer, as
the Elzevirs were the great Protestant printers, and
54 The Elzevirs, Plantins, and Old Printers.
the works of both reflected these influences. From
the former presses issued all the grand missals and
prayer-books and religious works, while invocations
to the Blessed Virgin and pious inscriptions graced
the rooms in which the work was carried on. The
Elzevir presses groaned with fierce controversy and
abundant attacks on the old faith. The productions
of both were almost on a level for typographical
merit ; but the Elzevir press has obtained a far
higher reputation among book amateurs. The old
presses, standing idle, but in excellent order, are
notable for a certain artistic elegance of design and
construction, and one is amazed at their number : in
one room there being more than twenty-two. In the
correctors' room—a noble apartment, where once
Moretus, Rapheling, and Lipsius, all scholars, sat and worked —the drawers are filled with corrected
sheets and old authors' manuscript, the furniture and
armoires are all of fine design and solid make, and
it is to be noted that the correctors sat upon a high
platform to pursue their labours. It is a chamber
worthy of the dignity of the calling, and very different from the little " den " so often allotted to
that functionary with us. Upstairs there is the foundry, with the furnaces, the stores of matrices and
type, and vast masses of woodblocks : three thousand for a single book, The History of Plants,
reaching to some fifteen thousand in all. The curious
have noted among the type some few of silver,
thus giving support to what has been often stated,
that certain books, either Plantins or Elzevirs, have
been printed with silver type. This might seem a
rather convincing proof of the fact, for to have cast
only a few letters of this precious material would be
unmeaning. The probability is that on ceasing
The Elzevirs, Plantins, and Old Printers. 55
business the silver type must have been taken away
and sold or melted down. Otherwise it would
have been like leaving so much money among the
types.
Though their list of works printed is not nearly so
abundant as that of the Elzevirs, it must be remembered it was a far older firm, and began its labours about 1555. Its grandest achievement was the
great Polyglot Bible, in seven large volumes, and in
five languages, Greek, Latin, Hebrew, Chaldaic, and
Syriac. This was attempted in 1573, under the
direction and patronage of Philip II . of Spain,
and at his cost. Such a work nowadays would
tax the energies of our most important printers, and
it may be imagined how difficult it was to secure
competent workmen equal to the duty of setting up
such " outlandish " dialects. And yet it was accomplished in splendid style, in the course of only four
years, employing the labour of forty men. The cost
too was comparatively small, 40,000 crowns, or
£10,000, equivalent, we may suppose, to about
£20,000 in our day.
Combined with the printing-office was the dwellinghouse of the family, which is exactly as it was in
their day, with its rich yet chaste furniture, fine pictures, manuscript, and other treasures. The old
printer who produced such grand works was an
interesting and even heroic person ; the bringing out
of some of his great folios was an enterprise-like
launching a ship. He laid all his energies to the
work, was often in straits for means to complete it :
had to encounter jealousies and hatred, desertion
and rivalries. He seemed to be carried through,
inspired by a genuine faith and enthusiasm, as though
it were a solemn thing to introduce one of these
56 The Elzevirs, Plantins, and Old Printers.
great things into the world. There was infinite
thought, labour, and cost in the planning of such
books, with also much anxiety and distress.
Such was the old printer's life-something of an
art for the workman brought with his strong arms
and delicate touch a certain individual feeling . Many
a compositor, as in the case of Franklin, would
"set " the type of a book entirely by himself or
aided by a companion : the pressman as he " pulled "
the sheets made the task an individual, or separate
art, carefully scanning and correcting defects for the
next effort. He therefore strictly " printed " the book.
So the work went on tranquilly and leisurely in the
sober and comparatively silent buildings ; the Leyden
scholars, sitting upstairs each in their calm retirement, officiating as " correctors. " Now for a curious
contrast, when we change the scene after an interval
of say two hundred years.
It is the afternoon of a busy London day, and we
turn out of Fleet Street into Bouverie Street, lined
with ranges of great factories, all blackened and
grimed, the rows of windows incrusted with the dirt
of years. Nothing here but gloom. The cross lanes
that join this street to its parallel neighbours are
also lined with the factory buildings, behind which
peeps up a stunted chimney belching rolls of smoke.
Strange Cimmerian regions these—men in dirty caps
and blackened arms hurry to and fro, and stray about
the doors. The ground throbs, and in the cellars the
pulses of engines beat. The perpetual clank, clank,
clatter of "the machine " strikes the ear from all
sides. Flywheels whirl, the presses strike and crash,
and it seems a matter of labour, and often pain, to get
an impression or " proof. " For this is modern Printing
Land, where the newspapers with " largest circulation
The Elzevirs, Plantins, and Old Printers. 57
in the world," &c. , are engendered, books struck off
at white heat, great ink-rollers glisten with jet ink,
cobra-like ; drying, boilers, flywheels, engines so many
horse-power, men and boys like imps ; and the " fair,
white," unsoiled paper-one of the most delicate
things-is produced, odd indeed ! by such agents.
Within nought but bare white-washed walls ; the
composing-room a vast cheerless factory, where there
seems a sense of huddle and little ease ; foremen seeming to work under temporary conditions, in accommodation knocked up, as it were ; corrector hard by,
in a rudely got-up enclosure ; a tortuous stair, like
that of the gallery of a theatre, perpetually promenaded up and down by the blackened boys and men
aforesaid ; pots of beer going up ; a man keeping the
" times" of the men in a little sentry-box hutch !
Here is a suggestion of the " behind the scenes " in
some great theatre ; the rudely whitened walls, the
revolving wheels aloft - ropes, " belts," &c. , helping the idea. Here, as by necessity, everything is
wrought by "the machine ; " the boy stands at its
mouth to " feed " it, the great white sheet is swept
in, tossed out in a half second at the other end
printed ; nay, the setting, though done by fingers, is
under machine influence, for the " copy" is cut into
short slips, and a column distributed among a score,
regardless of sense or sentence. What a contrast this
to the old printers and their art! Yet this change
is unavoidable, " cannot be helped, " under the conditions ; being, moreover, a wonderful spectacle of
energy, "saving of labour," and unrest.
How often the character of the old printer seemed
to answer to his work ! The more eminent have invariably been men of force of character, " adventurers,"
as it were, and of a life that interests all. This may
58 The Elzevirs, Plantins, and Old Printers.
come of the speculative cast that attends this venture,
the need for sagacity and for making a coup. Their lives have been not without romance-there is something in the tone of the " chapel "—the intercourse
with their authors—the busy workmen—that tends
to this. The story of the very first of them all,
Gutenberg, is a sad one of struggle and fortitude.
How interesting and even exciting is that of the
Italian Aldine family, and that of the French Stephens,
the Elzevirs, and Plantins ! In England, too, the story
of Caxton is full of interest ; while in modern times
we have the spirited careers of the Tonsons, Dodsleys, Strahans , Baskervilles, Boydells ; while the history of the Ballantynes and Archibald Constable lends
much that is dramatic to the life of Scott. In our day
the story of the Chambers's ( Robert and William),
Black, and Macmillan have been all told at length.
The printers associated with Boswell and Johnson
acquire a charming and original interest. So with
the Dillys, Charles and Edward, the hospitable entertainers of Wilkes, and Johnson, and Bowyer. *
There is always an interest in the hard-working,
painstaking, never- flagging " reader," who sits up
* A good tradition is handed down of the amiable delusion under which amateur writers labour as to the cost, sale, &c. , of their productions. A simple country clergyman had written a
sermon, in which he had exceeding faith , and came up specially to London to arrange for its publication. He waited on the worthy Bowyer, who was of the old type of publisher. The vicar was poor, but full of enthusiasm. The publisher asked him how many copies he would have taken off. " Why, sir, "
replied the vicar, " I have calculated that there are in the king- dom so many thousand parishes, and that, at the lowest com- putation, each parish will take at least one copy, and others more, so that I think we may venture to print thirty-five thousand,
or say thirty-six thousand copies. " The printer listened gravely,
the matter was arranged, and the vicar returned to his parish.
After waiting impatiently two months for the piece to get into fair circulation, he wrote for the account of sales , adding, how-
The Elzevirs, Plantins, and Old Printers. 59
aloft, anywhere or anyhow, and does his work. Of
him it was written : -
"His brain must be cool,
As an eagle his sight ;
And chained to a stool From morning till night,
He must read and correct
Typographical matters,
Taking care to detect All the wrong fonts and batters.
He who seeks for the place Must have worked at case, '
Must be also well up ' in typography ;
Of each science and art Must at least know a part :
Must be thoroughly versed in geography.
German- French- Latin -Greek He must read (if not speak),
Must of course be a thorough grammarian,
ever, that there was no hurry as to the cash settlement. He
received in reply the following account : -
" The Rev.
By sale of 17 copies of Sermon By printing, paper, &c . , 35,000 copies
Balance due to Printer
Cr.
5
6
785 5 6
• £784 0 0"
In a day or two followed another letter from the worthy pub- lisher, who was a good-hearted man.
I
" DEAR SIR, I beg pardon for innocently amusing myself at your expense ; but you need give yourself no uneasiness.
knew better than you could do the extent of the sale of single sermons, and accordingly printed but 50 copies, to the expense of which you are heartily welcome, in return for the liberty I
have taken with you, " &c.
Thus was the poor vicar relieved . Yet those who take a cynical view of human nature and of authors' vanity, might be inclined to add a sequel , viz. , the second thoughts of the disappointed vicar, when wounded vanity might begin to take effect. If a
larger number had been put into circulation , as he had directed,
why, the sermon might have sold. The publisher might surely have pushed it , instead of taking on himself to extinguish the work so effectually.
60 The Elzevirs, Plantins, and Old Printers.
Quite aufait to the rules Ofthe various ' schools, '
Not merely an Abecedarian.
Then he'll read-read-read ,
Till his eyes grow weary and dim,
And read-read - read,
Till exhausted in every limb,
'Midst the clamour of boys,
Interruption and noise ;
The uproarious revels Ofyoung Printer's Devils. '
Pray, how should you like to be HIM? "
How this useful being pursues his monotonous
functions is shown in a pleasant sketch by a once
popular writer :-
"While the ' reader,' " says Sir F. Head, " is seated
in his cell, there stands beside him a small intelligent
boy who is, in fact, the reader-that is to say, he reads
aloud from the manuscript while the man pores upon
and corrects the corresponding print. This child—
for such he is in comparison with the age of the master
he serves cannot be expected to take any more interest in the heterogeneous mass of literature he emits
than the little marble cupids in Italy can be supposed
to relish the water which is made to everlastingly
stream from their mouths. In our cell we find the
boy reading aloud to his patron a work or paragraphs
in the French language, which he had never learned,
and which, therefore, he was thus most ludicrously
pronouncing, as if written in English : Less ducks
knee sonte pass, ' &c. (i.e. , ' Les ducs ne sont pas,' &c. )
To the ' reader's ' literary ears this must have been
almost as painful as is to common nerves the cutting
of a saw ; yet he patiently listened, and laboriously
proceeded with his task."
Whenthe "proof" is returned to the compositor,
he amends it, and from it is printed another impres-
The Elzevirs, Plantins, and Old Printers. 61
sion, which is styled a " clean proof," also "author's
proof," which is sent to the author, and if he on reading it has no occasion to make many alterations, he
may not think it necessary to require another proof
(or "revise," as it is termed) , in which case he writes
the word " Press " upon it ; and having been finally
"read " in the office, it is then printed off. But when
the author or editor makes on it any alterations or
amendments, the compositor is paid for the time
occupied in so rearranging the type. Stower adds
that if errors be discovered when it is too late to
have them corrected, then the word " Press " is to
the "reader" as the signature of the death-warrant of
his reputation. It is absolutely required, therefore,
that a "reader " should be a man of one businessalways on the alert—all eye-all attention. It was
a saying of Godeau, a bishop of France (ob. 1671 ),
that to compose was an author's heaven, to correct
his proofs an author's purgatory, but to correct for press an author's hell.
The following account of the various types will be found useful. These are double pica, paragon, great
primer, English, pica, small pica, long primer, bourgeois, canon, brevier, minion, nonpareil, ruby, pearl,
diamond, and brilliant. Pica, from being used in the
pica or liturgy of the Church, was called by the French
and Germans Cicero, the epistles of that writer being
first done in them. Brevier had its name from being
used for the Roman breviary. The French call it
little text, and the Germans maiden letter. Canon
was first produced by the French for works relating
to the canons of the Church, to which the German
title missal alludes. It came into use about 1695.
Bourgeois also came from France, where it is called
gaillarde, and was dedicated to the master printers
62 The Elzevirs, Plantins, and Old Printers.
there. It first appeared about 1529. Office- books
of prayer suggested primer (from primarius), some- times called Bible text. Great primer is the largest
type ever used for books. The French call it Great
Roman. English (or Old English-so called from
its having been used in early times for printing our
books of laws, statutes, &c. —one of the founts known
among printers as " blacks ") , is called bythe Germans
mittel (by the French and Dutch St. Augustin, that
saint's writings being first produced with it) . Small
pica is called brevier by the Germans, and philosophie
by the French. Longprimer is called Little Roman
by the French, the Germans Corpus, it having been first used for printing the Corpus Juris. Unionpearl is a letter of fancy created somewhat past the middle of the eighteenth century. It is said to have
received this name from the pearls which grow in
couples, to which the nodules in the letters were conceived to bear some resemblance. Paragon, or
"perfect pattern, " which the word implies, happening
to turn out a well-shaped letter and better than the last, was so named by the French. It is the only
letter which has preserved its name among all nations.
Minion, a size between brevier and nonpareil, is so called from the French mignonne, or favourite. The
Germans call it colonel. Emerald is a small kind of
minion. Nonpareil (from the French and German nonparielle) so called because at its introduction it
was without a peer in comparative size to the larger
type. Ruby is so named by Mr. Hansard, he " having
felt it absolutely necessary to give some distinguishing
appellation to its size. '
""
Of printers ' errors, &c. , there are innumerable good
stories, and every busy writer could relate some piquant instances. Many, however, have the air of being
The Elzevirs, Plantins, and Old Printers. 63
manufactured,
are very good. A country editor, dwelling on the
Ideath of a village maid, whose obituary he was
writing, detailed her dying injunction that no monument should be placed above her grave, but a plain
slab, with the simple inscription " Mary. " On reading the proofof his article, however, he became doubtful of the correctness of her Christian name, and
hurriedly ran his pencil through it as a preliminary to correction. One of the townsfolk dropping in at
that moment assured him that the young girl's name
was " Mary," and he accordingly dotted a line below
the erased word, writing in the margin of the proof
the usual direction " stet " (let it stand) . He was
somewhat astonished the next morning on learning
from the paper that the dying girl had requested, as
a last favour, that upon her tombstone should be
placed "the simple inscription, 'Stet. "" It availed
him nothing that he endeavoured to explain to the
tearful but indignant parents that the mistake, after
all, was not so very bad. Many of the people believed that he had actually attempted to improve the
poor girl's dying injunction with his " college lingo. "
These American instances, however,
Awidower in the same place wished his elderly wife
to be celebrated, and he himself was allowed to writethe
obituary. In the proof the editor noted that the lady
was described as " being remarkable for her chastity "
-instead of " charity "—an odd commendation.
There is a work greatly recherché from a singular
oddity :-Dr. Bonnell Thornton was passing through the press a splendid folio work. In a certain page
a space (as printers term it ) stood up: the Doctor
(and this shows the misfortune of not understanding
"printers' marks ") , instead of writing or making the
sign for dele opposite the line with the objectionable
64 The Elzevirs, Plantins, and Old Printers.
little mark, wrote on a head-page " take out horizontal line at page so and so "-the compositor inserted
these words as a displayed line in the head- page
whereon they were written ; the " reader " passed it
in the revise, and it was so worked off ! Being
eventually detected, the leaf was of course cancelled.
Any copy, therefore, with these wrongly inserted
words, is consequently eagerly sought after. Such
errors arise, of course, from indifferent and bad
writing, some of which is absolutely distracting.
But it is a fact that no matter how indifferent or
difficult to read, the printers, if they have to deal
with much of it, soon learn to read it. They more
protest against the confusion of alterations and insertions, which are often impossible to follow. Burke's
"Letter to a Noble Lord " was printed off and the
proof sent to him, but was returned to the printingoffice with so many alterations and passages interlined, that the compositors refused to correct it as it
was, took the whole matter to pieces, and reset the
copy ; and there is little doubt that to the illegible
caligraphy of many writers with their sometimes
innumerable alterations, additions, &c. , is to be
attributed much of the " Errata " to be found in
66 most publications. Truly some copy " looks as if
a spider had been dipped in ink and permitted to
perambulate the paper, and so cover it with undecipherable hieroglyphics ; this was the character
in which the poetry of the Rev. W. Lisle Bowles was
written. Ofthe writing of Dr. Rees, the well- known
editor of " The Cyclopædia, " it is said it seemed as
if he had used a burnt stick, and that on one occasion
the printers clubbed their money and presented him
with a hundred good pens, begging him to use them
for their sakes if not for his own. The " Georgian
The Elzevirs, Plantins, and Old Printers. 65
Era" states that there is an instance on record of
three volumes of corrections being written to one
volume of proofs !
In the history of the " chapel " or printing- office
there are many strange incidents. How curious,
for instance, are those beings who at their desk
have " composed " their types without " copy, " being author and printer at the same moment. The intermediate writing was omitted. There are many books which have been made in this fashion.
66 Thus, there was a book published in 1844 called
Colloquies Desultory, but chiefly upon Poetry, &c. "
—a volume of 250 pages, but not a word of it was
really ever written. The clever author, printer, and
publisher, Mr. Lordan of Romsey, set up the types
as fast as he mentally composed the book, and
the latter, as a critic truly says, is highly creditable
to the author, who, however, never wrote it. It has
been affirmed that Dugald Graham, the Rhyming
Chronicler of the Rebellion of 1745 , used to compose and set up his works in type without com- mitting them to writing. There was a French
novelist who, being like our Richardson, a printer,
composed a volume in type, and thus this book
was likewise printed without having been written.
William Cowdroy, editor, proprietor, and printer of
the Manchester Gazette ( 1814) , whilst employed at
Chester as editor and compositor, displayed this
faculty of composing his paragraphs without writing
them. The practice was first adopted by Thomas
Jonathan Wooler, the printer of the Black Dwarf.
He was also its editor and article- producer, —
posed " his articles (in a double sense of the phrase)
at case. E. W. Forster, of the Hants Guardian,
used to relate :-" From my earliest connection with
E
66 com-
66 The Elzevirs, Plantins, and Old Printers,
a newspaper, now many years ago, it has been my
practice to compose all leaders from case direct,
without the help of any copy whatever. I have
followed this plan in many other ways connected
with newspaper work ; and what it is desirable to
communicate to the public is the fact that the rate
of ' composing ' coincides admirably with the flow
of thought ; that to furnish a good leader, or anything else, it is a great advantage to produce it from
the head direct, ignoring the use of pen and paper. "
DE Tartons and of the English
Printers.
HE subject of our English printer Caxton
is really a fascinating one, and has furnished food for the artist, the poet, and the story-teller. The learned and laborious Blades has written a profound
account of his life and works in one of the most interesting of such treatises-a dungeon of learning,
though perhaps too technical for " the general. " Indeed, it is surprising to see what the indefatigable
labour of antiquaries and expenditure of money have.
done both for Caxton and Shakespeare. But bythis
tremendous and assiduous toil, and the premium
offered in the shape of costly prices, an astonishing
number of the printer's works have been recovered ,
and will be preserved securely for generations born
hundreds of years hence -unless, indeed, convulsions
arise, such as the descent of barbarian hordes, or a
revolutionary rising, when these libraries may be
sacked or burnt, as in the case of the revolutions of
1830 and 1870.
One of the Spencer family, in an interesting
lecture on the Althorp Library, gives a summary of
the Caxton treasures in that wonderful library. Mr.
68 Of Caxtons and of the English Printers.
Blades has also enumerated ninety-nine productions
of his press as in existence. The British Museum
possesses the largest number of copies ever brought
together, between eighty and ninety-ofwhich twentyfive are duplicates. The collection of Caxtons in the
Spencer Library is more complete, numbering fiftyseven separate works, of which thirty-one are perfect
and three unique, namely, “ The Four Sons of Ay- mon, "” " The History of Blanchardin and Eglantine,”
and a folio broadside of " Death Bed Prayers, ” which
is in perfect condition, and measures 11 by 3 inches.
An important relic connected with the house inhabited by our first printer, and affording the earliest known instance of a broadside printed in England,
is to be seen in the Althorpe collection in the shape
of an advertisement, of which only one other copy,
and that an imperfect one, existed. It consists of
a single paragraph of seven lines, the longest measuring five inches, and which read as follows : —“ If it
plese ony man spirituel or temporel to bye ony pyes
of two and thre comemoracios of Salisburi use enprynted after the forme of this present lettre which
ben wel and truly correct, late hym come to Westmonester into the almonesrye at the reed pale, and
he shal have them good chepe. " *
* From Mr. G. Sanders's laborious MS. notes I take the following curious comparison of prices, and of the rise in prices paid for Caxtons :—
"
" The Recuyell des Histoires de Troyes, " fol. 1472, was sold by Dr. Bernard in 1698 for 3s. , whilst at the Roxburghe sale ( 1812) the Duke of Devonshire gave 1060 for a copy. Chess
Book, " fol. 1475, R. Smith in 1682, 135. 2d.; Mainwaring in 1837, £101. " Le Recueil, " fol. 1476, Eames in 1760, £2 , 125.; E. Spencer in 1823, £205 , 165.; M. Libri in 1844, £200.
positio Johannis Rupell, " quarto, four printed leaves, John Brand in 1807, £2 , 5s.; Marquis Blandford in 1819, £126. The
Dictes and Sayings of the Philosophers, " fol. 1477, Osborne in
"'Pro-
Of Caxtons and of the English Printers. 69
Mr. Quaritch, the possessor of many treasures,
can of course boast some rare and choice Caxtons.
Let him introduce-" The first book printed in
England. Westminster, William Caxton, 1474.
Caxton's ' Game and Play of Chess, Moralised ' (translated 1474), first edition, folio, 65 leaves (of the 72),
bound in old russia gilt. An extremely large,
though somewhat imperfect copy of the first book
printed in England, from Caxton's press. Mr. Blades
quotes 9 copies (4 perfect, 5 imperfect) , and the
44
""
1751, 1, 11s. 6d. ; Earl Spencer, £263, 10s. ; "Chaucer's Canterbury Tales," Joseph Ames in 176-, £2 ; Mr. Huth, £200.
" Boethius, " fol. 1479. Osborne in 1751, 1, 1S.; Gardner in 1854 ( imperfect copy) , £70. Mirrour of the World, " fol. 1481 ,
R. Smith in 1682, 5s. ; Duke of Devonshire in 1812, £351 , 155.
(it cost the Duke seven guineas) . " Tully of Old Age, " fol.
1481, 15s. 3d.; Dr. Bernard in 1698, 4s. 2d.; Duke of Roxburghe, 115; Willett in 1812, 210 ; Mr. Huth in 1857, £275.
Second edition " Game of Chess , " Dr. Bernard in 1698, 1s. 6d. (! )
Duke of Devonshire, 173, 5s. 'Godfrey of Boulogne, " fol.
1481, R. Smith in 1682, 18s. 2d.; Dr. Bernard in 1698, 4s. ;
Marquis Blandford, £215, 15s. "Polychronicon, " fol . 1482,
Ames in 1760, 14s.; Sykes, 1815, £150. " Confessio Amantis ,"
fol. 1483, Osborne in 1745, 14S.; Mead in 1755, 26s.; Duke of Devonshire in 1812, 336 ; Willett, 1813, 315 ; at Sotheby's in 1872, £670. " Golden Legend, " 1484, W. Fletewode in 1774,
75.; Duc de Aumale, £230. " Troylus and Creside, " fol. 1484,
J. West in 1773, 10, 10s.; J. Towneley in 1814, 252, 25.
King Arthur," fol. 1485, Osborne in 1748, £5 : Earl Spencer in 1816, £320. Fayts of Arms, &c. , " fol. 1489, Rawlinson in 1756, 11S.; Duke of Devonshire in 1812, 336 ; M. Libri in 1862, £255. Eneydos, " fol. 1490, R. Smith in 1682, 3s.; E.
Jeans in 1859, 100 ; B. Quaritch in 1874, 191 (copy wanting two pages), Chastising of God's Children, " fol. 1491 (?),
Smith, 5s.; Earl Spencer, 140. "St. Catherine, " fol. , Osborne,
I , IS.; J. Townley in 1814, 231 (now in the Grenville or British Museum Library).
44
"
46
At the sale in 1773 of the curious library of James West, Esq. ,
the following were disposed of: -"The Prouffytable Book for Man's Soul, " £5 ( at the Roxburghe sale sold for £140) ; " The Mirrour of the World," 2, 13s. ( Roxburghe, 351, 15s. ) ;
" Golden Legend, " 12, 16s. (Roxburghe, imperfect , 31 );
"Tulle ofOld Age, " 5 , 10s. (Roxburghe, 115 ; Willetts, 210);
70 Of Caxtons and of the English Printers.
present is the tenth known copy, and is TALLER than
even the Grenville-hitherto the tallest known copy ;
my copy measures 11 inches in height by 8 in
width, whilst the Grenville body ( also imperfect) is only 11 inches high. No copy of this edition has
been sold for years ; in 1813 , Alchorne's copy, wanting first two leaves, the last two leaves, and two
leaves in the second chapter of the fourth tractate,
fetched at Evans's, £54, 12s. The value of this
class of book has much risen since then, and may
" The Boke of St. Albans, " imperfect, £13 ( Roxburghe, £137 ;
" Fayte of Arms, " £10, 10s. ( Roxburghe, £336) ; “ Passe Tyme of Pleasure, " £3, 35. ( Roxburghe, £81 ) ; " Tragedy of Sir Rd.
Grinville, " 5s. ( or 12s. 6d . ) , Bindley, £40, 19s. Here a 4to volume of theological tracts sold for £3 , 3s. , but in 1856 six of the lot realised respectively thirty-five times the amount, L110, 55.
Caxton's Mirrour of the World, " 1481 , in good condition, and
for a copy of which at the Duke of Devonshire's sale in 1812 £351 , 15s. was given , was purchased in 1828 of a poor illiterate widow for 2s. !
"
Dr. Morell tells a story "that Dickey Dalton , his Majesty's
librarian, in garbling the library, threw out several Caxtons as things that might be got again every day. " The most beautiful production of this press is thought to be " King Arthur, " fol.
1485. The British Museum has eighty- five examples of Cax- ton's press , which is the largest number ever brought together ;
owing, however, to duplicates, the real number of works is but fifty-three. Earl Spencer's collection is therefore more complete,
as it contains no less than fifty- seven separate and independent works. Cambridge has thirty-eight separate works , the Bod- leian twenty-eight, and the Duke of Devonshire twenty-five.
Mr. Blades gives a list of 540 extant Caxtons more or less complete, some being mere fragments. These comprise ninety- four separate works and editions, but out of these ninety- four works no less than thirty-three are known to us by single copies or by fragments only. With respect to the sises of earlyprinted books, they were generally either large or small folios , or at least quartos. Caxton printed 67 folios , 23 quartos, 2 octavos , and one 12mo (" The Hora, " a unique fragment of eight pages).
His own translations into English amounted to twenty-two, con- taining upwards of 4500 printed pages. The total produce of his press, not reckoning the books printed at Bruges, reaches to above 18,000 pages, nearly all folio size. From the Sanders MS,
Of Caxtons and of the English Printers. 71
now be considered as ten times greater. " For this
treasure the sum of £400 was asked. The same
bookseller also offers :-
" Tour - Landry. ' On p. 9, leaf a i, Here
begynneth the book which the knight of the foure
made, and speketh of many fayre ensamples and
thensygnementys and techyng of his doughters,'
small folio, splendidly bound in dark green morocco,
-covered with blind tooling, joints, blue morocco
linings covered with gold tooling, silk fly-leaves , gilt edges, by Lewis, from the library of the Rev. Thomas
Corser. "
Next followeth its history :-" Excessively rare ;
only three other perfect copies are known, of which
two are in the British Museum and one in the library
of Earl Spencer. There is besides one imperfect one which is in the Bodleian. It is easy therefore
to conceive that the present perfect copy may be
considered unique as far as the collector is concerned :
Lord Spencer's copy is never likely to come into the
market (why not ? more likely than unlikely), the other two are, of course, inaccessible, and the one
now described is probably the only copy that can be offered for sale within the next hundred years. Since
the year 1698 only one other copy has been seen in
the public auctions ; it was purchased by Earl
Spencer at Brand's sale in 1807. The present one was bought at the Marquis of Blandford's sale in
1819, by G. W. Taylor ; from him it passed into
the hands of Mr. Jolly, at the sale of whose books in
1843 it became the property of Rodd, the bookseller.
Since that time it has been in the possession of the
Rev. Mr. Corser. " For this treasure £616 is asked.
Again, let us usher in " The Mirrour of the
World. Now at this tyme rudely translated out of
72 Of Caxtons and of the English Printers.
Ffrensshe in to Englissh by me symple p.sone
William Caxton , ' sm. folio, numerous fine woodcuts,
editio princeps, with engravings, two leaves, and the last page in facsimile, otherwise a fine copy in brown
morocco extra, gilt edges, by Bedford. Excessively
rare. Mr. Blades enumerates fifteen copies, six of
which are imperfect, while the other nine are locked
up as follows : -in the British Museum ( two) , the
Bodleian, and the libraries of the Duke of Devonshire, the Earl of Jersey, Earl Dysart, Earl of
Macclesfield, Earl Fitzwilliam, and Earl Spencer.
The Devonshire copy was acquired in 1812 at the
price of £351 , 15s.; and no copy of any kind has
appeared in a public sale since an imperfect one was
sold in 1835. Of the imperfect copies , three are
safely laid away in the Cambridge, the Windsor, and
the Ashburnham libraries ; the other three are in
private hands, and one of them is merely a fragment.
The woodcuts are very remarkable as the first existing specimen of English engraving." For this
£400 is asked.
He has also " Higden's Polychronicon. ' A very
fine and morocco copy in morocco extra, gilt edges,
with joints, by Lewis, from the Dent and Perkins
libraries. The last copy, even approximately perfect,
which was sold, produced at Lord Charlemont's sale
in 1865, the sum of £477, 15s. , although it wanted two leaves. In fact, it would be difficult to name
any perfect copies, except that in the Spencer library,
and the fine one which is now under description. "
For this £500 is demanded.
When Lord Charlemont's library was offered, this
"Polychronicon " was secured by Mr. Toovey, another
spirited bookseller of Piccadilly. This “wanting two leaves " offers another marvel, as we may be amazed,
Of Caxtons and of the English Printers. 73
considering how these leaves are attached by the frail 66 suture " of old thread, and how more frail still is
the paper, that they should have held together so
long, and that the whole had not gradually been frayed away.
All these were thought great prices. But, as usual,
when we come to the year of grace and of sales,
1885, in the month of May, the great leap to vast
prices was taken. The rare Caxton, " Le Fevre
Recuyell of the Historyes of Troy," one of the
first books printed, was sold , and, as was to be
expected, the leviathan buyer was the hero of the
day. The book was put in at £200, and by bids
of £10 and £20, run up to the sum of £1820,
and fell to Mr. Quaritch for that sum ! Shortly
after, the auctioneer, Mr. Hodge, informed the buyer
that in 1756 the same copy was sold for £8, 8s. ,
adding, " I wouldn't tell you before it was yours,
Mr. Quaritch, in case you would not bid." This
astonishing price was approached by that of Gower's
" Confessio Amantis, 1493," " a fine and perfect
copy, bought for £ 810 by Mr. Quaritch ; " while
66 6' Vyrgle Boke of Eneydos,' reduced into Englysche
by me Wyllyam Caxton, black letter, perfect copy,
rare folio, W. Caxton, 1490," was sold for £235 to the same buyer.
One of the most interesting features in the old
tomes of this era is the variety of type. Our modern
type is monotonous ; but these old printers seem to
have exerted their fancy, and yet, as we have seen,
printing had been but a few years discovered . One
of the most beautiful shapes is a sort of small
shortened text, only infinitely clearer, and which the
amateur will recognise in many of Caxton's books.
This was after a Flemish model, and Caxton adopted
74 Of Caxtons and of the English Printers .
it. It is curious, too, to find the same printer also
adopting a very shabby form of type-a kind of
elongated black- letter. He is often very careless about ink or paper. One of the most beautiful
works of its size, modest pretensions and price, is a
small quarto, Petrarch's " Rerum Memorandarum,
&c.," printed in the year 1487 , and now penes me.
This is scarcely distinguishable from a Caxton, and is remarkable for its fine creamy vellum-toned paper
and ebonyletters ofthe small German text. The whole
it set off with red and blue flourishes. It cost but £2,
and is indeed a choice work. It was printed in Belgium,
and shows clearly whence Caxton brought his types.
Caxton's books leave very much the same pleasing
impression, and the unfamiliar reader who is shown
one of his choicer volumes for the first time is astonished to see, instead of a rather rude, antique, and
quaint-looking thing, showing age and decay, a fresh,
clean, and brilliant work, wrought with elegance
even, and lustrous with its cream- tinted paper and resplendent type.
Excellent, however, as are Caxton's best productions, it must be admitted that they cannot be put
beside the triumphs of the foreign printers, neither
in their sumptuously ambitious size nor in the style
of workmanship. These seem to have become at
once past masters in the art, and there is a perfect
ease and variety in their mode of treatment. Caxton's
are slight and unpretending efforts by comparison
with their stately volumes, as though his establishment lacked resources, both of money and mechanism.
The type and printing, too, will not bear minute
criticism, which the foreigners seemed to invite or
defy. This is clearly shown by the difficulties restored and reparators encountered -on which Dr.
t
Of Caxtons and of the English Printers. 75
Dibdin, an enthusiast in all that has typographical
merit, declares "that some of Caxton's letters are
so riotous and unruly, that the mere casting of a
fount after his models would not ensure an accurate
reproduction, while the ' setting ' is decidedly bad
and disorderly, the letters being set up irregularly
and at unequal distances, leaning various ways, and
altogether so rude and barbarous that no printer
could set up a line to correspond with the original."
About thirty years ago a beautiful and successful
facsimile was issued of " The Game of Chess," with
which enormous pains were taken, and much cost was incurred. It was not one of the common photographic facsimiles now in fashion, but a reprint or
reproduction, letters being specially cast for the purpose. The paper and water-marks were made
specially to approach the original as nearly as possible : the result is very satisfactory, and is really
about equal to the prototype. In a hundred years
or so, when it has duly mellowed, it will cause some
confusion, but all imitations are readily distinguishable, *
The sad necessity of many a fine old volume wanting a leaf or title, or, it may be, a corner of a page
torn away, has engendered an art of reparation and a
race of doctors skilful in healing and restoring. It is
a marvel what an infinite cleverness is here displayed
-pages of print imitated, the tone of the paper
copied, or a new corner joined to the frayed portion so as almost to escape detection. In the British
* A very curious instance is the case of the beautiful and celebrated " Giuntà " edition of the " Decameron, " 1527, which so far back as 1727 Consul Smith at Venice had reprinted line for line and with the same title , tint of paper, &c. , so that now,
at an interval of 160 years, it is difficult to distinguish, But the skilled eye detects it.
76 Of Caxtons and of the English Printers.
Museum is often seen one of the reparators at his
work, for there he finds the original, which he can
copy. Some little old quarto play lacks the title-page
or a half- page torn across. A new title is traced, a
piece of old fly leaf is chosen, and with Indian ink
and a brush the whole is copied in a manner " to
defy detection. " The joining of the leaves is contrived in a marvellous way, the edges being " pulped '
or softened, and then squeezed together in a press
with a little paste. The letterpress is then copied.
During the last century there was a person called
Whitaker, who worked for Lord Spencer and others,
and who performed prodigies in this way. His great
feat was the supplying of two leaves in facsimile
for a copy of the Mazarin Bible, and Mr. Nicol, its
owner, was often puzzled to point out which were the
two furnished. It is said that there is a lady who
now earns a livelihood by skilfully filling up worm
holes in old books, each leaf being separately and
patiently dealt with, the material being chewed or
"pulped," and pressed into the hole. The charge is
said to be sixpence a hole.
Whitaker's Caxton restorations were really works
of extraordinary labour and art. The inferiority of
a facsimile or photograph is evident ; for print is
an impression that is forced into the paper, whereas
the imitation is merely the appearance of being im- pressed. Hence it is readily distinguishable, and has
a disagreeable sham look. But this conscientious
person set to work in the spirit that became the
situation, so precious a book as a Caxton requir- ing the most exceptional treatment. His mode was
this. He had the missing passage traced from
a perfect copy, some founts of Caxton letters cast,
and each fixed in a sort of binder's tool, But then
Of Caxtons and of the English Printers. 77
came the difficulty-Caxton had no uniformity, and
had sometimes twenty variations of the same letter.
The restorer had then with his binding tools to stamp
off every letter, guided by the tracing, and thus produced, at a great cost, certainly, what seemed all but identical with the copy.
From Caxton's day to our own, English printing
has not been conspicuous, though, taken en bloc,
there have been some admirable printers, whose
work is of high merit. It may be said, indeed, that
there is only one that has received the stamp of
a foreign reputation or approbation, viz. , Baskerville. * Baskerville was an artistic printer ; for to
secure beauty in typography, art must be applied
to the paper and tone of the paper, margin, ink,
spacing, size of type, &c. The secret is the finding out an elegant proportion in all, i.e. , in a small
book the type should not be thick or too black, nay
even in the shape, cutting of a letter, quality and
fitness is evoked ; it should harmonise with the mass
of letters, and yet be distinct. Here was the beauty
of the Elzevir type, each letter having a firmness and
character of its own, and yet not offering harshness
of detail. Uniformity having taken the lead in the
commercial side of printing and " machining " with
a vastness and rapidity that has no rival, the nation
has sacrificed the other graces.
Baskerville, Foulis of Glasgow, Tonson, and Bulmer are perhaps the finest of the older generations
of printers. Baskerville's types were purchased by
a French company, and will be recognised by the
The exhaustive monograph on this great printer, recently furnished to the National Biography by Mr. Tedder, the librarian of the Athenæum Club, should be consulted by all book- lovers.
78 Of Caxtons and of the English Printers.
critical in the grand seventy-volume edition of Voltaire's works, issued under the direction of Beaumarchais at the close of last century, where it has
an odd masquerading effect. The bold, honest, English type is in protest, as it were, against the French
minauderies and refinements it is compelled to express. So looks a Frenchman in English clothes.
The force of expression goes deeper than might be
supposed. There is something singularly odd in an
English work printed in French type, and vice versa.
Baskerville, it is said, produced his chief effects by
rapidly drying his printed sheets in ovens before the
ink had time to sink into the paper. *
Some of Tonson's folios have a noble air, the
paper is so stout and thick, the type so large, black,
and handsome. There is a Lucretius of his, which
is sometimes met with arrayed in old crimson morocco
à la Derome, which has an air of what the French
call distinction. Bulmer's great quartos-the celebrated Boydell Shakespeare, Milton, &c. , are fine
ambitious works, but the type seems to lack force
and dignity in the large expanse. It must be confessed that some of the Foulis folios have a greater
dignity and are more impressive with less pretension.
They are more after the stately sober pattern of the
older progenitors—the pristine " Fifteeners. ”
English works, whether illustrated or otherwise, are
little sought abroad, as any one who consults foreign
catalogues may discover. One conspicuous work,
however, always brings an enormous price, provided it be the right edition. This is Pine's Horace, a
* Baskerville lost heavily in his enterprise, and £3700 from the French for his splendid fount.
finally descended to the base use of figuring newspaper " print, " and were employed for the teur,
received but These types as ordinary daily Moni
Of Cartons and of the English Printers. 79
rather fantastic and stiff-looking book, which is
illustrated on every page, and which is literally not
printed with type. It is engraved on copper-plates,
words and all, from beginning to end.
One of the grandest sets of books ever published
was the Delphin Classics , a series of all the Latin
and Greek writers, specially prepared, " for the use
of the Dauphin. " They run to many volumes, and
bring a great price. An enterprising English printer,
Valpy, reissued them about the year 1820, with
variorum notes, in 152 volumes. A splendid copy
was on sale not long since a magnificent set
of books from Colonel George Meek's fine library.
The volumes bound in morocco and calf have his
arms in gold on sides, the half-bound volumes have
his book- plate. The work was published at over
£400, and the owner must have paid Mackenzie nearly £200 for the binding. Yet Charles Lamb
might have counted these books among the books
which " no gentleman's library should be without, "
But this item shows what a terrible costly and serious
thing a great library must be-from the vast amount
required for such "long sets, " their ponderous weight,
and the cost of glass cases.
The Scotch, in truth, have always not only excelled in publishing enterprises, but have been conspicuous in bringing typography to its greatest perfection. Most of the great London publishing
houses owe their prosperity to some sturdy plodding
Scottish pioneer, and the names of Andrew Millar,
Dodsley, Strahan, Foulis, Constable, Murray, Cadell,
Macmillan, Black, Blackwood, and many more,
show what success has attended these efforts. One
Scotch firm belongs to the roll of the masters of the
art, and the works of the Foulises of Glasgow bring
80 Of Caxtons and of the English Printers.
fancy prices at the sales. Their fine folio Homer
is "desired " by every collector, and their Virgil
and other editions of the classics are as pleasing to
look at as many of the older masterpieces of typography. There is a calm dignity, an unobtrusive
harmony, in the large page and its proportions and
tint, that at once excites admiration. These great
printers took such a pride in the thoroughness of
their work that, as the legend runs, they challenged
all comers to discover a single error in their work. *
This steady level of excellence has been maintained
down to our time. The press of the Ballantynes,
under the inspiration of Sir Walter Scott, issued
marvels of brilliant and effective printing, which
seem to ripen with age. A more beautiful, legible,
and satisfactory edition could not be well imagined
than that of the long set of the Waverley Novels,
published about " sixty years since." The size, paper,
illustrations, and extraordinary brilliance of the type,
make it quite a favourite edition —indeed the famous
tales seem to read differently in the " Abbotsford "
and later editions of more show and pretence.
This firm still pursues its labours, but has not
equalled this feat.
Other later Scotch publishers have issued works
that approach more nearly to the older excellence
than anything that can be named of modern date ;
and certain works issued by Messrs. Edmonston &
Douglas are really astonishing for the nobility of the letters and the grand paper. It is uncertain, however, whether these will stand the test of time, or,
* So reasonably proud were the Scotch printers of one of their elaborate classics, the " Immaculate Horace, " as it is called,
that they set up on the gate of Glasgow College a notice offering a reward for the detection of any errata. Some, it is said, were discovered.
Of Caxton and of the English Printers. 81.
like the older monuments, improve and mellow with
years, There is no guarantee for the excellence of
modern materials, paper, ink, &c. , and there is a
hurry, roughness, and violence in the processes of
machinery which are not found in the care and deliberation of the old hand-work. Each sheet was
the distinct and separate result of the workman's
labour. The making of a great book in the old early
days was like making a monument, such as building
a house ; now it seems like a manufacture, and
copies are turned out like so many pieces " of
cloth.
""
F
圆
§ Df the Library.
EW things so effectually transport us
back to the older ages as the rare spectacle of a library of chained books. In
the picturesque old Abbey of Wimbourne there is an antique chamber,
small, decayed, low-roofed, high up in the church.
Round it are arranged some rows of tall ancient tomes
in their mouldering calf and vellum, each secured
with its chain hanging down. The effect of all these
chains is graceful and bizarre, from the abundant festoonings with which every tome is furnished. There
is also the accompanying shelf below; for the book
thus secured must be consulted in its own neighbourhood. * In one of the libraries at Cambridge, that of
Trinity Hall, the old-fashioned system of a seat that
drew out for the reader under the books, with a desk
* In the church of Grantham, Lincolnshire, was a library remarkable for being one of the few remaining that had its volumes chained to the shelves. The removal of Selden's books (about 8000) from London to the Bodleian Library, Oxford, be- sides costing £34, the providing chains for them cost £25, 10s.
more. This charge occurs so late as 1751. In 1761 there was a
payment for unchaining 1448 books at a halfpenny each. The Bodleian still preserves some ofthe loose chains as relics . Bodley in one of his letters " advised the binding sundry authors to- gether, that the multiplicity of chains might not take away the sight and show of the books. "
The Library.
83
to place it on, is, or was, retained until lately. The
system, too, of turning the books with the backs to
the wall and their leaves to the front, on which was
written the name of the work, is still to be seen in
one or two old libraries. A bar with a ring and padlock ran in front, and gave protection to the long
line of volumes.
There have existed, in our own day even, what
seem to be appropriate tenants for these antique
retreats. Such would exclaim, like Heinsius, " No
sooner have I come into the library than I bolt the
door to me, excluding Lust, Ambition, Avarice, and
all such vices, whose nurse is Idleness, the mother
of Ignorance and Melancholy. In the very lap of
Eternity, amongst so many Divine souls , I take my
seat with so lofty a spirit and sweet content that I
pity all our great ones and rich men that know not
this happiness." Such were these retiring men, whose
studies have been as profound and interesting as those of the past. It has been the custom to point to old
Burton as a miracle of quotation and display of omnivorous research ; but there died not long ago a student
whose works offer far more astonishing exhibitions of
reading and study. This was the late Kenelm Digby,
whose " Mores Catholici " and succeeding works
astound us, and almost take the breath away by their
vast stores of wisdom and poetry, quoted from almost
every known book. He appears to have read almost
everything ; and the effect of the whole is not that of
scrappy " mosaic or patchwork. The body of the
work is in itself a monument of good sense and
thought, and the quotations are only used to illustrate
the author's views, and seem to have been furnished from the memory, which must have been of prodigious power. The whole is conceived in
84 The Library.
a quaint antique strain. With these old scholars,
limited and cramped in means, often dim-eyed, it is
impossible not to have a deep sympathy. They seem
to have grown into the very fashion of their idols,
were mouldy, " fly-blown, " wormed. One such is before me now-a worthy antiquary, and one that might
have been treated by Dickens. There in his scant,
curious library he sat, the dim, grimed panes of the
old episcopal library, the atmosphere in which floated
the dust of decayed leaves ; with gaunt shadows, the
slumbering volumes, the long windows uncleaned for a
decade of years, the complete stillness, and he, the old,
absorbed librarian bent down to his folio ! Or I have
met him on some country road, striding on to his
duty a strange Dominie Sampson figure-with invariably a tiny volume, an Elzevir it might be, held
close to his dim bleared eyes.
Every important librarian of our day can tell his
story of the pilferer, nearly always a person of respectable rank. Borrowing is often akin to robbery.
The private individual who lends has almost in- variably to bewail his good-nature. The borrowee
himself knows not what has become of the volume.
It is lost. There is a pleasant menace written for the benefit of such delinquents.
"Si quisquisfuretur,
This little Libellum.
Per Phæbum, per Jovem,
I'll kill him-I'll fell him ;
In ventrem illius
I'll stick my scalpellum,
And teach him to steal
My little Libellum !"
At the British Museum there often occurs an epidemic of unmeaning spoliations, a page or two, or a
print, being found to have been torn out of valuable
E
The Library. 85
books ; and the reader will recall the time when one
or two of these outraged volumes used to be set
up on a stand as a warning and an exhibition .
How often the librarian of some college at the Universities can tell his tale of volumes mysteriously
abstracted in a steady course, and how at last suspicion rested on one much-respected scholar, perhaps
an ecclesiastic, at whose rooms were found a whole
shelf of purloined volumes. This distressing discovery
is usually " hushed-up," as it is called -the offence
being indulgently considered a sort of disease.
With the growth of modern libraries has arisen a
sort of profession-a class of learned experts, well
skilled in all the mysteries of books-an accomplished, and, it must be said, rare class of professors.
The modern librarian is now recognised. There is a
powerful guild of librarians, who hold their congresses
and issue their Transactions. Reading these, one sees
how truly scientific is the subject, and how necessary
that the subject should be scientifically dealt with.
In the enormous and overwhelming production of
books, it needs a rare instinct and knowledge to know what books are to be selected as having a representative character ; and there are a thousand minor
questions of arrangement, treatment, issue, checks,
and the like. *
On the topic " Catalogue," what an elaborately
scientific article might be written ; for the proper
arrangement, disposition, &c. , of a library have exercised the labour and speculations of some of the cleverest men. Some curious and unexpected reading on this interesting matter will be found in the
Mr. Tedder, one of this body, has written an agreeable and scientific little tract, in which are set out the librarian's duties,
with a view of all the various qualifications necessary.
86 The Library.
Parliamentary Blue-book on our Museum, Classification is always perplexing, but the classification of
books now reckoned by millions is the most perplexing
of all. Would we enter " Coningsby," for instance,
under Disraeli or Beaconsfield ? It might be said that
the principle of modern cataloguing is to adhere
strictly to an inflexible rule, even with the result of
some inconveniences ; but to make up for this, out of
pure good- nature they set up signposts to direct the
searcher to the right road wherein he shall search.
Thus, it being fixed that names, but not titles, should
be used, we may conceive one searching for Lord
Malmesbury's Diary. If he were ignorant of the
family name, Harris, he could not find the volume ;
but a sign-post, good- naturedly set up, points the
right road " Malmesbury-see Harris. "
The British Museum Catalogue is, like the Mu- seum itself, one of the sights of London. It extends
to nigh two hundred great folio volumes, ranged
in convenient circular shelves, accessible to all.
Considering that the books are pouring in at the
rate of some thousands a day, and which have to be
entered, one gazes with astonishment at the feat of
a catalogue that remains the same in form, for
daily use, and yet is daily expanding. This marvel of
steady perseverance and ingenuity is thus contrived .
The title of every work is written out in a sort of
uniform " Museum hand, ” and by manifold ink some
half-a-dozen copies are made. These slips are pasted
into the folio volumes in their order. The folios are
all bound with abundant “ guards, ” so that when a
leaf is filled with the slips, new leaves are attached to the adjoining guards, And here is shown the ingenuity. The slips are pasted in a peculiar fashion ;
only at the ends, not at the top or bottom. A paperL
The Library.
87
knife will detach them in an instant ; and such is the
quality of the Museum paste and the handiness of
the system, that the operation can be repeated again
and again. When it is necessary for the purpose of
rearrangement, as when a page is filled, that the
new entry should have a place found for it among
the others, in a few seconds the paper-knife has
set free all the entries : the new leaves and the
old ones are now all blank ; the whole can be rearranged, and spaces left here and there, &c. When
all the guards have been filled, and the volume
will absolutely hold no more, it is taken to the
binder's, divided into two, each being filled up to the
old measure with new blank pages and new guards.
By a new system the printing of the entries has
been adopted, thus making an enormous saving of
space, a third or fourth of the old space now sufficing.
This is making steady progress, many letters having
been completed. The system is a costly one, but
not so costly as might be supposed ; and it is a
further testimony to English spirit and energy that
it should have been the first to carry out, on this
great scale, a plan from which other nations have
shrunk.
Of late years a fashion has obtained of giving
exact reprints of first editions of such books as " The
Complete Angler," Bunyan's " Pilgrim's Progress, "
Shakespeare, &c. One or two of Caxton's very
earliest books have been thus reprinted. This opens
a curious matter for discussion : the vulgar idea
being that nothing can be more correct than thus to
go back to the fountain-head, where you find the pure
text. The truth is, these editions, with their simulated antique type, are no more than simple " curios. "
Little value is attached to the disorderly first folio
88 The Library.
Shakespeare, with its antique spelling and mistakes,
and queerly shaped letters. But even in the case of
modern authors, the first - edition theory will not
serve. The truth is, once the book is published,
the text ceases to be controlled by the author, and
he himself becomes one of the speculators and conjecturers as to his own text. This is one of the
penalties of print. Even as to the meaning of a
passage, it has been superficially thought that the author is the best judge of what was intended. But
it is really what meaning the text will bear, not what
he intended, -which, however, may be accepted out
of compliment to him. "There are some books, "
says Mr. Palgrave in a pleasant essay, " of which
we cannot tell whether the author sanctioned what
was printed in his lifetime. There are many of which
we cannot tell which edition represents his final
intention . Simply to take the last published coram
vivo would be a coarse and imperfect expedient ; for
by that time the copyright has often passed from his
possession, or the works have been reprinted without
his oversight, or he may add and alter many times. "
This has been done notably by Wordsworth, and in
our own day by Tennyson, with bewildering effect,
and many have not accepted the later shapings and
changings.
We might fairly urge that his first imprint was
final and complete-one might as well alter a face when born. The alteration of a verse is a new
effort by the author, to be accepted quantum valeat ;
"The Grand Old Gardener, " for instance, has been
reshaped-thought vulgar-but the author cannot
unget his own. Then, again, it has been said by the
same authority, that "it may be doubted if there are
ten English poets of whose texts an editor could
L
The Library.
89
swear in court that they are demonstrably the exact
mirror of the poet's intention ."
And many of
Shelley's works were printed after his death.
"Elia" had an exquisite sense of the becoming
accidents, as they may be called, of books ; and no
one has expressed with greater delicacy the special
charm of what seems indescribable and indeed impalpable. How common to hear some matter- of- fact
reader, and an enthusiast too, say that all editions,
pages, paper, print, are to him the same-matter, not
manner, is for him. Yet it is a truth that certain
authors "read better " in certain editions. So much
in reading depends on " the humour " or gusto with
which a book is taken up, that the costume and
decoration of an author is not to be put aside
lightly; as in real life we would have the friend
whom we love costumed appropriately, and in a
fashion that harmonises with his character. There
are editions of Shakespeare, for instance the stereotyped, double- columned, and in " one volume octavo,
boards "-which no one that respects himself or his
author could read with comfort or dignity- associated meanness and cheapness with cheeseparing,
squeezing, huddling ; the contrast with the large
ability of the author and the sumptuousness of his
treasures, will intrude and disturb. On the other
hand, the grand pompous edition equally distracts with
its lavish amplitude of margin, vast " spacing," huge
type, and large engravings. Here the splendid clothing diverts attention. But Lamb analysed these
fancies with his charming touch. Thus he contrasts
the older editions of " the Bard, " with its ordinary
unambitious " cuts," " which to him were more expressive, since they, without pretending to any supportable emulation with it, are so much better than
yo The Library.
the Shakespeare Gallery engravings, which did. I
have a community of feeling with my countrymen
about his plays, and I like those editions of him
best which have been oftenest tumbled about and
handled. On the contrary, I cannot read Beaumont
and Fletcher but in folio. The octavo editions are
painful to look at. I have no sympathy with them.
If they were as much read as the current editions of
the other poet, I should prefer them in that shape to
the older one. "
In truth, an essay might be written by way of com .
mentary on this pregnant passage. There is even a
deeper significance in his praise of the older illustrations, which applies with even greater force to the illustrations of our own time. These older plates
were all of the most general kind, of a rude imagina- tive treatment warriors and tents, and flowing
robes. They seem knights and heroes. Our modern
illustrator makes all realistic, and copies from the men and women about him. This lends an earthiness and a prosiness inconsistent with the text.
There is an air of old-fashion, too, about these older
editions that is in keeping, and that being "oftenest tumbled about and handled," really means
human association, sympathy, or fellowship, which
is always welcome. It must be said, too, that
these old editions have merit, the paper and print
being good. What Elia adds about not being "able
to read Beaumont and Fletcher but in folio, " is not
purely fanciful. For these dramatic folios, the Ben
Jonson, Beaumont and Fletcher, and Shakespeare,
are exceptional volumes, convenient in size, and with
an air of quaint antiquity that harmonises with the
subject. There is a pleasant old fashion in the
arrangement of the page, the double column, the
a
The Library.
91
border, the catchword at foot, the old spelling and
lettering ; these being natural and belonging to the
age, not affectation , as the modern " old-faced " type
and imitation " old editions. " The paper, too, is
grown tawny. They are really interesting volumes
these folios. There is a deeper philosophy, at which
we can only hint here, in the expansive page, into
which is gathered the substance of many pages.
There is more before the reader's mind ; his eye can
travel, and he can feel himself in company with
many more images and thoughts. He can have
anticipation and retrospect without trouble, and he is not cribbed and cabined within the limit of a small
page holding a few lines. This sense of mental
space may seem a refinement, but it has its signifi
cance. The octavo editions, with which Elia had
"no sympathy"-he means doubtless those issued
by Gifford and Weber-being now nearly a century
old, would be more satisfactory in his eyes, as by
time and change of fashion they have an antique air of their own.
Elia's other protest might well be taken to heart
by reckless publishers . " I do not know, " he says,
"a more heartless sight than the reprint of the
'Anatomy of Melancholy. ' What need was there of
unearthing the bones of that fantastic old great man,
to expose them in a winding-sheet of the newest
fashion to modern censure ? What hapless stationer
could dream of Burton ever becoming popular ? "
And a "heartless " sight it is, as any one who has
held the work in his hand will own. This grave
reverend " Don, " now pedantic, now grimly humorous, now learned, the quintessence of the wisdom
of others as of his own, to be dressed up in "a
cheap edition," on mean paper, in a poor pimping
92 The Library.
type ! The effect of the contrast between the antique
diction and solemnity and the vulgar popular shape
almost shocks. But who could express it so happily ?
"Heartless " was the word exactly.
Few have an idea of the amount of industry
and knowledge that has been brought to bear on the
science, as it may be called, of books. Bibliography
can boast its Owens and Buffons, who can classify
and supply genus and species from a mere fragment.
For centuries the fascinating study has engaged the
attention of profound scholars, who have left be- hind them exhaustive works exhibiting vast research,
and this too applied to everything that concerns the accidents of books. For these scholars do not regard
the matter of which a book is the vehicle : just as
I have known a first-rate philosopher and mathe- matician who mastered the whole science of music,
and could compose you a fugue secundum artem,
yet to whom musical sounds were unintelligible and odious. It was he who once declared that a fine
melody "suggested to him the idea of chloride of
lime ! "
It is pleasant to reflect that the first and earliest
writer upon books and book-loving was an Englishman,
the old Bishop Richard, of Bury, the popular author
of the well-known " Philobiblion," issued in 1473.
He was Bishop of Durham and Lord Chancellor,
and wrote this ardent praise of a library : " In Paris
he found delightful libraries in cells redolent of aromatics ; there flourishing greenhouses of all sorts of
volumes ; there academic meads, trembling with the
earthquake of Athenian Peripatetics pacing up and
down ; there the promontories of Parnassus, and the
porticoes of the Stoics. There, in very deed, with an
open treasury and untied purse-strings, we scattered
The Library. 93
money with a light heart, and redeemed inestimable
works from dirt and dust, "
Him followed a long and respectable line of commentators and classifiers, whose works are quoted
wherever the subject is dealt with, some writing in
Latin, some in German, French, or English. Panzer
is a dungeon of learning on " incunables " and early
editions, followed by Hain. The French De Bure
treats his subject in an agreeable popular style, but
Brunet is the indispensable handbook and companion.
For English books there are Watts and Lowndes, or
Bohn's Lowndes, to which the present writer furnished some humble aid.
But apart from these solemn official treatises, there
are some pleasantly garrulous little books, written
with a light heart and out of pure love of the subject,
and which offer very agreeable reading. Does not
the following promise pleasantly as a " Book upon
Books "? " Book Rarities in the University of Cambridge, illustrated with anecdotes of bibliomaniacs,
original letters, and notes, biographical, literary, and antiquarian. By the Rev. C. H. Hartshorne." More
amusing is Davis's quaintly named " Two Journies
Round the Library of a Bibliomaniac, with notes con- cerning rare, curious, and valuable old Books. Writ- ten in 1821." Dr. Dibdin's treatises are well known
and unique from their exaggerated raptures ; his
earlier works are little known, such as the " Literary
Directory," or the " Bibliographical Miscellany : an Essay on Bibliography and the Love of Books,"
issued 1806. There is a little set of small octavos
by Dr. Adam Clarke, which contain much curious information descriptive of old and rare volumes, and
" Oldys' British Librarian," published in 1738. But
this subject requires a treatise in itself; and as, of
94 The Library.
course, there has been written a stout volume containing a list of all the works written on bibliography.
It may be mentioned that not long since there was
offered for sale for two guineas what appears to be
the first attempt at classifying books in England, "A
Catalogue of the most Vendible Books in England,
orderly and alphabetically digested under the various
heads, with the Supplement ; by William London,
4to, calf, 1658, very scarce." It is added that this
is " the first priced bookseller's catalogue ever compiled, and now of great rarity. The excellent ' Introduction to the Use of Books ' was generally considered to be by Bishop Juxon, but was really written
by a Newcastle-upon-Tyne bookseller. "
6
Bibliography being a matter on which large sums
are invested and study and labour expended, has
become almost scientific, with its systems and
methods and tests. In the case of rare old volumes,
whose lives are counted by centuries, troubled adventurous lives too, in which storms, buffetings, and
ill-usage have been encountered, the purchaser may not venture to take their merits on trust. There are
registered descriptions carefully and minutely made by which they must be tested. This is the " collation," often a laborious process when it has not been already officially made. In the case of an old
"incunable " or cradle-book belonging to the early
printing days, there is often no paging, and the
purchaser with his book, in good condition and old
binding, cannot tell whether it has its proper number of leaves. The knowledge of the " Register " involves many intricacies, and it is often a complicated
thing to investigate the state of a volume before it
can be warranted sound and perfect. Bibliographers of
the first rank do not disdain this labour, and their de-
The Library. 95
scriptions of rare volumes are founded on diligent and
minute comparison with some rare and not commonly accessible copy. Here, for instance, is a good
description of a very rare book :-" The Workes of
| Geffray Chau | cer newly printed, with | dyuers
workes whiche were neuer in | print before : | ...
small folio, black letter, woodcuts, editio princeps,
title inlaid, fine copy in old panelled calf.
Thomas Godfray, M.D.xxxii ( 1532). "
London,
COLLATION : Sig. A, 4 leaves, containing general
title and preliminary matter ; B, 6 leaves, of which
the first is the title to the Canterbury Tales ; C-T,
V, X, Y, Z, in sixes ; AA, 6 leaves, of which the first
is the title to the Romaunt of the Rose ; Bb-Pp, in
sixes (of which Hhr is the title to Troylus and
Creseide) ; Qq, 9 leaves ; Rr-Tt, in sixes (Ttr , the
title of Boetius de Consolatione) ; Vv, Xx, Yy, Zz, in
sixes ; Aaa to Vvv in sixes (of which Ddd 3 is a title,
"Howpite is ded, " and Lllr the title of the Testament
of Love). There are no blank leaves in the book,
every folio bearing letterpress." With this before
him, the purchaser of a copy of the Chaucer of 1532
would have no difficulty in testing the merit of his copy.
In the old Aldine folios, such as that of Georgius
Valla (penes me) , an italic " register " at the end
gives the letter or signature, with the beginning word
of every page, so that every page is, as it were, indexed. Often, however, the pages of " incunables "
are found to be numbered in the handwriting of the
illuminator. Many of the old MSS. are found to
have signatures for the benefit of the binder. *
* The first printed signatures, according to Palmer, appeared in a Terence, 1470, and were introduced by Anthony Zarot, who started the first press in Milan. Others say they were invented by Koelhof at Cologne in 1472. They first appeared in Paris in 1476. Our Caxton first used them in 1480. (Sanders MS. )
96
The
Library
.
The great " Nuremberg Chronicle " is numbered
in a stately fashion-Folibm J. or XII. being placed
on every page at the corner. *
It is remarkable that two of the most useful and
laborious encyclopædi f reference should have
come to us from Ame The idea of these is
original, and entailed enous drudgery. One is
"Alibone's Dictionary," in three portly volumes,
giving references and quotations dealing with everyt celebrated person connected with letters. Thus in
the case of, say, Sheridan, all the more famous passages and criticisms of his speeches are given, with
references to nearly every book which gives information about his life. No one who has not yet seen
this work can conceive how Herculean was this task.
The merit of it is, that reference is made to many
recondite and little known quarters where informa- tion is to be found. The other work is " Poole's
Index to Periodical Literature." The author had
gone through all the long-protracted series of Household Words, Macmillan's Magazine, &c. , and noted
everything under its proper head. This spirited
gentleman tells us that when he was a student at Yale
College, from pure love of work and humanity, he
prepared a MS. index to such periodicals as were in
the library, which was so much used, and became so
Signatures are now put at the bottom of the right- hand pages of sheets, and when the alphabet is finished a second begins Aa (instead of a single A) , and when that is terminated Aaa are given for the third , and so on. In order to indicate
more correctly the order of each sheet , printers add to the initial letters some figures on the third , fifth , and seventh pages. The numbers of these figures which do not pass the middle of th -sheet point out the size of the edition - thus A2 on the third page, A3 on the fifth , and A4 on the seventh page, shows ac workto be in octavo. In the duodecimo size A5 occurs on th ninth page, and A6 on the eleventh page, &c.
The Library. 97
popular as to be frayed into destruction . It was
then printed, making a small volume ; a larger
edition was prepared, and finally, on the co-operative system, librarians agreeing to help him by
indexing such periodicals they had, it grew to
its present size, nearly ousand closely- printed
pages.
Few who carelessly turn to the last pages of a
thick volume " to consult the index " can imagine
the art, not less than the labour, that is necessary to
furnish a good index that shall be a guide to the contents of the volume. With some, it is enough
to meet the name of a person to put it in the index.
Thus : " Mr. Sheridan, after complimenting his
friend Mr. Burke," would certainly be referred to as
" Burke, p. 120." The difficulty of abstracting what ´is essential and of referring it to its proper head
is enormous. The well- known story of " Best, Mr.
Justice Best, his great mind," need only be alluded to. What can seem more drudging ? And yet
there is a certain meritorious charm in it. Thus
poor Mr. Hodman labours on with a certain pride and purpose. There have been some prodigies of
this sort of navvy-work in our day-
" How index-learning turns no student pale,
Yet holds the eel of science by the tail."
Fuller quaintly says, "Without an index a large
author is but a labyrinth, without a clue to direct a
reader therein. I confess there is a kind of learning
which is only indical, when scholars (like adders, only
bite the horse-heels) , nibble but at the tables, neglectng the body of the book. But though the idle derve no crutches, pity it is the weary should be nied the benefit thereof."
G
98
The
Library
.
Alas ! the drudges are not all so handsomely
remunerated as were certain barristers who in 1778
were appointed to index the journals of the House
of Commons, for which they received close on
£14,000.
1
Di Binding and its Curiosities.
T is natural perhaps, when all that con- cerns "books " is so precious, recherché,
and of exceeding interest, that the protecting covering (without which the
leaves would all part company one by
one) should become a subject of desire for the col- lector, ravening for what is collectable. Hence the
rage for " BINDINGS," which has only comparatively
recently attracted the gatherer of voracious appetite.
In our own generation , opulent amateurs have entered
this department, and " run up " prices to the most
extravagant pitch. Few men, indeed, are above the
influence of binding ; for Roscoe, remarking on the
taste for the decoration of books, says, " It is perhaps difficult to discern why a favourite book should
not be as proper an object of elegant ornament as
the head of a cane, the hilt of a sword, or the latchet
of a shoe." Another says, " The binding is the robe
of honour in which we invest a noble book, and upon
the binding we impress its external insignia of rank
and merit." Adam Smith, one of the least showy of
men, confessed himself to be a beau in his books, and
probably the majority of men of letters are so to some
extent. Thomson, however, used to cut the leaves
with the snuffers,
497789
100 Binding and its Curiosities.
"Bindings " is one of the most fascinating and,
alas costliest of the many tastes or manias which
pursue the bibliophilist. It may, indeed, ultimately
become a rabies, when the unfortunate victim must
buy regardless of cost, even unto beggary, until, by
a fitting Nemesis, he is ruthlessly stripped of the treasures that beggared him. Old bindings of the first
class are now ardently sought, and at huge prices,
and the matter is complicated by an additional taste
for gold scutcheons and devices on the outside, and
for book-plates within ; nay, some of them, such as
those with the De Croy arms and Grolier's, are secured at fancy and almost terrific amounts. We
thus arrive at this odd inversion , that books are to
be bought for the sake of the binding, not the bind- ing for the sake of the books. There is indeed an
air of romance about many of these old coverings ,
and we gaze with curiosity and reverence at the
elegant and decorated volumes which have come
from the libraries of those light and airy ladies,
Margaret of Valois or Diana of Poitiers. Of late
years a good many specimens belonging to these
personages have come under the hammer, and these
are distinguished by a charming elegance of treatment, set off with piquant devices. They are, besides,
the handiwork of eminent masters. Clovis Eve was
the artist who adorned the volumes of Margaret, and
on his volumes, besides the fine workmanship, is to
be noted her motto, Expectata non eludet, and that
pretty device, the daisy. Many of them are classics
and modern Latin works, giving us an idea of the
owner's accomplishments. Thus even in the auctionroom we can fortify or illustrate our history.
What associations come back on us as we take
the dainty volume into our hands-say the " Cent
TA
Binding and its Curiosities. ΙΟΙ
Nouvelles." There are visions of the League, Henry
the Fourth, all faded out, extinct, and dim ; and yet the little tome was once in her hands ! Diana of Poitiers' piquant books are also coveted. Is there not
a melodious sound in the names of the old binders,
such as Clovis Eve ? At the sound the collector or the
dealer pricks up his ears, and his eyes kindle. It is
as though he were enjoying some full and juicy fruit ;
and "binding by Derome, with his ticket," to the
enragé collector has the melody of an organ chant.
"
This taste for beautiful bindings by masters of the
art has sprung up within the last few years, and
if not carried to extravagance, can hardly be pronounced an illegitimate one. For as binding is an
art, so there must be specimens some more beautiful,
and professors more skilful than others. At the
great sales of fifty years ago, it has been noted the
names of Pasdeloup, Derome, &c . , were never quoted
as recommendations to a volume, though " English
binding was a charm that might stimulate bidders.
About thirty years ago the eager pursuit of bibliopegistic treasures-is not this a truly absurd title ?
-began, set on foot, it is said, by a certain eminent
bibliophilist, Brunet. This connoisseur, the greatest
authority on all that is old and rare, was bitten in his
old age with this binding mania or phrenzy. His
new passion was said to have been really prompted
by a singular scene which took place at the Parison
sale in Paris, where a little obscure " Telemaque," of
the date of 1725, and which in ordinary course
might be worth a few francs at most, was put up for
competition. But one bibliophilist, or rather bibliopegist, had noticed that it bore on its cover a rich
device ofthe Golden Fleece, which had been selected
by a certain tolerably obscure dramatist. Brunet
102 Binding and its Curiosities.
saw a piquancy in this copy, and determined to
secure it, but found that a wealthy financier coveted
the book also. To the astonishment of the room, the
two bid against each other furiously-avec acharnement, we are told. No one could understand it in
those days of darkness. The bibliophilist finally
carried off the " Golden Fleece " device (not the book) for the enormous sum of £68. "Madness ! "
"Folly ! " " Ridiculous caprice ! ". such were the
criticisms, and the purchaser himself was much disturbed at his victory. But he was not far out after
all. At his sale in 1868 it was sold for £88, and
has since been on offer at £ 160. The same amateur was in possession of a La Fontaine, a " FarmersGeneral copy, the rare edition of 1762, binding
by Pasdeloup, described as " of a mosaic kind,
laid out in compartments of red and green morocco,
on a yellow ground of fruit and flowers." For this
he had paid but £ 13, but the book was actually sold
for £288, and finally passed to the cabinet of a rich
amateur for £560 !
Some of the finest existing examples are to be
seen in the great libraries and treasuries of Europe,
e.g. , the cloisonnée enamel cover of the Greek
Gospels in the library of Siena ; an ivory cover of
Byzantine school at Würzburg, in Bavaria ; the
remarkable early pieces in carved ivory at Berlin ;
the Codex Wittikind ; the very early cover in the
Hildesheim Treasury, " open cut," studded with crystals, gems, and cameos ; the most interesting ivory
carved cover of the Psalter of Charles the Bald, preserved in the Imperial Library of Paris ; the beautiful
cover in copper-gilt and niello of the Sainte-Chapelle
New Testament at Paris, besides several other remarkable examples in our own National Museum.
31་
Binding and its Curiosities. 103
One ofthe most interesting and remarkable books
in the world, both for its contents and its binding,
belongs to the British nation, viz. , the Bedford
Missal, which has a regular pedigree, and whose history can be traced. This work was a book of
prayers, executed for John, Duke of Bedford, Regent
of France, " containing fifty-nine miniature paintings,
which nearly occupy the whole page, and above a
thousand small miniatures, of about an inch and a
half in diameter, displayed in brilliant borders of
golden foliage, with variegated flowers, &c. This
rich book is 11 inches by 7 wide and 2 thick,
bound in crimson velvet, with gold clasps, on which
are engraved the arms of Harley, Cavendish, and
Hollis, quarterly.
"It was in the year 1430 that Henry the Sixth
is known to have gone on a visit to Rouen ; so it fell
probably at the siege of Rouen into the hands of
Charles the Sixth. By Henry the Second of France
it was subsequently decorated with the arms of Diana
de Poictiers and Catherine de Medici. From this
period, and two hundred years later, it came into
the hands of Sir Robert Worseley of Appuldurcombe,
in the Isle of Wight, Bart. , to whose lady it had
descended from her mother, Lady Frances Finch, by
whom it had been purchased in France for £100.
Lady Worseley sold it to Edward Harley, second
Earl of Oxford, who prefixed to it the arms of Harley
and Hollis, and bequeathed it to his daughter, the
Duchess of Portland. At the Duchess's sale in
1786 it was purchased for two hundred and three
guineas (George the Third having bid up to two
hundred), by Mr. James Edwards, the bookseller, at
the disposal of whose library in 1815 it was bought
by the Marquis of Blandford, afterwards Duke of
104 Binding and its Curiosities.
Marlborough, for six hundred and fifty-five guineas
(the contest for which is described in Dibdin's Decameron). The Duke afterwards parted with it, on
consideration of a loan of three hundred guineas,
to John Milner, Esq. , who afterwards became the
owner, it was rumoured, at £800. Mr. Milner disposed of it to John Broadley, Esq. , F.S.A. , and at
the sale of that gentleman's library on June 19,
1833, it was purchased by Mr. Cochran, the bookseller, on commission for Sir John Tobin, Alderman
of Liverpool, for the sum of one thousand guineas.
In the year 1838 it became the property (by gift)
of the Rev. John Tobin, M.A. , Incumbent of Liskeard,
near Liverpool, who sold it in January 1853, together with other splendid manuscripts, to Mr. W.
Boone, bookseller, of Bond Street, who directly
offered it to the Trustees for the sum of £3000. ” *
How say you, amiable and interested reader, is
not this story of the vicissitudes of a book curious ?
And how strangely linked to the course of human life !
The common mode of binding in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries was a simple parchment wrapper, with the edges folded down. Where oaken
boards were used, " waste " leaves of other works
were pasted in as a lining, while the boards were
covered with sheepskin, marked with a pattern in
circles, &c. Caxton is said to have adopted this
mode, and Mr. Blades gives an interesting illustration
of what may be gathered from so trivial a thing as
the lining of a book-cover. For from a copy of Boece,
and from some fifty-six half-sheets gathered from
other volumes, it was found that these must have
been fragments of three works of Caxton hitherto
quite unknown.
* Sanders MS. , penes me.
Binding and its Curiosities. 105
As was to be expected, binding being a fine art,
there are authorities and elaborate works on the subject
-Dibdin, Peignot, and Paulin. There is also Jacob's
" La reliure depuis l'antiquité jusqu'au dix septième
siècle," which is found in the author's " Le Moyen
Age. " Techener has an elaborate work, " Histoire
de la Bibliophilie, " with facsimile illustrations. Monographs on celebrated pieces of binding are to be found
scattered about, notably in the " Bulletin de Bibliophile, " and in catalogues such as that of the Libri
Library. Finally comes the latest, the treatise of
Mr. Zaehnsdorf, a pleasing work by a practical and tasteful workman.
The recent sales offered a goodly display of bindings. The Sunderland was notably rich in specimens
-witness the noble folio " in Grolier style by Clovis
Eve, distinguished as much by the exquisite style of
the design as by the condition and extraordinary
finish of the work, which is elaborately tooled and
painted in compartments. It was bound, we are
told, for a collector whose name it bears-R, D. Manaldi-but who is now unknown to fame, though his
book has a pedigree from the library of Thuanus and
the Marquis de Menars, who, however, was vain
enough to stamp his arms in gaudy gold in the very
centre ofthe beautiful design of Clovis Eve. " The book
itself, which measures 14 inches by 10 inches, is of no
great merit. Another singularly interesting book is
Grolier's own dedication copy of Rhodoginus, "Antiquæ Lectiones," with a beautifully painted large monogram ofall theletters of his name in capitals interlaced,
and on another page bearing the dedication and arms
finely painted in gold and colours, with his mottoes.
Amore interesting and brilliant collection was now to come. The Duke of Hamilton had married the
106 Binding and its Curiosities.
daughter of the well-known Mr. Beckford, a virtuoso
of the old magnificent school, albeit eccentric. He
was a writer, too, of no mean capacity and much
picturesque power. His son-in-law also had a taste
for rare and costly books, though in a different direction ; and the two splendid collections, after the
deaths of their owners, came under the same roof at
Hamilton Palace, though kept apart and distinct. *
The Beckford was noted for the superb collection of
bindings-beautiful bindings in themselves, but remarkable also as having come from the collections
of famous amateurs of binding. Here were seen in
profusion works from the libraries " of Popes and
Cardinals, Kings and Queens of France, Grand Seigneurs of all kinds, whose books glittered in gold and
devices of their owners, " folios from the Papal palace
and from cardinals' and bishops' libraries, usually
sumptuous-looking things, from their splendid golden
escutcheons, tiaras, and cross- keys, and the cardinal's
hat or mitre displayed on old crimson morocco.
Here, too, were seen the finest productions of the
finest binders · Le Gascon, Pasdeloup, Derome,
Thouvenin, Monnier, Desseuit, Nicholas and Clovis
Eve ; Roffet, Meux, Ruette, Boyer, Baumgarten, Kalteeber, Staggemeier, Walther, Roger Payne, Welkher,
Hering, Charles Lewis, and Bedford. There were
many books from libraries of royal and other amateurs known to be luxurious in the matter of bindings
or sumptuous in their tastes. Then there were books
-
* It may be mentioned , in connection with the subject of this union of libraries, that the present Lord Malmesbury enjoys the usufruct of no less than three libraries. His grandfather, the well-known philosopher, had formed one in his own line ; his successor, the diplomatist, made another abroad, chiefly of foreign works and elegant literature ; while the present holder of the title made another after his own taste.
"4
Binding and its Curiosities. 107
that had belonged to Francis I. , Henry III. and IV. ,
Louis XIV. , Marguerite de Valois, to famous Popes,
to Christina of Sweden, James I. , Queen Anne, Queen
Mary II. , and George IV.; besides books from such
famous libraries as the Dukes of Grammont and
Montmorency, Villars, and Richelieu (what a ring in
these august names ! ) , Prince de Soubise, Prince
Talleyrand, Duchess of Berry, the Italian families of
Cornaro and Contarini, " all arrayed in magnificent
coatings, displaying the exquisite bibliopegistic skill "
of every celebrated binder.
Here also were seen specimens of binding from
famous libraries, such as that of Maioli, which certainly brought absurd prices, solely for its devices
and bindings. Thus a " Boccaccio, " in one volume,
with " Thomas Maioli et Amicor," and on the reverse his motto, " Inimici mei mea mihi non me
mihi," very rare, brought £365. A " Book of
Hours," with " Grolier tooling, " fetched £349. Of
all these choice works, those belonging to Grolier's
library seem to be most recherché, and fetch prices that seem extravagant, if not ridiculous. The
"Toison d'Or," by the Prince Jasn, 1563, but having
the interlacing arms of the Duc de Guise painted on
the side, brought £405. Arare Scotch work, a poetical translation of the Psalms, a beautiful copy in
olive morocco, the sides and back covered with gold
tooling in the Grolier style, the first arms of Thuanus
forming the centre ornament, fetched £310. But
the following, for its associations and general
beautifyings, was one of the gems of the sale :-A
beautiful copy of the " Heptameron of Marguerite
de Valois," which belonged to Louis XIV. , bound
in brown morocco extra, with elegant border, on
which are introduced the crown, fleur-de-lys, stag,
108 Binding and its Curiosities.
cock and star, having as a centre ornament the
arms of France, all worked in gold , lined with
vellum, covered with gold tooling, having " May,
1695 , " in the centre, gilt marbled edges by Ruette.
No wonder it brought £406.
At the Sunderland sale a specimen of Monnier's
binding brought £530.
Many years ago there was shown in the Stowe
Library a book of singular historical interest, and
which was also remarkable as a specimen of the old
fashion of binding. This was the " Book of Gospels, ” on which the early English kings down to the
time of Edward VI. took the coronation oath. It
was arrayed in ponderous oak boards an inch thick,
fastened by huge leathern thongs. The corners were
protected by huge bosses of brass, while on the
cover was a huge brazen crucifix which the monarchs
kissed. Brazen clasps mounted in leather secured
the volume. This interesting relic, after figuring in
the possession of a Norfolkshire gentleman, was
some years ago heard of as being the property of
“a lady in Belgravia. ”
The name of GROLIER ever kindles the eye of
the bibliophilist. The sight of one of this master's
books fills him with enthusiasm. Grolier really takes
rank with the painters, and excites a keen competition. He was one of the four treasurers of France
during the reign of Francis I., and the most celebrated of old book collectors. The binding he
adopted was remarkable for the fine character of its
interlaced ornament, which is said to have been
designed by himself in moments of leisure. We
find it recorded with astonishment, some twenty or
thirty years ago, that a bookseller gave £150 for
an Aldus, "rich and refulgent, yet quiet through
Binding and its Curiosities. 109
its Grolier tooling. " Each volume of his library was
adorned with the amiable inscription, " The property
of John Grolier and his friends " —a curious contrast
to that of another French collector, whose book- plate
bears a text from the parable of the Ten Virgins :
"Go to them that sell, and buy for yourselves. "
The prices realised for specimens of the ancient
bindings were perfectly marvellous at the sale of the
choicest portion of the library of M. Libri, the most
eminent of modern book-collectors, which took place
in London in the beginning of 1860. " The collection
exhibited specimens of the finest bibliopegistic skill
from the fifteenth century to the present time, and
embraced not only the magnificent samples of binding bestowed on the volumes by private amateurs
like Grolier, Maioli, De Thou, Count d'Hoym, Longepierre, and others equally celebrated , but was particularly rich in books which formerly had been the
private property of popes, emperors, kings, princes,
cardinals, and reigning sovereigns of England,
France, Italy, Germany, &c. , all magnificently
bound, and bearing either their arms or the devices
known to have been adopted by them. These seem
to have been collected with a view of tracing the
history of ornamentation. They had availed themselves ofthe skill of the best artists to obtain designs
or patterns, several of which are known to have been
furnished by Giovanni da Verona, Andrea del Sarto,
le petit Bernard, and even the great Raffaele himself. "
The characteristics of the binding of this school
were an elegance and delicacy of touch, the gilt lines
flowing and interlacing with much freedom-a freedom that was secured by not sinking the golden lines.
so deeply as is done now ; they were more on the surface. It may be conceived, too, that the leather
110 Binding and its Curiosities.
cannot be so indented or scored as to avoid breaking the surface ; whereas by the lines being traced
lightly, the gold is shown to better effect. The work
of these old masters seems to have the freedom of
etching or engraving, so airy are the lines.
It would almost seem that the designs for binding
of Grolier, Maioli, and Clovis Eve, and kindred masters, were often suggested, if not copied from the
florid frameworks of the title-pages of the French
and Italian little quartos in the sixteenth century.
These seem again to be taken from the free-hand
carved frames and florid scroll-work of the day. The
idea seems to have been to decorate the sides as a
framing for the device. Grolier's library contained
about three thousand volumes, and it is declared that
each fetched about £ 120. Each side was decorated,
one with the device above quoted, the other with the
pious one " Let my portion be in the land of the
living." The variety and ingenuity of his interlacing
of patterns of different shapes crossing and intersecting each other is very pleasing. Bonaventure d'Argonne, an amateur of the day, thus described Grolier's
collection : " We might almost think that the Muses,
who had done so much for the inside of the books,
had striven to take their share in the outside, so much
art and esprit is seen in these decorations." They
are gilt with a delicacy unknown to later gilders.
The compartments are often painted in colours, a.e
admirably designed, and are all of different shapes.
Clovis Eve's style was more purely geometrical, while
Le Gascon is associated with the beautiful tracery
which covered the sides like a golden net, though the
effect was found at last a little monotonous. Often it
takes the shape of a golden spray. One work of his,
"La Guirlande de Julie, " is considered a triumph, and
1
1
Binding and its Curiosities. IJL
never to have been surpassed in the tone of the gilding, finesse, and workmanship.
The treatment of large quartos and folios by
binders ofthe present century has seemed always to
be directed by wrong principles. It is only when we
contrast it with the simple and perfectly effective and
legitimate system of the older masters that we see its
failings. English binders of this school were particularly favourable to a sort of buff- coloured calf, which
makes but an insipid contrast with the profuse gilding, scored at the edges with a rich flowery pattern ,
so as to give the idea of a border. Most of the books
in the Syston Park Library were bound in a fashion
that has long since gone out, but which was in vogue
some fifty years ago, the principle of which seems to
have been an elaborate bordering, of a geometrical
kind, very broad bars, and rich gold. The effect was
unmeaning and heavy. It seemed to suggest an imitation of a raised or mechanical border. The fashion
of our day is to make the tone and workmanship of
the leatherthe main object. The light line of gilding
is adopted to set off the covering, as a light trimming
would a dress ; whereas the former system was the
reverse to use the leather as a means of setting off
the gilding and decoration. The placing a golden
border on the edge of anything is as false a principle
as placing a rich lace border at the edge of a lady's
dress next to the ground, where rough usage and contact with the ground would soon destroy it. The solid
lines of border should be traced at some distance from
the edge, and thus preservation as well as effect is
secured. Within, the linings were well tooled and
scored with parallel lines and flourishings at each
These lines, much attenuated, lack force and
breadth, and the whole effect is poor,
The leaves are
corner.
112 Binding and its Curiosities.
" shaved " smooth, and the gilding shows in one
unbroken surface. Now, compare the olden style
as displayed in some folio or spacious quarto handled
by Derome or La Ruette. Here a well-grained
fine skin is selected , of rich ripe plum colour, and the
idea is to show that it is a leathern cover or jacketing
for the volume. In the decoration the skin is treated
as a skin. In the centre on this ground may be
displayed the coat of arms, while the leather is
allowed to be seen at the edges without gilding—a
sign of practical purpose and use, besides being contrasted with the sinuous and irregular " old gold "
leaves. But within a quarter of an inch of the edge
are drawn three delicate gold lines running all round,
which have a strange simplicity and elegance conjoined, and are infinitely more effective than the
English bordering. The English boards of this
period lie as square and stiffly as if made of timber :
the foreign work has a flexibility, and offers curvings.
Again, the ornaments used in modern binding are
too meagre and stereotyped , and different from the
bold, rich, and effective floweret, scroll , or fleur-de-lys.
Leather is not suited to such fine lines or designs,
save only when delicately touched and on the surface ;
for even with Le Gascon's network the general
effect is as of a mass of gold. The tendency of the
binding of our time is in the direction of this olden
simplicity ; large, expansive, and well-toned skins,
treated with consummate workmanship, and with few
or delicate " toolings "" on the slightest and most
modest scale.
The latter part of the eighteenth century saw
English bookbinding carried to its highest pitch of
celebrity by the remarkable skill of Roger Payne.
He came to London about 1700, and soon acquired
Binding and its Curiosities. 113
a reputation in his art which placed him above
rivalry, notwithstanding his utter want of prudence
and orderly habits. Towards the end of his life he
worked for John Mackinlay, one of the most popular
binders of the period in London, under whom many
of the later English binders of chief note learnt their
trade. David Walker was contemporary with Mackinlay, to whom Charles Lewis was apprenticed in
1800. To the skill and judgment of Roger Payne,
Lewis added business qualities which won for him
respect as well as admiration. Dibdin says of him,
"The particular talent of Lewis consists in uniting
the taste of Roger Payne with a freedom of ' forwarding ' and squareness of finishing peculiarly his own.
His books appear to move on silken hinges. His
joints are beautifully squared, and wrought upon
with studded gold, and in his inside decorations he stands without a compeer."
It is rather difficult to understand the admiration for the work of this most famous of English
binders, Roger Payne. It has certainly the merits of
a plain severity and simplicity, and of excellent workmanship ; but there is a monotony in his favourite
red and absence of tooling. There is also a lack of
that elegance of touch and daintiness which distinguishes the old foreign binders. We note also the
absence of that proportionate treatment which is the
charm of artistic work, For we find that too often
the little pocket Elzevir is treated on about the same
scale as a large quarto, Roger using the same roughly
grained red morocco and simple tooling as he did
for some huge tome. Neither are the joints so free
and like to a hinge, and there is a faint idea of
clumsiness. His peculiar red tint is inharmonious
compared with the rich mellow plum colour of H
114 Binding and its Curiosities.
Derome, while his "tooling " is stiff, without that
unobtrusive delicacy of the gold lines and borders
of the French artist.
This binder, like so many other persons of talent
and genius, was an eccentric enthusiast, never in
possession of money, and fond of drink. His appearance was that of a quaint and attenuated old man ;
but his work had an unmistakable cachet or " touch,”
and very little experience enables one to recognise a
Roger Payne binding. There was a little roughness
and clumsiness, as we have said, about the back, but
there was a bold effective treatment about the rest
of the volume, and he seemed to keep in view, what
many binders forget, that the leather was the main
element, not to be too much overlaid with gilding
and decoration. It was a fortunate day for him when
he secured the patronage of that munificent amateur,
Lord Spencer, who trusted him with his finest and
most precious volumes to dress. Some of his bills
have been preserved, which are as quaint and eccentric as himself, and often embody a vindication of
his charges. Thus, for binding an old edition of
Petrarch :-
The paper was very weak, especially at the back of the book. I was obliged to use new paper
in ye washing, to keep the book from being torne or broken. To paper for washing
To washing. There was a great deal of writing ink and the bad stains. It required several
washings to make the paper of the book quite safe. For tho' the book with one or two
washings would look as well as at present, it will not stand the test of Time without repeated washings—carefully and quite honestly done •
To siseing very carefully and strong
·
£ s. d.
0 20
090
. 076
Binding and its Curiosities. 115
Eschylus. Finished in the most magnificent
manner, embordered with ermine, expressive
of the high rank of the noble patroness ofthe
designs, the other parts finished in the most elegant taste, measured with the compasses.
It takes a great deal of time making out the different measurements, &c. . • £12 12 O
Roger Payne ended a life of labour, poverty, and
intemperance in St. Martin's Lane, and was buried
at the expense of his friend, Mr. Payne the bookseller. This Eschylus is deemed his chefd'œuvre.
He was very singular in his conduct ; made all his
own tools, and never would work before any person,
but always in some secluded cellar, and only when
his necessities called upon him for exertion.
The late Mr. Bedford was perhaps the greatest
and most elegant of modern binders, combining the
characteristics of solid English workmanship with
the finish of the foreign school. Our present school
of binding is a good deal imitative, Zaehnsdorf and
others reproducing the Grolier and Derome workmanship with perfect success.
In binding, as in other departments of art, to produce success it is necessary to follow strictly the
aims and principles of propriety and good sense.
How often we see the whole inside of the cover lined
with morocco and " tooled," with the idea of adding
to the magnificence of the whole. Testing it artistically, we find that the first result is the enfeebling of the general effect of the outside. The reflection
also occurs, if the leather is to protect and make
serviceable the outside, the same material must be quite unsuited for what is within . It becomes so
much waste. Again, the inside splendour is shut up,
excluded from the air, and rubbed by the pressure of
the opposite pages, and this idea of friction or pres-
116 Binding and its Curiosities.
sure is at once hostile to the use of any precious or
decorated material. This suggests that one of the
most tasteful and beautiful effects produced by the
old masters of binding was the perfect entente between this lining and the outside decoration, both
being, as it were, harmonised when the volume was
opened. This lining in Derome's books was almost
invariably a richly mellowed and deep- toned marbled
paper, which suggested the idea of service as well as
of beauty. Many of his linings were exquisite in
their taste and rich harmony. The idea suggested
was that of something subsidiary to the purpose of
the outside. The common marbled papers of our
time are inferior and staring. Neither are the poorer
papers-speckled like plover's eggs-more effective.
The truth is, all should be designed together, lining
and outside. For large books a larger treatment
and larger pattern and bolder colours are requisite.
At the present moment the rage for collecting
bindings is at its height. There are amateurs, like
the Duke d'Aumale, who will give any price, not for
a fine piece of binding, but for pieces of a master's
work. One of the later binding fanciers was the late
Baron F. de Rothschild of Paris. This accomplished
man, who was remarkable as a financier, railway director, &c. , and took a conspicuous share in the direction
of his great house, was cut off at the early age of thirtyseven. His taste lay in the direction of early French
romances, poems, &c. , of which he had collected a
vast number. His taste and knowledge was proved
by his extraordinary gift of endurance in that most
painful of all drudgeries, copying. With his own
hand he had copied an enormous mass of rare papers and unique volumes. He was often seen at this
laborious task in our Museum, and he seems to have
Binding and its Curiosities. 117
taken pleasure in the monotonous duty. He was
accustomed to say that this he found the best mode
of reading and studying a writer, for he could remember the smallest detail of any manuscript or book he
had copied, and this extended even to variations of
the text, &c. When he had once undertaken to
transcribe a work, he never omitted doing some of
the copying every day. He had also a wonderful
instinct for the true value of everything that was old
and valuable ; he was not one of those magnificent purchasers who leave great orders at auctions,
but always attended in person, and bid on rational
principles ; not, as too many do, for the applause of
"the gallery." There was a pleasant simplicity and
honest enthusiasm in his " ways," for any day at a
particular hour he was to be found at a bookseller's in
the Passage des Panoramas, Morgand & Fatout's,
surrounded by a number of amateurs, with whom he
discoursed on this darling topic. At a later hour he
appeared at Rouquette's in the Passage Choiseul,
where we are told he met a class of fanatics devoted
to the collection of illustrated romances published
some sixty or seventy years ago, above all, with
the original paper covers on. This foolish craze now
obtains with us, and large sums are given for early
" Pickwicks," &c. , with their " green wrappers " on.
These people he pleasantly satirised by purchasing
a cheap copy of Hugo's poems in a villainous yellow
paper cover, which he would not have bound or
disturbed, but placed in a morocco case specially
made for it. To some it seemed that this was
genuine enthusiasm, but it was in truth a pleasant
jest. He used also gravely to point out to them that
they were neglecting a really important branch in
not collecting the paper backs of these illustrated
118 Binding and its Curiosities.
tomes, with their dates and inscriptions. His superb
library, so rich in early French literature, was a
monument of taste and erudition, of which a sump- tuous catalogue raisonné had been prepared by his
own laborious hand, with a title and proper descrip- tion of each work. This sensible bibliophile, it is
noted, never indulged in the usual exaggerated and unfounded encomiums of books, such as "very rare,"
"fine copy," " believed to be unique. " He was a
particular amateur of the old bindings, and here
again he was nice and exigent, for he allotted no
piece of work to Pasdeloup or Le Gascon on the
testimony of their tooling, &c. , but only on their
official signatures. This fine catalogue, in thick and sumptuous royal octavo, is notable for some rather
original illustrations of binding. Four or five exquisite specimens are shown, the covers, gold, &c. ,
exactly reproduced, with even the raised embossing,
the sunk " tooling," the actual texture of leather, &c. ,
and the effect is really marvellous.
Jules Richard, a French amateur, tells us with
much gout: " Like all great artists, great binders
are intractable. We have not only to cover their
productions with gold pieces , but must wait their
convenience fifteen or eighteen months, even two
years, be you king or prince, or even, " he adds with
sly sarcasm, "President of the Republic. You
should always," our Frenchman goes on, 66 bind up
with a book its printed cover, even though the cover
be the same as the title. Every good bibliophilist
will take care to add to his book everything that will
enhance its price. You should have a copy taken
on the finest paper, or, if this be impossible, one without blemishes. Then a portrait of the author
should be got, his autograph, engravings made from
Binding and its Curiosities. 119
other editions, and in different states. " Our bibliophilist then adds this emphatic declaration : " I
declare," he says, "that if a library were formed on
this plan, begun say in 1882, composed mainly of
first editions, and kept steadily up for twenty years
on this plan, at the rate merely of a hundred volumes
a year, it would be worth by that time fully £2000. "
""
As a little indication of what collectors seek with
avidity, we come on the following :-" Thuanus, His
First Marriage. -Clamengiis ( N. de) Opuscula Aureum, Paris, 1512-21 , in 1 vol. sm. 4to, fine copy,
in old sage green morocco, with the large Arms of
J. A. Thuanus in gold on sides, and Monogram interlaced with that of Marie, his First Wife, in gold
on back ; " also, " Thuanus, His Second Marriage.
-Bossche, Historia Medica, fine copy, bright old gilt
calf, very neat, with the Arms of Thuanus and Gasparde de la Chastre, his Second Wife, in gold on
sides, and interlaced Monogram in gold on back, very
rare. This opens a subdivision ; for you may possess the De Thou monogram interlaced with that of
his first wife, but without the second you are utterly
incomplete ! To show how endless the business is, it
must be known that if you collect bindings, you must
display specimens of the grand libraries, such as that.
of Colbert, Harlay, &c. , and, above all, specimens of
that tasteful Marquise de Vielboisy, " Louise- Françoise d'Harlay de Celi, " whose collection was noted
for being bound by the most celebrated bibliopegistic
artists of her time. Well might we covet her Delphin Livy, in six volumes quarto, dressed in fine old
morocco, extra gilt and marbled edges (pretty combination) , and her arms and cipher stamped in gold
in four compartments.
Amuch-debated question arises as to the " plough-
120 Binding and its Curiosities.
ing" (as it is called) of the leaves, thus saving the
reader the trouble of using the paper-knife. This
seems a convenience ; but it is beyond question obtained at the sacrifice of artistic considerations and
injures the book. Shaving or ploughing the edges
should properly not be done at all, that is , not with the
guillotine, which pares away wholesale with beautiful
accuracy. Under the old system of a knife used
by the hand, it was possible to apply a certain delicacy, and do little more than trim the rough edges.
But when the book is issued with shaved edges, a portion of the margin is cut away ; and when it is sent to
be bound formally, there is a second shaving, and it
becomes a maimed, cut-down, poor thing. This smooth
edge, too, contrasts hideously with the cloth cover of
the unbound book ; it is like putting fine lace on a
frieze coat. But, in truth, the making the gilt edges
as smooth as though they were planed is also a
falsely inartistic principle and a disguise ; for the
leaves are separate things and
expression should be retained.
than the effect produced by the
Derome, who allowed each leaf to express itself in
wavy lines with a dull “ old gold ” colour.
are details, and their
Nothing is more rich
old binders, such as
Intimately connected with this is the question of
margin. It is foolishly imagined that a margin is a
thing of arbitrary caprice. There is a law regulating
this, as everything else, based on proportion, and
arising really out of the mechanical arrangement of the printer. His "formes " are made to contain so
many pages, laid out according to the size of the
sheet ; the margin is the expression of the interval
between each page as they lie before him. Margins
must, therefore, increase at the expense of the
page, till the absurdity is reached that a book's size
}
Binding and its Curiosities. 121
is regulated by the size of the paper space, not by that Thus a duodecimo page of the printed portion.
might rank and fold as an octavo.
66 But this is a technical view. Large paper copies," as they are called,
are a different thing from these exaggerated margins.
These expensive luxuries are furnished by the printer,
who, after the impression has been taken off, has to
arrange his pages in larger formes, filling the additional space with wedges, an operation of expense.
But it was worth the cost, and the effect was handsome ; a thicker or more solid paper was necessary,
to be in harmony. Still the effect is often bizarre
and odd, owing to the type, which seems out of proportion.
Vast margins are often ridiculous exaggerations—
" rivulets of type running through a meadow of
margin ”—and present a greater superficial surface
of blank paper than does the type itself, as though
the fringe or border of the garment were broader than the garment.
Of course the extravagance in bindings has often
furnished an opening for the display of fantastic
tricks and fads, and the foolish have chosen to display their humour in this way, much as some vapid
dame will dress up her honest dog and make him
ridiculous. We have only to enter our libraries to find
some of these exhibitions. A " Manual of Woodcarving " has been bound in wood by Bemrose & Sons. In
a bookseller's catalogue we read of a Latin copy of
Apuleius ' " Golden Ass " ( 1501 ) bound in ass's-skin.
The Duke of Roxburghe's library contained a collection of pamphlets ( 1724, &c. ) respecting Mary Tofts
(who pretended to be confined of rabbits), of Godalming, Surrey, bound in rabbit-skin . The Hon. George
Napier had a work relating to the celebrated dwarf,
122 Binding and its Curiosities.
Jeffrey Hudson, bound in a piece of Charles the First's
silk waistcoat. At Perry's sale, a copy of the " New
Year's Gift," also bound in a piece of the waistcoat
of Charles the First, sold for £8, 8s. Mordaunt
Cracherode, the father of the celebrated book-collector,
wore one pair of buckskin breeches exclusively during a voyage round the world, and a volume in his son's
collection (now in the British Museum) is bound in a
part ofthese circumnavigating unmentionables. " Tuberville on Hunting" was bound by Whittaker in deerskin, on the cover of which was placed a silver stag.
Fox's " Historical Works " were bound in fox-skin,
and Bacon's works in hog- skin. It is said Dr. Askers
had a work bound in human skin, for the payment of
which his binder prosecuted him. One offspring of the horrors of the first French Revolution was this
grim humour of binding books with the skin of
human beings. A Russian poet is said lately to have
offered to the lady of his affections a collection of his sonnets bound in leather-human leather -which the
poet himself furnished ! On falling from his horse
one day he broke his thigh, and being obliged to
undergo amputation, he had the skin carefully tanned
and reserved for some purpose of the kind. A public library in Bury St. Edmunds contains an octavo
volume, consisting of a full report of the trial and
execution of Corder, who murdered a young woman
named Martin at a spot called the Red Barn in a
neighbouring village about forty years ago, together with an account of his life and other cognate matter.
This volume is bound in the murderer's skin, which
was tanned for the purpose by a surgeon in the town.
The human leather is darker and more mottled than
vellum, of a rather coarse-textured surface, with holes
in it like those in pigskin, but smaller and more
Binding and its Curiosities. 123
sparse. A collector happened to be in a bookbinder's
shop about twenty years ago, on St. Michael's Hill ,
Bristol, when he was shown several volumes which
had been sent from the Bristol Law Library to repair.
These were all bound in human skin, specially tanned
for the purpose ; and some curious details were furnished of several local culprits executed in that city,
who were flayed after execution to furnish forth the
leather for binding together some contemporary legal lore. On May 15 , 1874, was sold in Paris, by
auction , the first part of the curious library of the late
M. Lucien de Rosny, father of the eminent Japanese
scholar. It was rich in fine and, above all, eccentric
bindings, such as in skins of cat, garnet coloured and
buff, crocodile, mole, seal, fur of the Canadian black
wolf, royal tiger, otter, white bear, sole, and rattlesnake.
We
It has been often noticed that there is a physiognomy in books, which the very character of their
contents enforces. Who does not recognise from
its back or outside the " Poems by Tennyson," a
small green dainty volume, or the Macaulay History? Some books are intended for ornament.
know the gaudy volumes that repose at all the
points of the compass on the drawing-room of the apartments to let, or those on the dentist's or doctor's
table in the room where the patients bide their time
sadly. Every judicious binder will have the decency
to bind his volumes according to their degree and
quality. He will not, for instance, dress the "Annual
Register" or the " Year- Book of Facts " in morocco
extra. These are surely Lamb's "things in books'
clothing;" who justly complains of the disappoint- ment, " To reach down a well-bound semblance of
a volume, and hope it some kind-hearted playbook,
124 Binding and its Curiosities.
then, opening what seems its leaves,' to come bolt
upon a withering population essay." These indeed
are doleful and dispiriting experiences ; an idea most
eloquently expressed by Shakespeare, and linked by
his poetry to human sympathies—
" O rare one !
Be not, as is our fangled world, a garment Nobler than that it covers : let thy effects So follow, to be most unlike our courtiers ,
As good as promise. "
So, too, Juliet, hearing that Romeo has slain Tybalt—
"Was ever book containing such vile matter So fairly bound? "
Each of the three daughters of Louis the Fifteenth
had her own library, the volumes of which are easily
recognised. Madame Adelaide had all her books
bound in redmorocco, Madame Sophie's were in citron
morocco, while Madame Victoire selected green morocco. A somewhat similar practice is adopted at the
British Museum. There the great majority of the
books are bound in half morocco, with cloth to match
the leather. Historical works are in red, theological
in blue, poetical in yellow, natural history in green.
Besides this, each part or volume is stamped with a
mark by which it can be distinguished as their property, and of different colours : thus red indicates
that a book was purchased, blue that it came by
copyright, and yellow that it was presented. The
Bodleian use the following colours : arts and trade
maroon, theology black, medicine light brown, mathematics and physics light green, history dark red,
poetry dark green, philology light red, classics neutral
tint, miscellaneous dark blue.
There is a device for giving effect to the leaves which
is scarcely worthy the dignity ofthe library. For this
Binding and its Curiosities. 125
purpose the edge of the book is well scraped and
burnished ; the leaves on the fore-edge are evenly bent
in an oblique manner, and in this position, confined
by boards tied tightly on each side, the fore-edge in
this position receives a coat of colouring matter, generally red ; when this is dry, the boards are removed,
the edges regain their ordinary position, and in this
form are gilt (sometimes marbled), the gilding being
afterwards duly burnished. When the book is closed ,
the gilt edge only is visible ; when opened, the obliquity of the leaves shows the red or whatever other
colour was adopted In like manner the same steps
are taken when it is desired to paint a landscape on
the edges instead of a whole colour. In the library
of the British and Foreign Bible Society there is an
old Swedish Bible that has a picture painted on the
edges of the leaves, which is not to be seen when the
book is closed, on account of the gold covering it ;
but one cover being thrown back and the leaves
slightly separated, the gilding disappears and you
perceive an antique figure of Christian on his journey
up the straight and narrow way to the Heavenly City,
beside portraits, emblems, views, &c.
This brings us to one of those bits of facetiousness
to which the scholar occasionally condescends, as if
to lighten his graver pursuits. Most persons have
seen in libraries those " dummy " things, after the
pattern ofbackgammon boards, which, appearing to be
ranged on shelves , simulate the titles of honest books,
to hide a door. This system has exercised some of
the best wits. Thus in Sir Thomas Acland's library
we find " Friend's Right of Entrance," " Trap on
Fictitious Entries, " " Treatise on the Law of Partitions," " Noah's Log- Book," " Millington on Covered
Ways," " Snug's the Word, by a Clerk of the Closet. "
126 Binding and its Curiosities.
Near the hinges of the disguised door the titles run―
" Squeak on Opening," " Bang on Shutting," and
" Hinge's Orations. "
In the Army and Navy Club library, Pall Mall,
are, or were to be found, quips in the same spirit.
"The Art of Turning, by Handle, " " The Rape ofthe
Lock," " The Law of Substitutes," " Treatise sur les
Sorties Imprevues, " " Essay on Woodbind," " Pasley
on Passages of Communication, " " Viner on Stoppages
in Transitu," " Blacklane on Fictitious Entry, " " Le
Livre Fermé," " The Blockade of the Sublime
Porte," and " Rien du Tout, in six volumes. " These
are not over-sparkling. But of a very different kind
were the exercises of the ingenious Tom Hood.
He supplied to the Duke of Devonshire, for a doorway out of the library at Chatsworth, some droll titles :- 66 Percy Vere in forty volumes, " " Dante's
Inferno, or Description of Van Demon's Land,"
"Lamb's Recollections of Suet, " " Malthus's Attack
on Infantry," " Macadam's Views in Rhodes, " " Bish's
Retreat of the Ten Thousand," " Pygmalion, by
Lord Bacon," "On Trial by Jury, with remarkable
Packing Cases, " " Memoirs of Mrs. Mountain, by
Ben Lomond," " Boyle on Steam," " Rules for
Punctuation, by a Thorough-bred Pointer," " Bookkeeping by Single Entry," " John Knox on Death's
Door," "Designs for Friezes, by Captain Parry,"
"On the Site of Tully's Offices, " " The Rape of the
Lock, with Bramah's Notes," Haughty-cultural
Remarks on London Pride, " " Lamb on the Death
of Wolfe," "Annual Parliaments, a Plea for Short
Commons," " On Sore Throat and the Migration of
the Swallow," " Debrett on Chain Piers," " Voltaire,
Volney, Volta (3 vols. ) , " " Peel on Bell's System,
"Freeling on Enclosing Waste Lands, " " Johnson's
66
""
Binding and its Curiosities. 127
Contradictionary," " Life of Jack Ketch, with cuts of
his own execution, " "Barrow on the Common Weal, "
"Cursory Remarks on Swearing, " " Shelley's Conchologist, " The Hole Duty of Man, by J. P. Brunel,"
"The Scottish Boccaccio, by D. Cameron," " Cook's
Specimens ofthe Sandwich Tongue, " " Hoyle on the
Game Laws," " In-i-go on Secret Entrances."
But at Gad's Hill, the late Mr. Charles Dickens,
ever pleasant and mirthful, devised a series of sham
titles for his shelves which are good of their kind,
and to these his friend Mr. Forster added the following "Dr. Kitchener's Life of Captain Cook, "
"Adam's Antecedents, from the Family Papers,"
"The Poetry of Doctors' Commons ( Proctor) ,"
"Vestiges of the Unnatural History of Taxation, "
"Bishop Philpott's Wanderings in the Holy Land,"
"The Corn Question, by John Bunyan, " " Retreat
of the Ten Thousand, by the Earl of Cardigan,"
"Savage on Civilisation (2 vols. ), " " An Impartial
View of the Gorham and Denison Controversies, by
Henry, Bishop of Exeter, " " Mr. J. Horner on Poets'
Corner."' *
Librarians and others who give out large quantities
of books for binding can record some amusing
mistakes as to the "lettering " and titles placed or misplaced on the backs. Thus, such a publication as "Thomas Adam's Works on Private Religious
A singular library exists at Warsenstein, near Cassel ; the books composing it, or rather the substitutes for them, being made of wood, and every one of them is a specimen of some different tree. The back is formed of its bark, and the sides
are constructed of polished pieces of the same stock. When put together, the whole forms a box ; and inside of it are stored the fruit, seed, and leaves, together with the moss which grows on the trunk, and the insects which feed upon the tree ; every volume corresponds in size, and the collection altogether has a
singular effect.
128 Binding and its Curiosities.
Thoughts," has been returned as " Adam's Private
Thoughts," and " Buffoon's Natural History " looks
like a practical joke. Recently Bishop King's dissertation on the " Origin of Evil " was sent home from the
binders lettered " King's Evil." Dr. Trusler's work
on " Synonyms, showing the distinctions between
words generally esteemed synonymous," was lettered
"Trusler's Synonymous Distinctions." It has been
humorously remarked that the indorsements at the back
ofbooks do not always intimate what is to follow, for
neitherthe " Novella of Leo, " or the " Extravagantés, "
as edited by Godefroi, contain matter of a light, airy,
or amusing kind. "The Diversions of Purley " is
deemed the toughest book in existence . Edgeworth's
Essay on Irish Bulls was actually ordered by a
farming society. M'Ewan " On the Types, " a book
treating of the types of Christianity in the old law,
has been deemed utterly useless by a compositor
or journeyman printer, who naturally expected to
find the book honestly descriptive of the tools of his trade. There are an infinite number of pleasant
mistakes and misapprehensions connected with the
titles of books. The late Mr. Le Fanu, the novelist,
when a child, mystified the booksellers by ordering in
the name of his father, a clergyman, a work called
"Dodd's Holy Curate, " and which could not be
found, though sought for " high and low. "
66 ""
Everything, indeed, connected with " Book " is
"collectable," or made a subject for the devotion of
the connoisseur. A pleasing custom that has long
been in vogue is that of the owner placing his bookplate or registry in the beginning of his books.
They pass from owner to owner, from library to
library, and each new possessor adds his own plate,
which often gives a singular interest to a book thus
Binding and its Curiosities. 129
inherited. * Some of these decorations are exceedingly artistic and also characteristic ; some of the older
ones in a fine, bold, and flowing style. Others are
in the nature of a " device " with a chosen motto,
quaint and suggestive, some artist friend, such as Mr.
Stacey Marks, having often designed them. Mr. F.
Locker, in a note to his Catalogue, states that the late
Sir W. Stirling- Maxwell designed nearly a hundred
for his acquaintances and friends. It is pleasant
to open some tome from an old library, and be
greeted by a flamboyant coat of arms-it may be ducal-with supporters in all due state ! It was
natural that the eager, greedy eye of the collector
should take note of these artistic adornments :
why not collect, scour high and low, " lay down, "
neatly paste, classify into countries ? Accordingly he
has long been at work at his gruesome function, purchasing books-odd inversion - for the sake of their
title escutcheons. The back in most cases is stripped
off; but the more reverential have a deft mode of extracting the plate by means of a press and moisture.
It seems the most distinguished collector in the
kingdom is the Rev. Thomas Carson of Dublin, who
has gathered the most artistic specimens, and is deeply
skilled in the lore and philosophy of such things.
The specimens given by Mr. Warren show that there
is a principle involved in such designs, and we are
amazed at the boldness and beauty of some of the
bookplates. There are innumerable forms — some
* The first who used armorial or other bookplates it would be difficult to ascertain ; they were certainly in general use on the Continent before the end of the sixteenth century. Mr. Hodgkin ofWest Derby has a 4to volume, printed at Strasburg about 1515,
with a bookplate of H. Eck, of a date he thinks not later than 1530. However, in the December 1869 Catalogue of M. Bachelin- Deflorenne, bookseller, Garrick Street, Covent Garden, is a de.
scription of two bookplates dated respectively 1279 and 1314.
I
130 Binding and its Curiosities.
allegorical, some heraldic, and different styles, such
as the Jacobean, &c. One very commonly met with
is what may be styled Chippendale, modelled on the
shape of the mirrors and other ornaments of that
designer. Cardinals and bishops command a special decorative advantage in the showy and effective hat
and tassels which serve as crest or canopy. As a
matter of course, there is a system and handbook
for the subject, and the Hon. J. Leicester Warren has
issued a pretty little volume dealing with what may be called the science of the " Ex Libris, " for such is
the technical name. Intimately connected with this department is, of course, the subject of devices
stamped in gold on the sides of books, which
being more ambitious, are the desire of the opulent collector. There is something almost ludicrous in
the idea of having to secure some huge and heavy
folio on a dreary subject for the sake of the
escutcheon on the side ; but done it must be. It
would not do to cut out the device, as it could not
subsist without the support of the book. This, as
may be well imagined, opens up one of the most
costly of collecting departments ; for all the potentates, kings, popes, princesses, have their arms
emblazoned with great state and splendour ; the
"masters," Clovis Eve, Le Gascon, and others,
"tooling " away exquisitely all round the emblazonment, embroidering initials and monograms and arabesques.
There is a Count D'Hoym whose device on a book
has been for some time the rage, and this a mystery,
for it is noted to be of an unostentatious character.
Yet another proof of the knowledge and skill expended on these trifles is that these arms and escutcheons, whether French, or German, or English, are
Binding and its Curiosities. 131
generally identified and their owners announced.
Connected with which a new craze has been recently
announced. Some one has discovered that the disused
well- worn engraved copper- plates have beauty from the
richness of detail. At least they can be collected,
framed, made into caskets, and the owner can point to
them as being the original of some famous engraving
on paper. But there is no end to these absurdities.
There have been a great many devices and systems introduced by the ingenuity of binders in connection with the wholesale trade. It must be
remembered that binding also belongs to publishing, as distinguished from the other departments
affected by the amateur and collector, the latter
department only being artistic. In old libraries and
on the stalls we see almost every book of the last
century dressed in the invariable brown calf, the
livery of the publishers. All the books " which no
gentleman's library should be without " display this
dress. Who, for instance, has ever seen Goldsmith's Histories or "Animated Nature," or Hume and
Smollett, or Robertson, or Fielding, or the pretty
little "Shandys," without these calf " jackets " ?
They seem to have been thus issued from the pub- lisher's office, though copies could be had in boards.
Up to thirty years ago the circulating-library novel
was always in boards, covered with a sort of grey or mud- coloured paper. It was only lately that a wonderful change was made, which really created a trade,
namely, the use of the now prevailing " cloth covers,"
the introduction of an enterprising and energetic Scottish firm. This has developed in an almost
stupendous way, and has become universal in publish.
ing. It has since become susceptible of decoration
and endurance, while the appliances of machinery have
132 Binding and its Curiosities.
been made so effective that " covers " can be turned
out as rapidly as the printed copies demand. In
1835 the late Mr. Archibald Leighton introduced the
use of cloth for covers, the first publisher to adopt
it being Mr. Pickering, and the first work so bound
being Lord Byron's complete works, with a little gilt
ornament. Most of our books at the present time
are cloth-bound, and many of them of a certain
elegance ; and amongst the names of the designers are to be found some of the most noted decorative
artists of the day. In this we have created a style
the admiration and wonder of all foreigners—toile
Anglaise being known for its excellence of workmanship and taste over the whole world. In short, our
English cloth-binding is as superior to that of the
rest of the world as a Sheffield blade is to one of
Paris make. It would be an interesting speculation
to investigate why one nation, like France, invariably
prefers paper covers, and another the more permanent cloth. The theory of the fashion after which
popular French works are sewn in paper covers seems
to be founded on portability (pour la poche), and a
saving in price ; with choice between preservation in
regular official binding, if the book be worth it, to
be thrown away if otherwise. The cost of binding
in thin staring paper boards of the railway novel would
be twopence or threepence, while the three volumes
of a novel can actually be done up "in cloth gilt" for
so low a figure as fourpence or fivepence a volume, on
a large number being taken. Much fault has been
found with the French system, the three - franc or
two-franc yellow novel soon dismembering, the sheets
tumbling apart. But this seems exaggerated .
book holds together long enough to be read by two
or three of the family, and even if the threads have
The t
Binding and its Curiosities. 133
But
Our
given way, it is still not inconvenient to read.
for decent binding the advantage is obvious,
cheap " ploughed " railway novels cannot be bound
without losing their already shorn margins. There is
nothing meaner or more miserably starved in consequence than our two-shilling railway novel when
bound, for it is then stripped of its gaudy picture
cover, and, with its stunted margin, is positively
degrading to read.
Some years ago it was calculated that the mere
waste- paper shavings of the London bookbinders
amounted annually to upwards of four hundred tons,
while the consumption of leaf-gold amounted to little
short of four million square inches weekly. Rags
are used in removing the superfluous gold during the
process of lettering, ornamenting, and edging. They
are burnt, and the yield would astonish the majority
of people. It is known in the trade as " skewings. "
There is a newly-introduced system of fastening the
sheets together by wire stitching, which is being
generally adopted, notably for such publications as Mr. Labouchere's Truth.
There were some examples of costly English bindings in the Exhibition of 1862. A book of Bedford's
binding took some two months to finish, and cost
forty guineas. Shaw's " Decorations " was lavishly
enriched with tooling and jewels, said to be of the
value of £ 100. Zaehnsdorf, of Brydges Street, exhibited Doré's Dante's Inferno in folio, the binding
and decoration of which, after the Grolier and Maioli
style, cost one hundred guineas. Messrs. Leighton,
Son, & Hodge in later years introduced silver on the
ornamentation of books, or rather, it should be said,
aluminium, for silver too soon tarnishes to be useful.
A unique specimen of binding was recently executed
134 Binding and its Curiosities.
by Messrs. Peacock. It was a large quarto Altar
Service in crimson morocco, with massive side ornaments encrusted with precious stones. A painting
on porcelain of our Saviour, framed in a band of
gilt metal studded with pearls, filled the centre.
This was surmounted by a cross, also set with pearls ,
and with a large diamond in the middle. Below was
the emblematic eagle of St. John, blazing with amethysts, garnets, and diamonds, and a lily, emblem of
the Blessed Virgin Mary, set with black and white
pearls. An elaborate border of gilt metal was thickly
studded with topaz, pearl, amethyst, malachite, and
turquoise, with beautifully carved cameos at intervals,
and large rock crystals mounted at the angles. The
gems, several of which are of considerable size, were
alone said to be worth more than £200.
Turning to the comparative value of different materials for binding, Mr. J. Leighton (Luke Limner),
in a paper read by him before the Society of Arts in
February 1859, calls morocco "the prince of leathers. "
Hogskin he considers "a nice and durable leather,"
though not much used, and it takes " blind-tooling"
admirably. Russia leather, except extremely thick, is apt to become rotten. It is principally prized for its odour and pleasant tone of colour. It has been said,
indeed, by experienced binders, that the duration.
of russia binding in the atmosphere of London is but three years. It is certain, indeed, that russia
backs always " go. " Vellum is extremely strong and useful, but hard to work. All the tree - marbles,
sponge - dabs, and other stained fancy patterns, he also considers must in time injure the leather, on
account of the acids used in producing them. Brown
and black are the only fast colours in cloth bindings.
Red, green, and blue are nearly so. In calf-binding
Binding and its Curiosities. 135
yellow or tan is the only colour that will not fade.
It wears best. Blue calf fades and rubs white. The'
quietest colours -neutral shades -will satisfy the eye
longest. What are called " purple " and " wine "
colours - solferino and magenta in binders' phrase--
have been known to fade out entirely in a month.
Wine that is "claret" is nearly a fast colour,
somewhat like green and red.
Paintings on the edges of books, or sometimes
with the edges of the leaves embossed, or the title of
the work written or impressed on them, have been
amongst the most interesting features of the ancient
ornamental art of bookbinding. At that time books
were generally kept flat on shelves or on appropriated
reading- desks, without any ornament or lettering on
the back. We frequently see such positions of old
books represented in the illuminations or woodcuts
of the period, In some places the practice of lettering books on the edges had not been discontinued
till comparatively recent times, for we find in a copy
of " Locke on the Epistles " a written memorandum,
made in 1711, stating that the "more convenient
manner of placing books in libraries is to turn their
backs outwards, with the titles and other decent
ornaments in gilt-work, which ought not to be hidden,
as in this library, by a contrary position, the beauty
of the fairest volume is ; -therefore, to prevent this
for the future, and to remedy that which is past, if
it shall be thought worth the pains, the new method
of affixing the chains to the back of the books is
recommended, till one more suitable shall be contrived." What are known as "index edges," such
as we see in the huge Kelly's Post Office Directory,
are said to have been introduced by Messrs. Leighton.
Curiosities of Printing.
HE mere oddities and eccentricities connected with books and printing are as
endless as the curiosities of literature
itself. There are books which exhibit
in their paper and print freaks and
"fads " ofthe strangest kind. One can hardly believe
the excessive length to which amiable fanatics have
indulged in their dealings with honest serviceable
type and paper. The most singular displays of oddity
have been in the choice and contrasts of paper and
print.
A French bibliophile, M. Peignet, has actually
published a work supplying a list of these fantastic
productions. Thus in the year 1822 we find the following: "Aristarchus, or the Principles of Composition," 1822, which was printed on about fifty different
coloured papers, and only twelve copies were struck
off. The most extraordinary of these caprices is an
"Elegy on the Death of Prince Henry, " published in
1613, printed on black paper with white letters !
There have also been blue, yellow, and harlequin
papers. In the Bodleian Library is a copy of
"Textus Decretalium Bonifacii VIII. " ( 1473), printed
on alternate sheets of vellum and paper. We also
Curiosities of Printing. 137
find " A Sermon Preached before Charles the First,"
by the Rev. Joseph Howe, 1644, and thought to be
the only known copy out of thirty printed, which is
printed throughout in red ink, Other works, such
as Chidley's " Complaints, " 1652, Wilkes's " Essay
on Woman, " 1772, " Red Book," Dublin, 1790, are
also printed in red ink. "Le Livre de Quatre
Couleurs " (Paris, 1720) is printed in four different
coloured inks. The " Book of Four Coulours," by
one Caracicoli, printed in Paris in 1757, is printed
in four different coloured inks, gamboge, ultramarine,
sepia, and vermilion. Babbage's " Specimens of
Logarithmic Tables " is printed with different- coloured
inks on various coloured papers (to ascertain by
experiment the tints of the paper and colours of the
inks least fatiguing to the eye) , in twenty- one volumes, 8vo, London, 1831. Of this work ONE SINGLE
COPY ONLY WAS PRINTED. There were one hundred
and fifty-one variously coloured papers chosen, and
the following coloured inks were used : light blue,
dark blue, light green, dark green, olive, yellow, light
red, dark red, purple, and black. Vol. xxi. contains
metallic printing in gold, silver, and copper bronzes,
upon vellum and on various coloured papers.
"" "Le Livre de Demain was printed on various
kinds of paper with different coloured inks. The
contents consist of selections in prose and verse, as
well as an account of inks, paper, and the art of
typography. The peculiarity of the book is the
endeavour to suit the paper, ink, and type even, to
the subject of the selection. The author, M. de
Rochas, contends that a love-poem printed with
light ink on rose-coloured paper will make a far
deeper impression than if printed in black ink on white paper. There was a book published in 1832
138 Curiosities of Printing.
entitled "Typographical Curiosities," printed on
paper manufactured from white lead, and weighing
two pounds. A curiosity, too, must be a book that
appeared in 1800, being an account of " all the
substances that have been used to describe events
and to convey ideas, " by one Koops, and which itself
claims to be the first book printed upon straw paper.
Our great humourist, Sterne, in his first work,
"Tristram Shandy," condescended to some fantastic
tricks. Thus in Vol. i . , at page 73, after the death
of Yorick, we come on an entirely black page, in sign
of mourning ; at pages 169, 170, we find two pieces
of marbled paper pasted on the regular page, "motley
emblem of my work," he says ; to say nothing of a
chapter made to comprise two pages and left blank !
At another passage, where Trim is described as
making a flourish with his stick, a diagram of the
flourish is represented on the paper. Stars are
profusely used, sometimes for half a page, to convey
the idea that something very emotional has been left
out. It is remarkable, too, that in every copy of the
two or three earlier volumes the eccentric author
signed his name, which must have entailed much
labour. Certain careful and fastidious writers have
with their own hand corrected glaring misprints.
Indeed, there is no end to these curious tricks
and devices, which are really unworthy of the great art. In the Exhibition of 1862 was shown a sort of
typographical tour de force by one of M. Dupont's
compositors a statue of Gutenberg, a portrait of
Beranger, and Cupid and Psyche (an odd company),
all set up in " leads, " and at a proper distance
looking exactly like engravings. At the previous
Exhibition of 1851 , the printer of a Scotch newspaper, The North British Advertiser, displayed a view
Curiosities of Printing. 139
of the Free Church College, which was composed of
twelve thousand five hundred pieces of type, and
eighty feet of " brass rule, " the whole at a distance
being easily taken for an engraving.
Porro, born at Padua, 1520, is mentioned by
Strutt as having engraved a print, " The Passion of
Christ," in which the lines constituting the shading
are found, when examined with a magnifying-glass ,
to be formed of small writing. In like manner,
Strutt, in his " Common Prayer Book, " 1717 (all
engraved on 188 plates) , prefixed an engraved bust
of George I., the shading lines of which contain the
Lord's Prayer, Creed, Commandments, Prayers for
the Royal Family, and the Twenty-first Psalm.
In 1862 appeared Mr. Peter's machine for microscopic writing, whereby it is stated that the words.
"Matthew Marshall, Bank of England," can be written in the two and a half millionth of an inch in
length, and it is actually said that calculations made on this data show that the whole Bible can be written
twenty-two times in the space of a square inch !
The Lord's Prayer has actually been written this
wayin a space not exceeding the one-fifty-third of an
inch square ; when examined with a high magnifying
power each line of the letters was perfectly distinct.
The eccentric printer has always striven to distinguish himself by some vagary of this kind, and
every age has boasted of its own special extravagance.
Oddly enough, these feats, unremunerative to the
projectors, have become profitable to those who come
after. Thus, miniature volumes, printed in Liliputian
type that can scarcely be read without glasses, seem
to have had a fascination for certain printers, on
account of their involving the solution of difficult
problems. A large and respectable collection could.
140 Curiosities of Printing.
be made of these tiny performances. The most
tempting object of the printer has always been to
produce little miniature volumes, which shall hold
as much and be as legible as some of the huge and
grosser tomes. The conditions attending on such a
work are most difficult of attainment, legibility and
thinness of paper being the chief. Minuteness of
type is not, however, as might be supposed, incompatible with legibility, as the Elzevirs have shown in
their dainty volumes. It requires extraordinary skill
and thought to design letters which form words that
shall be small and yet clear, and as the paper must
be thin, to prevent the ink showing through on the
other side. The problem has, nevertheless, always
had a sort of attraction for printers, both in England
and in other countries, and has been attempted
frequently. One of the earliest attempts in this
direction was the little Pindar issued in 1757 by
the Foulis Press. Some fifty or sixty years ago, the
printer Pickering issued a series of " Diamond
Classics," marvels of minute typography, arrayed
in silk binding, in which the whole of Virgil,
Horace, &c , was compressed into a thin and tiny
volume, very legible and " black in the type. "
These are now scarce and bring good prices.
Whittingham and Pickering " Shakespeares " are
each in one substantial little volume, about half the
size of the Globe " Shakespeare," but difficult to read,
since the type, though brilliant, is crowded. There
is another charming edition of the Pickering and
Whittingham " Shakespeares, " each in eight or ten
volumes, legible and fairly readable, and illustrated
with graceful and spirited cuts. The Pickering set is
deservedly admired.
The
Didot, the famous Paris publisher, printed in 1828
1
Curiosities of Printing. 141
a " Horace " in a remarkably small and exquisitely beautiful type called " caractère microscopique. " It
is eclipsed, however, by another called brilliant, so
named by its makers, Messrs. Miller & Richard,
on account of its exquisite appearance when printed.
Of this microscopic type, it takes 4000 i's to make
a single pound, and about 6300 of the thinnest pieces
for spaces. At the Exhibition of 1851 , Gray's
"Elegy," of thirty-two verses of four lines each, was
printed in a space of four inches by three. Mr.
Hotten issued a "Keepsake for Smokers " in this
type, said to be " silver-faced, " and the smallest
type ever made. In 1884 , Messrs. Field & Tuer
published a tiny little book entitled " Quads," not more than an inch square, printed on "bank notepaper," and in what was pleasantly called " midget
type. " But all these tours de force were carried to
extravagance towards the end of the last century,
when some absurdly small books were issued in
England and France. There is a little " Thumb
Bible," as it was called, which contains some score
ofleaves, has copper-plate pictures, is bound secundum
artem, and yet is no bigger than a postage stamp.
I have also seen a French almanac of about the
same size in fact, there is no reason why a collector
should not appear on the scene to devote his days
and purse to gathering specimens of the Liliputian
press.
The most thorough and rational feat in this direction was successfully carried out some years ago by
Mr. Bellows, who planned a waistcoat-pocket EnglishFrench Dictionary, which was to be profound and
scientific, and yet at the same time of the smallest
dimensions for reference. The work is said to be
admirably written, and a perfect success. The fact
142 Curiosities of Printing.
of a dictionary comprising idioms, roots, &c. , all on
the most elaborate scale, entailed the idea of vast
space. Johnson's vast and massive " huge armful ”
and this tiny manual represent the two extremes.
The first point was to secure the very thinnest paper
consistent with stoutness , and by a consultation with
an eminent French firm of papermakers at Angoulême,
Messrs. Laroche, a very fine thin article was secured,
which was opaque, and firm enough to bear printing
on both sides. A special type was designed and
cast in Edinburgh of the sort known as “ brilliant, ”
only this was claimed to be the smallest ever cast,
even two sizes smaller than that of the smallest
Testament known. It was quite legible, and the
author considered that it would not try the eyes, as
dictionaries are not used for reading but for consultation. The paper was tinted buff, while a red line
ran round each page with pleasing effect. It is, in
short, a most singular little book, and the first edition
was disposed of in a very short time.
We may contrast with these tiny performances
some grotesquely Brobdignagian efforts, typographical
monsters made for the private reading of giants.
Some of the grand Aldines are enormous armfuls,
that require strong persons to handle, intended, as
we have said, to be read missal-like on a desk.
Perhaps the hugest work known is the vast Denon
collection of illustrations, which cannot be fitted
into any known library shelf, but require to repose prone on their sides . *
* A pleasant traveller thus describes some gigantic volumes at the Escurial, where it " seems there is an elephantine lectern ,
weighing six tons, but moving very easily indeed on a pivot,
and on its ledges repose the books used by the choristers. The
volumes are about six feet in height byfour in breadth, bound in that famous yellow leather of Cordova, and heavily clasped
Curiosities of Printing. 143
The most extraordinary feat in cheap printing in
our time was the issuing of an edition of a substantial
novel of Dickens's, filling three volumes octavo, in a
pamphlet shape, for one penny. The paper was
good and tough, and in amount was equal to three
quires of cheap note- paper. In each page there were about fourteen hundred words. How it was done,
or on what chance of profit or repayment it was
based, it is difficult to say. For the very cheapest
paper that could be brought into the market could
hardly be supplied under the price of a penny a
quire. Then there was the " setting," ink, working,
stereotyping, &c. But there are wonderful and nice
problems in these matters, and it was calculated that
if the sale was only large enough the projectors would
be repaid. The same difficulty occurs in the case of
the Times newspaper, sold to dealers, I believe, at 24d.
a copy. Here the paper is fine, good, and stout, and
the sheets that make up a copy, including supplement
and clamped with brass. The parchment pages, every one as big as the lease of the Castle of Otranto or Mrs. Shandy's marriage settlement, have the staves ruled blood- red, and on them rest, or rather ride , the notes. Such notes ! such quadrangular blotches of glistening carbon ! Every crotchet is as big as a blackthorn walking-stick with a knob at the end, fit to crack the head of Goliath. As for the words beneath the notes,
so monstrous were those black- letter achievements, that, turning the crackling parchments over, it seemed that Non' took up one page, and ' nobis ' two, and Domine ' half-a-dozen.
never saw such books out of a pantomime. " In the Royal
Library at Stockholm there is shown a monster manuscript, the "Codex Giganteus, " so called on account of its colossal size.
It is two Swedish ells in height, and of proportionate breadth.
This code is, in fact, a species of library in itself : it contains,
besides a Vulgate, a collection of writings upon the Jewish Antiquities by Josephus, Isidorus, &c. Also the "Comes Pragensis Chronicon Bohemiæ. " Many, struck with the enormous size of the volume, and with its singular illumination ,
have agreed in calling it " La Bible du Diable " or " Codex Diaboli."
144 Curiosities of Printing.
and extra half-sheet, would be equivalent to some
nine or ten sheets of good foolscap or "demi, " which
could not be bought under threepence the half- quire,
thus leaving nothing for " setting " copy, money to
editors, leader-writers, and reporters, or for working.
Yet, as is known, there are vast profits. These arise,
however, from the advertisements, which are thus all clear gain without deduction. In this connection it
is evident that an excessive circulation beyond this
proportion of profit must only increase the expense
of production, while the advertisements remain a
fixed quantity, and thus it would be conceivable that
the expenses would exceed the advertising returns.
And this accounts for what sometimes happens in
the case of the Christmas numbers of the illustrated
papers, where each copy costs a large sum to produce, leaving a slender margin of profit. Any fresh
issue entails a capital expense, and the advertisements being already paid for and exhausted, additional copies become a matter of loss. Nor must we
pass by, as a wonderful feat, Dick's humble edition
of Shakespeare, sold at a shilling. The thought,
organisation, and calculation necessary to produce
this work successfully, required commercial talent of
a high order. There is, or was, a bookseller's shop
in Oxford Street, with which is associated a curious
and perhaps unique incident in the trade. Mr.
Horne, a poet of merit of the last generation, once
published an epic called " Orion, " and which, like
many a good epic, was not as much appreciated by
"the general " as it deserved to be, though by "the
judicious " it was duly admired. One day he determined to prove that the cost, at least, of his work,
should not stand in its way, and the front of the
shop was covered with advertisements announcing
Curiosities of Printing.
145
that the poem could be had within for one farthing.
I lately had this book in my hand--a rare one, and
"marked with three R's in the catalogues ." It is
printed on the thinnest paper, is bound in cloth, and filling more than one hundred pages. But on the
first day only three copies were sold, and by the end
of the week only a few more. The truth is, low price
will not tempt purchasers. A publisher once informed me that of a volume of poems he had literally
sold two copies, and these were purchased by a
friend ofthe author's. This, he said, was unique in
his experience.
Cheap literature, or books for the masses, has at
this moment been carried to the lowest point in the
great countries of France, England, and Germany.
France led the way with its " Bibliothèque Nationale,"
which was begun in 1863 , and furnished for twopencehalfpenny a series of little volumes containing the best home and foreign literature. Since then some ten
millions of copies have been issued. Next followed
a Leipsic bookseller, Reclam (a good suggestive
name), who established the " Universal Library,"
at the same price, and has issued some eighteen
millions of copies. Finally, in 1885, came the
English attempt, started by the Cassells, who issued
little works at threepence a copy ! Their series is
superior in paper and print to its foreign rivals, contains nearly 200 pages of print, and is issued every
week. It will be interesting to see the result of this
experiment.
The extraordinary results of machinery and division of labour has of course been applied to printing,
and some wonderful tours de force have been accomplished in the way of rapid and cheap production.
There is nothing so wonderful in these feats after all,
K
146 Curiosities of Printing.
as it only amounts to putting a sufficient number of
workmen to the task. Thus, a three-volume novel
may consist of some seventy or eighty sheets, and if
a skilled workman could " set " a sheet in the day,
the whole would be accomplished, on pressure, by
seventy or eighty compositors in a single day. On
the occasion of the Caxton celebration, a show feat
of this kind was performed, which Mr. Gladstone,
with a rather rhetorical flourish , described as " the
climax and consummation of the art of printing."
A hundred copies of the Bible were commenced at
two o'clock on the morning of a commemoration meeting at South Kensington, and before two o'clock in
the afternoon a copy was handed on to the platform
perfectly finished. The book, with its 1052 pages,
had been printed, dried, pressed, sent up to London,
collated, sewn, rolled, bound in Turkey morocco, its
edges gilt, the cover embossed with the University arms and an appropriate inscription, in less than
twelve hours. Here, however, the " setting " had been
done previously. Another fantastic performance was
the issue of the Revised Version of the Bible, which
was, in truth, an extraordinary commercial operation,
admirably developed and worked. For one of the
Testaments some 300 tons of paper were used, the
presses were kept groaning night and day for months
before issue, while a perfect dearth was caused in the
leather market by the demand for skins for binding.
Never was there such a foolish craze founded on pure
curiosity, and it may be suspected, without breach
ofcharity, from no burning ardour to be in possession
of the purest and most genuine version of the sacred text. Nor must we pass that surprising feat of the
Bible Society, the issue of the " Penny Testament, "
which, filling 240 pages, bound and sewn, and re-
Curiosities of Printing. 147
spectably printed on good paper, is issued for that sum.
#
The mention of Bibles leads to that of certain extraordinary editions of the sacred text which have
received names, or even nicknames, " in the trade,"
from some absurd mistake in the printing. These,
of course, commend them to the notice of the inge
nious collector. There is the well-known " Breeches
Bible," which turns up frequently enough in an
imperfect state. A Breeches Bible in fine condition is highly valuable. This sobriquet is owing
to the quaint translation- " Adam and Eve made
themselves breeches," &c. Nor must we omit the
" Bugge Bible. " There is also the " Vinegar Bible, "
the words " parable of the vinegar " being used instead of" vineyard,” A Belfast Bible, 1716 , has “ sin on more," instead of " no more, " More curious is the
“ Leda Bible " of 1572 , so called from the careless
profanity of the publisher, who, wishing to adorn the
work with illustrations, used an old block of " Leda
and the Swan. " Field's " Genuine Pearl Bible " of
1633, which has been described as " THE WICKED
BIBLE," and is complacently recommended in the
catalogues as "famous for its errors " (6000) ,
deserves notoriety for its translation of a passage
in the Corinthians-" Know ye not that the unrighteous shall inherit the kingdom of God ; ” and also,
"Ye cannot serve and mammon. " These strange
misprints were amended by cancelling some pages,
** * From the beginning of August 1884 to March 1, 1886,"
writes to me Mr. Brown, the secretary of the Society, 1,310,000 copies of the Penny Testament were issued bythis Society. The first million copies were sold within ten months. The cost of printing and binding the book is a small fraction under two- pence.' The book was therefore produced at a loss of about three- farthings a copy.
148 Curiosities of Printing.
which the collector rejects contemptuously, seeking
copies "without the cancels. " The well - known
Catholic version, the " Douay Bible," issued in
1609-10, has been called the " Rosin Bible, " owing
to the translation of the passage in Jeremiah, " Is
there no rosin in Gilead ? " Even the folio authorised version (Barker's of 1611 ) has been termed the
great " He " Bible-why I know not.
There have been, of course, collectors of Biblesa really stupendous undertaking -of which the most serious and ambitious was the late Duke of Sussex,
who sought them in every language, and amassed
some two thousand. The catalogue of this wonderful
collection no real Bible- collector " should be without. "
His Royal Highness was a fair Hebrew scholar, and
his collection was rich in Hebrew Testaments.
One
It had long been established that the earliest
printed Paris Bible was that dated 1570, and all
accredited bibliographers and commentators, having
settled this point, worked from it as a base.
day there was discovered in Archbishop Moore's
well-known library a copy of a Bible with a date
much earlier. The confusion and bewilderment
among the cognoscenti was incredible. It was found
impossible that such a thing could be ; yet there it
was, incontrovertible. An acute Mr. Johnson, however,
scrutinising the date narrowly, " cried out that there
had been an erasure, and that the new figures were
written with printing- ink on the scratched part, otherwise no bad imitation, and upon the whole a very
ingenious counterfeit. " An ordinary piece of illumination had been drawn over the place for better disguise. There was also a rent, with a piece of thin
paper pasted on the back, seemingly in a careless
manner. " Thus was exposed one of the greatest
Curiosities of Printing. 149
difficulties that have clogged the annals of the press. "
It may be said that the wary eye of the modern old
bookseller would have detected the cheat at the first
glance.
As an illustration of the historical suggestiveness
of books, it may be mentioned that there was a copy
of Caxton's " Legende of Saintes, by me Wynkyn
de Worde," which had this inscription in the beginning : " I take this to be the edition of 1517. This
is one of the few copies which have escaped the execution of the remarkable inquisition of Henry VIII.
to expunge or deface the life of St. Thomas of
Canterbury, and the word Pope wherever it might
occur. -W. Herbert, 1827."
In the case of a work of Tyndale's, the " Pentateuch," it was directed by Parliament in 1540 that
all the marginal notes should be cut off, which was
actually done. The Grenville copy, however, escaped
the massacre or mutilation, and is therefore considered a choice rarity. Another book, " Fabyan's
Chronicle," was suppressed so successfully by Wolsey that only one copy survives.
There is a class of collectors who collect everything on a favourite and particular subject. These elements fall under the denomination of " cuttings,"
and it is surprising how, with the diligent aid of a
pair of scissors, the mass soon begins to accumulate.
The accumulation is for the most part rubbish ; but,
to one writing on the subject, it often supplies valuable
indications of topics and matter worth investigation.
Some of these " dust-bins, " which often contain a
stray silver spoon or fork, are of the oddest character,
as "A Collection of many Hundreds of Bills, chronologically arranged, from 1741 to 1868, including
Astley's, Ducrow's, Coburg, Surrey, Tottenham Street,
150 Curiosities of Printing.
Sadler's Wells, Drury Lane, Adelphi, Olympic, Covent
Garden, Haymarket, Theatre in Guildhall ( 1758),
New City, Garrick, Deptford, City Pantheon, King's,
Soho, &c. , Menageries, Exhibitions, &c. , with a large
collection, many thousands of cuttings from various
sources, extending over a period of nearly 100 years,
a number of orders and tickets of admission, with
interesting autographs. "
Another person with great industry brings together
everything that can bear on " Waxwork Exhibitions,
Panoramas, and other Shows of London, from early
in the Eighteenth Century down to our times (a few
country items included) . It comprises a very large
number of cuttings, bills, handbooks, catalogues, advertisements, admission orders, &c . &c. , to Fantoccini, Shadows, Puppets, Marionettes, Automata, Tableaux Vivants, Penny Shows, &c. , and represents the
under- current of Metropolitan amusement with its
frequent pandering to the morbid tastes of the last
hundred and fifty years' populace. Of Waxworks it
is believed that a larger collection does not exist in
one body in that branch are Anatomical Venuses,
Chambers of Horrors, distinguished persons, scenes,
&c. , from 1729 downwards. Panoramas, dioramas,
cosmoramas, sculpture, paintings, giants, dwarfs,
monsters, entertainments, and very many items which,
while legitimately belonging to the history of London
life, and nearly allied to the lower stratum of the histrionic profession, are but poorly represented in even
the richest collections relating either to our metropolis
or to the drama. "
Another curious collection is one on Dr. James
Graham's exhibtions : " The Temple of Health and
Hymen, the Celestial Bed, Exhibitions ( Rare and
Curious), &c. , a curious collection of prints, views,
Curiosities of Printing. 151
songs, music, poems, manuscripts, matters, portraits,
accounts of lectures and exhibitions , advertisements,
&c. (including an account of Lady Hamilton) , mounted
and arranged in a 4to volume, new half-red morocco,
cloth sides, gilt edges, curious and rare. " And also
the next on ballooning : " An Extraordinary Collection of 960 Engravings, Newspaper Cuttings, Autograph Letters, Documents, Advertisements, Broadsides , Handbills, Posters, Water-Colour Drawings,
and other papers relating to Aeronautical History
from 1724 to 1854. Arranged in chronological
order, and very neatly mounted on 102 sheets of
drawing-paper. The collection comprises 81 plain
and 22 coloured plates, many of which are very
scarce (and the large tinted engraving of Lunardi's
balloon at the Pantheon especially so) , 105 woodcuts,
8 caricatures, 23 portraits of aeronauts ; 5 watercolour drawings, 20 large posters for walls, advertising fêtes at Ranelagh, Vauxhall, Cremorne, and other
places of amusement ; 62 broadsides and songs, some
with woodcut headings ; 45 autograph letters ; numerous admission tickets initialed by Green ; and 10
pieces of silk of various colours cut from balloons.
The remainder are cuttings describing every event
between the dates named, including the opening of
London Bridge, the fête in St. James's Park, &c. , &c.
Having been formed by Mr. Green, the famous aeronaut, the collection is perhaps the most complete it
would be possible to form. Several autograph letters
of his are inserted, together with accounts of ascensions by him and Coxwell at Cremorne, Vauxhall,
and elsewhere."
Among other strange and unexpected subjects, we
have Willshere on " Playing- Cards " in the collection
in the British Museum, which amounts to about forty
152 Curiosities of Printing.
packs of all nations. This is said to be " the m st
elaborate and authoritative of all recent works on
playing-cards, containing a great many illustrations
of all kinds. Also many interesting curiosities connected with playing- cards, including a facsimile advertisement of the patriotic American Decatur cards, of
which the backs were adorned with a cut of Decatur's
victory, various comic cartoons and caricatures in
imitation of playing-cards, a lot of the internal revenue stamps issued by playing card manufacturers,
and specimens of the ' marked back ' playing-cards
used by gamblers. " But there is a literature on playing- cards. The really grand work on the subject is
that of the Society of French Bibliophilists, a grand
folio volume, containing 100 coloured plates, and
going back to the fourteenth century.
There is a well- known dictionary called “ Men of
the Time, ” which appears at intervals. The impression of 1856 is greatly sought because of a bizarre
account of Wilberforce, then Bishop of Oxford, who
was described as " a sceptic as regards religious revelation ; he is nevertheless an out-and-out believer in
spirit movements. " The fact was, this sentence had
slipped out of the preceding article on Robert Owen,
and got mixed up with the account of the Bishop.
Prince Ferdinand of Portugal recently made a collection of all works that had been suppressed by governments, the total amounting to many thousands.
Among the innumerable odd subjects to which
books have been devoted, there is the odd one of
caligraphy, or "flourishing " penmanship, once a
sort of art, held in favour when schoolmasters cultivated drawing, with bold sweeps of the pen, swans, and
other devices. Some of them are wonderful productions indeed, and the art was in demand for the pre-
Curiosities of Printing. 153
paration of addresses, &c. , often seen hung up in old
mansions and places of business.
It might be a fair speculation why it has not occurred to some collector to form a gathering of books
each ofwhich had some odd adventure or association.
For there are numbers of books the very titles of
which suggest some strange history, or have been
connected with some crisis. Here, for instance,
opening a catalogue, the eye falls on Henry VIII.'s
famous work, with its full style and title : -"Assertio
Septem Sacramentorum adversus Martinum Lutherum
ædita ab invictissimo Angliæ et Franciæ Rege, &c.
Henrico ejus nominis octavo. Romæ, opera Stephani,
Guillereti, 1521.-Literarum quibis invictissimus Princeps Henricus Octavus, Rex Angliæ, Fidei Defensor
respondit ad quandam Epistolam Martini Lutheri
ad se missam. Romæ, apud F. Minitium Calvum,
1527. In one vol. 410, fine tall and clean copy in the original limp vellum, £7, 10s. This original Roman edition of Henry VIII.'s famous book
against Luther is still more rare than that printed
in England, and contains in addition Pope Leo's
letter to Henry conferring upon him the title of
Defender of the Faith, which was not reprinted
in later editions. This appears to be one of the
earliest copies issued, as it has not the supplementary
sheet containing Dr. Clerk's Address to the Pope.
Concerning the second piece in the volume, the Grenville Catalogue says, speaking of the London edition,
' This original edition of Henry VIII.'s answer to
Luther's letter to him is of great rarity. Strype says
he once saw it in the exquisite library of the Bishop
of Ely.' The Roman edition is probably even more
This volume is from the ancient library of the
Altieri family, and bears marks of having been in
rare.
154 Curiosities of Printing.
days of yore in the hands of the Roman Inquisitors,
for the name of Henry VIII. and Martin Luther are
struck through with a pen, or have paper pasted
over them. "
There are some curious incidents connected with
the first edition of Milton's great poem, which in
small folio is readily procurable. But the informed
collector knows that the publisher issued it with a
series of different title-pages -seven or eight, if not
more. You must describe your copy carefully, as
the "first edition with the seventh title-page," or one
with the third or fourth. But one with the first titlepage and the first edition is priced by Mr. Quaritch
at £40.
How curious to come on the quarto pictures of
Lady Hamilton in her " attitudes "'.—a tribute paid
her by her foolish worshipping husband. We think
of Nelson, of her strange adventurous life, and her
dying in debt and destitution at Calais. So to come
upon a book printed that is " set " by the venerated
hands of Benjamin Franklin. Such is " Cicero
Cato Major, with explanatory notes. Philadelphia,
printed and sold by Benjamin Franklin, 1744." For
this small quarto ten guineas was asked many years
ago ; now, with the "fury " for things American, it
would be offered at double the money. In Mr.
William George's Bristol catalogue, quaintly entitled
"Bibliotheca Antiqua et Curiosa ; a descriptive and
priced list of some old and curious books, being
the fifteenth collection under that title," we find
Milton's " History of Britain, collected out of the
antientest authors thereof. Portrait by Faithorne.
First edition. Quarto, original calf, 1670." On
which it is pointed out that " the beautiful portrait
of John Milton in this work is one of the few English
Curiosities of Printing. 155
portraits cut on copper from the Each impres- life.
sion has the rank of an original portrait of Milton,
and, as such, an impression hangs in the National
Portrait Gallery." Or here is a specimen of the
minute fashion in which the bibliographer marshals
evidence " Charles the First. -Eikon Bazilike, the
Portraicture of his Sacred Majestie [ &c. , with two
mottoes and date] . Folding frontispiece by Marshall,
Tall octavo, original calf, 21S. 1649. The largest
edition of the ' Eikon, ' with fine impression of the
folding plate, having engraved verses.
This copy,
being in its original binding, it is interesting to note
that the place of the plate is facing its ' Explanation,' and not facing the title-page, which is preceded
by a leaf on which the royal arms are printed. "
Avery odd and handsome book, published in 1754,
is " The Gentleman and Cabinet Maker's Director,
being a large collection of most elegant and useful
designs of Household Furniture in the Gothic, Chinese, and Modern Taste, with proper directions for
executing the most difficult pieces, the mouldings
being exhibited at large, and the dimensions of each
design specified, 157 copper plates, folio, calf, by
Thos. Chippendale. " Nowevery one knows the merits
of the " Chippendale furniture, " the curious designs and carvings, unmistakable in their character, It is
one of the scarcest of volumes, as Mr. " Rainy Day"
Smith, after duly praising it, prophesied it would be.
It now brings from fifteen to twenty guineas !
First editions of even living authors seem to become rare within a very few years. One of the most
precious of volumes is the " Poems by Two Brothers,"
issued in 1827, which was the first appearance of
Alfred Tennyson, and for which ten guineas is an
average price. A copy of the " Poems by Alfred
156 Curiosities of Printing.
Tennyson, 1833, " has cost £14. Awhole set of the
green-coated volumes, first editions, would be worth
a large sum, and there would be found plenty of opulent collectors ready to give what is called " any
money" for the set. They could then have them
dressed up in " crushed levantine " morocco, to form
"a superb monument of the bibliopegistic art. "
These early Tennyson editions are sought for chiefly
by students and admirers, on account of the rather
capricious variations the author is fond of making in successive editions. " The Grand Old Gardener "
has thus been reshaped and altered many times and
a new phrase substituted . " Timbuctoo," his prize
poem, has been sold for five guineas ; but the rarest
of his books remains the " Poems by Two Brothers. "
Shelley's works attract the attention ofthe curious,
such as the early editions of " Queen Mab," " Adonais," printed on rude paper and with ruder type.
To this category also belong the works of Lamb,
Southey, Coleridge, and many more, and their works
are now greatly sought. These are elegant little
volumes, set off with " plates by Westall " or by
Stothard. There is an impression of grace and refinement left as we look at these illustrations ; they
are conceived in an abstract and poetical spirit ;
the figures, limbs, and draperies are elegant, and
seem the work of masters. It is when we contrast
these with the modern illustrations to Longfellow,
Tennyson, &c. , that we are drawn down to earth,
so coarse and purely unpoetical are these things.
Lamb's works in their original edition have an exceptional flavour. The " Tales from Shakespeare "
derive an additional value from the plates being by
Blake. A copy of the " Album Verses " was offered
lately, and was of great interest. " Three copies, each
Curiosities of Printing. 157
of peculiar and exceptional interest to the collector,
all in original boards, uncut, viz. , the original proof
copy, with corrections in the author's handwriting
(one leaf of which is missing) ; the copy formerly
belonging to J. G. Towers (the friend of Charles
Lamb), and presented by her brother (page 12 is
composed of verses from the album of Mrs. Jane
Towers) ; and the copy purchased at Samuel T. Coleridge's sale, with the following note on cardboard
affixed to the fly-leaf in Charles Lamb's autograph : -
'At No. 64 New Bond Street is to be seen a capital picture of Milton, the property of C, Lamb, which
' he thinks would gratify Mr. Coleridge to see when he
is in town and can spare a minute. ' It is interesting
to remark that this particular portrait found its way into London auction about two years ago, and the
advertiser, after a spirited competition , let it fall at
£355." Rarest of all is the " Devil's Walk," a
poem of which but a single copy was known to be
in existence-I think in the possession of Messrs.
Moxon, But one little work, " The Poetry for Children," containing some verses by Lamb and his sister,
had altogether disappeared. For years a copy was
sought ; high rewards were offered, but in vain,
Strange to say, it at last turned up in one of the
colonies, was sent to England and reprinted. It
should be known that poems and essays by Lamb
are scattered about in all directions in such little
books as the " Pocket Magazine, " Selections from
"The Champion " newspaper, and in Cottle's " Anthology." Very rare is the Coleridge little volume
published at Bristol, in which are some of his friend's
sonnets. His works extend, as may be conceived, to a
vast number of volumes , all uniform in size and style.
The late Lord Houghton, among other fancies, col-
158 Curiosities of Printing.
lected all the poets of this century, great and little ,
and which were printed in this uniform shape.
In a previous page was detailed the fashion in
which certain works have been saved from destruction. Boswell's entertaining Letters to Temple were
discovered in a shop in Boulogne, in use for wrappingpaper. More extraordinary still , Mr. Gibbs of Bath related to me how, searching in some old house, he found
Sterne's Diary kept for Eliza in a plate-warmer !
It is much the fashion now to simulate the old editions, mimicking, as it were, the paper, type, and gene- ral air of a favourite work. Mr. Stock has given us
some curiously exact facsimiles, such as those of
"Walton's Angler, " and, more singular still, a tiny
volume reproducing the original black-letter writing of the immortal " Imitation of Christ. " The two
little inviting volumes, the original " Vicar of Wakefield, " retiring, unobtrusive-like the Vicar himself—
have recently been revived , an exact copy in its boards,
paper, and print. So with the first Kilmarnock edition
of " Burns's Poems " and Bunyan's " Pilgrim's Pro- gress," and many more. It would be an interesting
speculation to think how these copies will mystify generations two hundred years hence. But with such
things Time is the great distinguisher. As in painted
imitations of wood, every year shows more clearly
that it is paint and not wood , so in these volumes the
points where likeness was attempted will become more glaringly revealed. One of the latest and most
far-fetched absurdities of publication is a posthumous
work of a popular writer, announced as the " last
work of the late Hugh Conway." This is an oblong
volume with facsimiled handwriting of this rather
over-praised author. It is given with ali erasures, &c. ,
and is not, like all MS. , very easy reading.
Curiosities of Printing. 159
The modern devices for setting off books are endless in their variety. Photography in its numerous
forms-photogravure, phototype, &c. -is made to
bring colour and mechanism to our aid, and it must
be said with singularly pleasing and apparently artistic effect. The latest French works " of luxury,"
display on the finest paper the most exquisite drawings, printed in a rich blue, brown, or green tint,
figures, arabesques, landscapes " embordering " the
page. These are not engraved, but are the original
drawings or water-colours reproduced by the process.
They are, however, delusive enough. In course of
years they will fade or at least " grow flat, " for by a
curious law of retribution all mimicries and pretences
in time must prove their inferiority, and the weak
places are revealed. The older finely finished engravings are " impressions, " ie. , a magnifying-glass would
showthat every line is raised on the paper, which gives
a sort of relief and the brilliancy of relief. On the
other hand, a literal photograph of an engraving, the
tone of the ink copied and every line reproduced,
lacks this relief, or rather simulates it. *
44 Here is a description of one of these bizarre works, which first brought this style into fashion. Uzanne (Octave).-- L'Eventail L'Ombrelle-Le Gant-Le Manchon. Profusely illustrated with charming engravings by Paul Avril, exquisitely printed in various delicate tints, and having inserted sets of proofs on Japanese paper, printed without the letterpress , 2 vols.
imperial 8vo, superbly bound by Rivière, in blue and orange morocco extra, the original silk covers used as linings, £40. Two remarkable books, illustrated in a manner entirely novel, and probably destined to effect a revolution in the art of book- illustrating. M. Brunox writes of them, Rarement livre fut accuelli avec un succès plus vif, et , disons-le, plus mérité que L'Eventail. Son apparition fut, pour les bibliophiles, un éblouis- sément.' Both works rapidly became out of print, and the publisher guarantees not to reprint them. Of the sets of proofs
only 100 were printed, and that to L'Ombrelle is a picked set,
bearing the artist's autograph. " Forty guineas was the price.
160 Curiosities of Printing.
During the last ten years another mania has obtained in Paris for issuing exquisitely printed little
books with red-letter titles, it may be, and tiny etchings, of Elzevir shape or series. The paper is a little
rough, the print " old faced," the margins large.
Several firms have distinguished themselves by issuing these dainty books, such as Lemerre, Glady, &c.
One would think it was a simple matter to do this, so
many copies at such a price. But the jaded stomach
of the bibliomaniac must be tickled by congenial
devices. So : ( 1 ) every copy must be numbered ;
(2. ) there must be a limited number, say 300. The
numbering gives an individuality to each copy of the
300. Say thirty are printed on Turkey mill- paper; "
then for coquettish amateurs we have the following : -
Printed on choice grape-paper
"
"
choice parchment
Japanese quarto
•·
66
Imperial Whatman paper Chinese do.
" "
"
"" " Van Gelder's Dutch .
• I copy.
2 copies.
30 99 • 50 ""
50 "
200 ""
""
On this scale was the choice " Manon Lescaut
brought out. The English Whatman hand- made
paper is highly appreciated in France. Most of these
little books are designed to furnish opportunities for
the binding maniac, who finds thus a choice subject
to exhibit some exquisite exercise of the bibliopegistic
skill.
Returning to other " oddities, " the old halfpenny
ballads have always had an attraction for the collector,
and Macaulay's taste in this direction is well known.
Playbills also are sought ; and there is something
attractive " in the casual sight of an old playbill, "
the memories attached, its own frail texture contrasting with the stouter and more enduring tenure
of those whose doings it chronicled, and who are long
Curiosities of Printing. 161
The
since moulded away. Yet this shred and patch endures. Mr. Halliwell Philipps has a bill of Dryden's
arrangement of " Troilus and Cressida," in the time
ofWilliam III . , than which there is none older existing. As, however, there are no actors' names, this is
hardly a bill proper. Perhaps the scarcest of bills is that of Garrick's first appearance. I myself possess
66 a poster" of Mrs. Siddons's last appearance,
most famous collection of halfpenny ballads is that
known as the " Roxburghe, " partly formed by the
Duke of that name, and sold at his sale in 1812 for
£482. They are now in the Museum, having been
secured for £535. But this was exceeded at the
Brindley sale, when eight volumes of halfpenny ballads were disposed of for £837!
Yet another amiable craze is that for " chap-books,"
diligently collected, small pamphlets, things sold by
hawkers for a halfpenny and a penny, from ten to
fifteen pages long-" Goody Two Shoes, " " History
of England, " &c. There are those who boast their
"finest collection of chap-books in England. " There
is a legend, moreover, that some ofthese have " cuts
by Bewick," and that some, at least certain children's
books, were written by Goldsmith. They are poor,
starved things, uninviting, on rough, villainous paper-
"wrapping," apparently-and wholly undesirable.
An odd and interesting department of which a collection might be made are journals and magazines
published at schools and colleges, and to which men
afterwards celebrated contributed. Among these are
" The Microcosm," published at Eton, to which Canning furnished some lively, precocious trifles. Also,
at the same place, " The Eton Miscellany," by Bartholomew Bouverie, now of Eton College (Eton, 1827 ),
"containing thirty contributions byW. E. Gladstone,
L
162 Curiosities of Printing.
five by Arthur Henry Hallam, and others by Colvile,
Doyle, Gaskell, Hanmer, Jelf, Law, Pickering, Selwyn, Shadwell, Skirlow, Wilder, Frederic Rogers,
G. A. Selwyn, and others anonymous. "
The familiar "Arabian Nights," delight of our
childhood, one might fancy, was accessible enough.
However, Mr. John Payne, of the Villon Society,
conceived the idea of translating these old tales on
the principle of calling a spade a spade throughout,
with this result, that every judicious bookseller secures
a copy when he can, and invites the purchaser on
these tempting grounds : " The Book of the Thousand Nights and One Night, now first completely
done into English prose and verse, from the original
Arabic, byJohn Payne, 9 vols. , very scarce, 1882-84.
Intending purchasers are strongly recommended to
lose no time in securing this valuable work, as every
month it greatly increases in price, and the limited
number printed quite precludes the possibility of its
value decreasing. Only 700 copies were issued, each
numbered and signed by the printer. It consists of
a perfectly free and literal translation from the original Arabic, and was printed for the Villon Society
by private subscription, and for private circulation
only. " For these nine volumes, now grown scarce,
twenty-two guineas are asked. No doubt the attraction is what the French call " scatological " or " Pantagruelic. " Captain Burton has rencheri on the idea,
and recently published a new translation, and being
still more literal, or, as our neighbours would say,
"naturalistic," the demand is far greater. The copies
are rising in price.
Arecommendation often found in a catalogue runs,
" The edition nearly all destroyed in the Fire of London." It has indeed been said that in this calamity
Curiosities of Printing. 163
£200,000 worth of booksellers' property was lost.
Whole editions were burnt on their shelves. In Lincoln's Inn Library is one survivor curiously preserved,
viz. , "Prynne's Introduction, or An Exact History
of the Popes. " Every copy was supposed to have
entirely perished, until one was found to be in the
library of the Duke of Buckingham at Stowe. It was
never completed, but ends abruptly at page 400 in
the middle of a sentence. The Benchers of Lincoln's
Inn possessing the volumes comprising the body
of the work (and which are of extreme rarity in a
complete shape, " a large portion of the impression
having been burnt in the Great Fire ") , on the
occasion of the sale of the Stowe Library in 1849,
determined at any cost to possess this Introduction
of two hundred fragmentary leaves. They secured
it at the price of £335!
Who would not hugely covet works of which literally there is only a single copy known to be in existence ? This is the case in the instance of one of
the old English writers, Barnfield, of whose " Lady Pecunia" there has been but one copy found. Some
old bookhunter in the last century, prowling about the
Barbican, saw it on a dust-heap and rescued it. Of
other books there have been only a few copies printed ,
which has of course engendered an insane longing to
possess them. Thus Lord Peterborough issued a work
called " Succinct Genealogies, " of which there were
only twenty-five copies printed, a single one of which has brought £74, £98, and even £100. More
extraordinary still is the French work " Tableau des
Mœurs du Temps, " of which only a single copy was
printed. In such cases the book cannot be considered
as printed; it ranks with things in manuscript.
Dr. Madden's " Memoirs of the 20th Century," the
164 Curiosities of Printing.
bibliophilist Davis tells us, " published in 1733, is
considered one of the rarest in the English language :
it was intended to have been comprised in six volumes,
only one of which was ever printed. In order to
expedite the printing and delivery, three printers,
Bowyer, Woodfall, and Roberts, were employed, and
one thousand impressions of the first volume struck
off, but suppressed on the day ofpublication. Eight
hundred and ninety copies were delivered to Dr.
Madden, and all were supposed to have been destroyed by him. " In this short epitome, what a
picture of reckless waste, indecision , and folly !
The second edition of Woolaston's " Religion of
Nature " has deservedly an interest, as Franklin had
a share in printing it, or rather in setting the types.
The "Epistolæ Obscurorum Virorum " is notable,
because Erasmus, on the eve of a serious operation,
was seized with such a violent fit of laughter when
reading it, that the " imposthume " burst, and he was
saved.
There are two homely English books which at a
sale would bring good prices-Mrs. Glasse's famous
Cookery- Book, of "first catch your hare" notoriety,
and " Cocker's Arithmetic, " of " according to Cocker"
fame. A living London journalist found the first
edition of the first, " The Art of Cookery, " folio, in
the New Kent Road, and secured it for sixpence !
He had it superbly bound, and now values it as a
unique at £100. The first " Cocker " was published
so long ago as the year 1677 or 1678, and of this excessively rare book not more than three or four copies
have been heard of. The twentieth edition appeared
in 1700, and the thirty-second not long after. The
indefatigable Dr. Dibdin could never succeed in meeting a copy earlier than this. The late Professor
Curiosities of Printing. 165
De Morgan was all his lifetime engaged in trying to
get together a series of the earlier editions, but could
not succeed. Poor Professor ! dying in despair !
Rarest of this class is the famous " Joe Miller's
Jests, or the Wit's Vade Mecum . . . . most humbly
inscribed to those choice spirits of the age, Captain
Rodens, Mr. Alexander Pope, Mr. Professor Sacy,
Mr. Orator Henley, and Job Baker, the kettle- drummer. Printed and sold by T. Read, in Dogwell Court, Whyte Friars, Fleet Street, 1739. Price
one shilling."
Our old friends Sternhold and Hopkins are celebrated not for what had been their praiseworthy
ambition, viz. , versifiers of the Psalms, but as furnishing the happiest specimen of bathos or doggerel
known. They suggested a happy jest to Tom Hood,
who described a game of leap-frog by their familiar names. A desirable copy of these worthies' work was offered some time ago : "Booke of Psalmes,
collected into English meeter, by Thomas Sternhold,
John Hopkins, and others, in 1624, 18mo, bound in
contemporary maroon satin, entirely covered in rich
embroidery of gold and silver threads and pearls,
gilt edges, and accompanied by a beautifully worked
silk bag, embroidered in colours with trees, flowers,
animals, &c. , and gold and silver thread, the whole.
displayed in a specially prepared morocco case,
lined with maroon velvet, with glass lid and lock
and key. " Thirty guineas was asked, and it was
claimed that this was " a highly interesting historical
relic, the volume and bag having been found in the pocket of Charles I. after his execution . In the
early part of the present century it was purchased by
Mr. Pickering, who sold it to the late Mr. Bedford,
the eminent bookbinder, and while in the possession
166 Curiosities of Printing.
of the latter it was exhibited at the Manchester
Exhibition. The bag is believed to have been the
work of Queen Henrietta-Maria. "
Should you come upon an old folio Livy, with
portrait of Livy, and device of cat and mouse on
title, large copy, original vellum binding, 1520,
think of what the late Bishop of Ely used to say,
"Whenever you see a book with a Cat and Mouse in
the frontispiece, seize upon it, for the chances are as three to four that it will be found both curious and
valuable -admonition from such a quarter is not to
be slightly rejected . "—Dibdin's Bibliog. Decam. , ii.
231. There is something quaint in this piece of advice.
"Robinson Crusoe " went through more editions in
a short space of time than any other book-fortyone editions in forty years. It has been translated
too into every modern language. I have a few
numbers of a newspaper, "The Intelligencer," in
which it appeared as a serial. A popular schoolbook, however, goes through innumerable editions
with a steady, certain progress that the author of
genius might sigh for. In 1829 a book appeared
known as " Butler's Spelling- Book, " and it has since
reached to nearly its 350th edition ! while the betterknown " Mavor's English Spelling- Book " is advancing "by leaps and bounds " to its 400th edition ! It
has been said that Longfellow's " Miles Standish "
ran through forty editions in a month,
John Kemble, when an obscure actor at York in
1780, published a little volume of " Fugitive Verses,"
of which, when he grew into celebrity, he became
ashamed, and whenever a copy was announced to
be sold by auction , he sent to purchase it at any
price ; and once had to pay an enormous sum, owing
Curiosities of Printing. 167
to the competition of a rival purchaser, who was determined to secure it. Hence it was considered
to be exceedingly scarce. Now it would not be
difficult at any time to secure a copy. *
* The veteran bookseller, Mr. Stibbs, one of the good old
type, can relate many a legend of this kind. Once the Duke
ofWellington wished to secure an old pamphlet written by Lord Wellesley, and directed his bookseller to purchase it for him at an auction. His brother, however, wished to have it, and also sent a commission. The shilling pamphlet was actually bid up to close on a hundred pounds, to the amazement and anger of
the Iron Duke. He was appeased , however, when reminded by his agents that they had only " obeyed orders. " Mr. Stibbs makes book-buying journeys through Holland in quest of rare "incunables " and mouldy tomes reposing in old dimly-lighted
shops at Amsterdam and the Hague. His experience is that there is no level of price for these treasures, which, on the whole,
bring far higher prices in foreign countries. There is an inti- mate communication between our dealers and the foreigners,
who give commissions at auctions at Rome and Berlin.
§ De Grangerising and Dickensiana.
RANGERISING " is a term familiar
enough to the initiated, but possibly a
mystery to "the general. " There is
many a book which a nice instinct
feels ought to be illustrated, such as
histories, accounts of persons and places. Hence it
is that certain ingenious persons, with plenty of
money and more idle time on hand, have devoted
their lives to the Grangerising some favourite work.
To this pursuit they have devoted energy and
purpose, hunting up and hunting down, tearing
and cutting out, ransacking generally, until they have secured what they desired. It is in this way,
as Mr. Blades shows, that fearful havoc has been
wrought, and thousands of fine books mutilated and
destroyed by the Grangerites. And why Granger- ites ? It seems that a Rev. Mr. Granger came into
the world specially for the benefit of these Attilas,
having written a large " History of England," in
which he made allusion to every celebrated person
and place connected with the chronicles of England .
It may be conceived what welcome volumes these
were to the collecting " Grangerite," and from that
Grangerising and Dickensiana. 169
time to the present there have always been a number of persons diligently engaged in the task. Some of
these collections have cost fortunes. The " Bindley
Granger " was celebrated. The late Mr. John Forster
had two Grangerised copies of " Granger, " one in fourteen folio volumes, the other in seventeen. Together they contain between five and six thousand
portraits, many ofwhich are singularly rare and costly,
and might count as originals. The incidental expenses of Grangerising are serious, owing to the nice
"laying down " of the prints on extra fine paper, and
of the " inlaying to folio size " of small printed pages,
which is an expensive operation,
Dr. Dibdin, in his most sarcastic vein , gives a
happy instance of this mania, "Take this passage,"
he says, "from Speed : ' Henry Le Spencer, the
warlike Bishop of Norwich, being drawn on by Pope
Urban to preach a crusade, and to be general against Clement,' To be properly illustrated, ( 1 ) Procure all
the portraits, at all periods of his life, of Henry Le
Spencer. (2 ) Obtain every view, ancient or modern,
like or unlike, of the city of Norwich, and, if fortune
favour you, of every bishop of the See. (3 ) Every
portrait of Pope Urban must be procured, and as
many prints and drawings as will give a notion of the
crusade. (4) You must search high and low, early
and late, for every print of Clement. ( 5) Procure,
or you will be wretched, as many fine prints of
cardinals and prelates, singly or in groups, as
will impress you with a proper idea of a conclave.
The result, gentle reader, will be that you will have
work enough cut out to occupy you for one whole month at least." He then adds that " a late distinguished and highly respectable female collector, who
170 Grangerising and Dickensiana.
had commenced an illustrated Bible, procured for the illustration of verses 20, 21 , 22, 23, 24, and 25
of chapter i . of Genesis no less than 700 prints ! "
It will be a surprise to know that even in the present time there is sometimes a wealthy amateur who,
with a love or passion for a particular subject, determines to adorn it in a special fashion, and gives an
order for a superb memorial to be prepared, set off
with exquisite writing, a series of drawings and watercolours, the whole being bound with all the luxury
"the bibliopegistic art " can furnish . It is thus that
we find many a superb volume prepared, to celebrate
this generous ardour.
One of the most tastefully printed modern works
is Doré's famous Bible published at Tours, the English edition having but small pretensions. It is
adorned with a vast number of illustrations ; but an
enterprising Grangerite has gathered every Scripture
print procurable, including all the most famous line
engravings, each of which is a thing of cost and
rarity, and has thus enlarged the work from two to
ten sumptuous volumes.
Men the most unlikely have engaged in this
fascinating craze. In the last century there was a
Mr. Storer, one of the wild set led by the Duke of
Queensberry, who never flagged in collecting, and left
the result of his labours to his University.
An extraordinary monument of pains, patience,
and expense in this direction is " Clutterbuck's
History of Hertfordshire," which an enthusiast
adorned and expanded in this fashion, regardless of
expense. Starting with some fifty plates of its own
of antiquities, seats, castles, plans, &c. , proof impressions, superb copy on large paper, it was enlarged
Grangerising and Dickensiana. 171
from three volumes to ten volumes, folio, and " illustrated by eleven hundred original landscapes, architectural views, and portraits, beautifully painted in
water- colours by Buckler, Harding, and other eminent
artists ; also fourteen hundred drawings of coats of
arms, beautifully emblazoned by Dowse, and nearly
six hundred additional engravings, comprising views,
old buildings, antiquities, portraits, &c. , by Hou
braken, &c. , fine and large mezzotints and brilliant
India proofs in folio, russia extra, gilt edges, by Holloway. " This, we are told, was " a magnificent monument of industry and liberality, and the finest copy
which has ever been offered for sale . The work of
many years, it was executed regardless of expense,
andcost thousands ofpounds to produce." The name
of this Grangerite was John Morice, Esq. , F.S.A.
Eight hundred guineas was asked for this treasure
by Messrs. Robson & Kerslake, the vendors.
Another of these costly and stupendous enterprises
was the copy of " Pennant's London, " illustrated by
a Mr. Crowle, and bequeathed by that gentleman to the British Museum, where it now reposes. Pennant
is a favourite subject, as the prints of London buildings and London streets are to be found in enormous
abundance. But what was this to the prodigious
" Clarendon and Burnet, " a collection of illustrative
pictures formed by Mr. Sutherland of Gower Street,
continued by his widow, and by her presented to
the Bodleian Library ? It has been said that this
is the richest and most extensive pictorial history
in existence, or ever likely to be in existence ; and this will be admitted when it is stated that there are
nearly 19,000 prints and drawings. The scale on
which it is carried out may be conceived when we
172 Grangerising and Dickensiana.
find it contains no less than 731 portraits of Charles
I. , 518 of Charles II . , 352 of Cromwell, 273 of
James II . , and 420 of William III . If we only
think how few are the portraits of Charles I that we
ourselves have seen, mostly copies after Vandyke,
we shall have an idea of the labour and exploration
necessary to gather up the 731. Think also of the
labour, pains, and cost in cleaning, "laying down, "
" insetting, " and " inlaying " these portraits, the
binding, arranging, &c. , and we shall not be surprised to learn that this folly occupied the eccentric
and fanatical Sutherland forty precious years of his
life ; that it fills sixty-seven huge volumes, and cost
twelve thousand pounds ! We may conceive all the
visitings of print-shops, the turning over boxes of
prints , the visiting of wynds and lanes, the correspondence, and the endless paying of money. To
give a finish to his labours, a catalogue was prepared
of all the engravings, and which fills two great
quartos.
Portraits en masse have little value, as they are
mostly copies one from another. "There is a
charm, ” it has been said, "in collections of the
human face divine, " though it must needs be powerful to call forth, as it does, twenty or thirty or fifty
guineas from a collector's pocket for a coarsely
executed cut of some Meg Merrilees, or a condemned criminal of which the only value is being "mentioned by Granger." The illustrator of Boswell's "Johnson " will find allusions to a malefactor
called Rann, otherwise " Sixteen- String Jack, " and
to Johnson, a circus-rider, whom the great Doctor ad- mired for riding several horses at a time. There
are actually in existence some cheap common sketches
Grangerising and Dickensiana. 173
of these worthies, the latter shown riding the horses.
These are singularly scarce, as may be imagined, and
your " Boswell " would be halting and incomplete
without it ; so any price must be given, on the
ground that all that had been paid would be thrown
away without them. It might be worth while almost
to have the plate re- engraved, and printed off on old
paper, say the fly- leaf of some contemporary volume,
and the result will serve. Not unfrequently, by a
happy chance, old copper-plates turn up, and new
impressions can be taken. Some such discovery has
been made in the case of Bartolozzi, the mania for
whose red- tinted oval plates has been to dealers one
of the wonders known in modern times.
Boswell's " Johnson " is certainly the most favourable object on which this taste may be exercised.
What can be done with this book was once shown by
a splendid memorial made by Mr. F. Harvey of St.
James's Street, whose pleasant magasin is as entertaining to the passer-by outside as to those within ,
for he liberally takes pains to put his best and dearest
proofs in the window, no niggard evidences of what is in store within. The pages of Boswell are so full
of allusions to persons and localities, and these again
are of such celebrity, and have been so handsomely
glorified by art, that the task may be undertaken under the most favourable conditions. Mr. Harvey
justly terms his work " the grandest literary monument erected in honour of Dr. Johnson. "
The " Life of Boswell " selected, was Croker's edition in five volumes, which was enlarged and inlaid to
sixteen volumes folio, by the addition of autographs,
portraits, views in water- colours, mezzotints and line
engravings. A general dealer in pictures, autographs,
prints, has immense advantages in his system ; for
174 Grangerising and Dickensiana.
out of the great masses of " papers " which he purchases, the great portion is certain to prove useful for some one or other of these purposes. The number of articles illustrating them, including twenty portraits ofthe writer, are nine hundred and eighty- two,
each one of which has been inlaid and enlarged,
cleaned, and laid down with the greatest neatness,
care, and cost.
The supplement, a single volume, was enlarged to
six folio volumes. How rich and curious the contents
are will be seen from the fact that it contains many
original MSS. of the Doctor, including the famous
letter to Macpherson, and which was worth £50 ;
the draft of the plan for his Dictionary, and which was
sold at auction for £57. There were water-colours by Pyne and others. For the whole set of twentytwo volumes, handsomely bound in morocco extra,
with the title-pages, table of contents, and printed
specially, the large but not excessive sum of one
thousand and fifty pounds is asked. The Grangerised Kemble is enlarged from two into nine volumes,
with all the luxe of special water- colours, bills, &c. ,
proof prints, &c. , and is valued at £300. But in
these instances, it need not be said, the outlay has
been purposely kept within measurable bounds. But
the wealthy reckless amateur need only to give his
commission and the book can be illustrated regardless of cost.
The pitiless Grangerite slaughters a book for a
few pictures, just as an epicure has had a sheep killed for the sweetbread. At the Bernal sale there
was a collection of pictures to illustrate Shakespeare :
"An Extensive and Valuable Collection of Engravings made for various editions of the Plays of Shakespeare, formed with the intention of illustrating the
Grangerising and Dickensiana. 175
Works of this celebrated writer ( ! ) by the aid of pictorial art, comprising the series published to several
editions, viz. , Bell's first edition , with the Actors in
Costume, large paper, 170 plates ; Inchbald's Theatre,
23 proofs on india before the writing ; Singleton's
designs, 44 plates ; Pickering's edition, 39 large
paper, india paper ; Smirke's designs, by Taylor, in
ovals, nearly all paper ; Woodcuts to Scholey's edition (23 ) ; Jennings and Chaplin's series of 40 proofs
before the letters ; Smirke's Illustrations (40) ; Sargent's Landscape and Architectural Illustrations, 9
parts, 45 plates, india proofs ; How and Parsons,
1841 ; The Union Shakespeare, 6 parts, proofs before
the letters ; Theobald's edition, 39 plates mounted ;
Bell and Kearsley, 106, mostly mounted ; Kearsley's
edition, 75 plates mounted ; with others from Ballantyne, Thurston, and Whittingham's editions ; in all,
above eight hundred engravings. Achoice collection,
mostly proofs. "
But what is all this to the following stupendous
monument : “ Blomefield's Norfolk Illustrated.—
Blomefield's (Francis) Essay towards a Topographical History of the County of Norfolk, new edition,
with Continuation, II vols. , large paper, richly illustrated by the insertion of additional manuscript and
printed matter, the arms coloured throughout, and
many hundred drawings of arms, seals, and other
* In a recent catalogue was offered a volume of miniatures and illuminated capital letters cut from the old MS. , and about 150 in number. Conceive of the sacrilegious Goth at his work,
slicing and snipping from the reverent tawny leaves of the thir- teenth century, it may be, and flinging away the useless vellum !
There is an instance, too, of another devastator who wished to illustrate the History of Printing in the most effective style , and formed a collection of title-pages cut from books, with speci- mens of ordinary pages. These he accumulated in thousands,
each specimen entailing the sacrifice of a volume.
176 Grangerising and Dickensiana.
interesting objects upon the margin ; half russia.
Original Drawings to illustrate Blomefield's Norfolk ;
also a very extensive Collection of engraved Illustrations, together amounting to about seven thousand
subjects, 29 vols. half russia, and 12 vols. in cloth ;
also a few additional drawings, unbound. Yarmouth
Town Rolls ; ancient manuscripts, neatly laid down
and bound in 1 vol. half russia. Original Deeds and
Charters, two hundred and twenty-four in number, in
I vol. half russia, Miscellaneous Deeds, about two
hundred and thirty in number, arranged in II solan- der boxes, russia backs, uniform with the rest. A
Collection of 224 Seals, embracing conventual, parochial, corporate, and private seals, many of high
antiquity ; arranged in trays, enclosed in a case with
russia back. List of Norfolk Portraits, Manuscript,
I vol. half russia. Index of Illustrations, arranged
according to Parishes (royal 8vo, privately printed,
inlaid to a size uniform with the rest) , with copious
MS. additions, I vol, half russia. Together 70 vols.
and cases."
"To speak of this article summarily as presenting
the finest illustrated county history ever formed would
perhaps be its only fitting and sufficient description.
It may, however, be stated that of the total number
of seven thousand illustrations (without estimating at
all those to be found in the printed volumes), about
four thousand are beautiful original drawings. " One
feels a sort of pity for this poor demented collector,
with his " eleven solander boxes," and his "trays with
russia backs," and his bills to the artists and binders,
and the jackals employed to search the country for
prey.
These " County Histories " are a favourite and invariable subject. Sometimes the wealthy amateur,
Grangerising and Dickensiana. 177
full of his pet subject, has given an order regardless
of expense for the illustrators by pen and pencil, gold
and colours. This seems turning the clock backwards, as these modern imitators, from want of
practice, lack the certainty and freedom of the older
masters ofthe craft. It was thus that some one interested in the meeting ofthe Field of the Cloth of Gold
commissioned artists and scriveners to prepare him an
illustrated chronicle of the ceremonies, with the result
of a superb volume :-"Field of the Cloth of Gold.—
Le Champ de Drap d'Or ; or, Account of the Interview between Henry VIII, and Francis I. on the
Field of the Cloth of Gold, near Guisnes in Picardy,
in the year MDXX, with a particular detail of all the
magnificent ceremonies there observed, from the
contemporary chroniclers. A beautifully written.
Manuscript, within borders of gold, by Adams, the
caligraphist, containing 80 original paintings by
Stephanoff, Cooper, Willement, R. T. Bone, Harlowe, and Kenny Meadows, royal 4to, purple morocco
super extra, joints double with vellum, completely
covered with hand-worked gold tooling in a remarkably handsome pattern, vellum fly-leaves, gilt gaufré
edges, by C. Lewis, and preserved in a green morocco case lined with velvet." The price for this gem was
one hundred guineas. " A volume which is in every
way a superb work of art ; and it has been justly
said that nearly two centuries and a half have passed
since any manuscript so richly decorated has been
executed. It formerly belonged to Mr. Hanrott, the
eminent bibliophile, and after his death was purchased for £173, 5s. by Sir John Tobin, whose arms were drawn and illuminated on the first leaf." It contained portrait of Henry VIII. in water-colours by
Willement, after Holbein ; portrait of Francis I. in M
178 Grangerising and Dickensiana.
water-colours, slightly touched with oil, by R. T. Bone,
after Titian ; portrait of Francis I. in chalks on blue
paper by Harlowe, from the original picture at Paris ;
three water - colour drawings by Stephanoff ; two
water-colour drawings by Cooper, R.A.; thirteen
historical oil paintings by R. T. Bone, and eight
smaller ones ; one water- colour drawing by R. T. Bone ;
three water- colour drawings by Kenny Meadows ;
illuminated title by T. Willement, bearing portraits
of Henry, Francis, their Queens, and Wolsey, coats
of arms, &c.; and forty-seven exquisite emblematic
and heraldic head and tail pieces, initial letters, and
vignettes, very beautifully illuminated in gold and
colours, by Willement,
Nothing would have caused so much amusement
and surprise to the late amiable and brilliant Charles
Dickens had he been assured that one of the fashions
in which his posthumous fame would have been
celebrated was to be a mania for collecting "early
clean or uncut " copies of his works, in various
" states " and conditions. This sort of compliment
would have brought a pleasant twinkle to his eye,
anticipatory of some quip more pleasant, Still,
though careful to preserve for himself the series of
his works in due order as they were issued, he
had little toleration for the fads of the bibliophilist,
as little as he had for " fads " of any kind. Thackeray, it is known, like many other copious writers,
used to complain rather piteously that he could never
lay his hand on, or keep a copy of, his own books,
which were usually begged or borrowed , stolen or
given away. On the other hand, the less-appreciated
author has generally a stock on hand, and is ever
ready to bestow a copy on a favoured friend, en-
Grangerising and Dickensiana. 179
riched with a presentation formula in his own autograph.
It is only within the last few years this eager quest
for early copies and first editions of Dickens's works
has developed to an extraordinary degree. Everything written by this master when in its " first state
fetches extravagant prices. All sorts of refinements
or variations are carefully noted to enhance the
price. Within the last two years a new " sense "
has been created by two or three enterprising London booksellers, who have contrived to stimulate an
eager demand for rare copies and editions. Possessors of early editions will be astonished to learn
what prices can be obtained for these rarities, or for
a " Pickwick " in " fine condition. " A " Pickwick "
arrayed in its green covers, it may be said, should
be bound up with these adornments, including all the
advertisements, the British Museum having ruled the
precedent, and binding up its magazines in this
fashion. A nice point is thus raised, it being urged
that these are legitimate and component parts of the
work, as being issued with it ; more especially as
among them will be found "the two scarce addresses" of the author to the reader. "Nickleby "
and its successors cost from three to four guineas,
according to condition, while " Oliver Twist," owing
to the masterly plates by Cruikshank, reaches to five
and upwards ; for here the claims of collectors of
Cruikshankiana and Dickensiana come into conflict.
Next comes "Great Expectations," a first edition of
which is almost impossible to procure, buyers having
to be content with a first or second volume, making
up the rest from the second or third. The reason given for this scarcity is a curious one. The work
was issued in the " Mudie " or three-volume form,
180 Grangerising and Dickensiana.
and was thus promptly thumbed, torn, marked, and
even dismembered, by the professional reader ;
whereas works issued in numbers were bought by private purchasers and preserved for binding. It is
indeed pathetically complained, " We have had to
use fourth editions for vols. ii, and iii . Vol. i. is a
first edition, and very clean. A complete copy of
the first is of extreme rarity, and even when offered
is generally very dirty in all volumes. When it is
remembered that the whole of the first issue was
sold out the day of publication, and the greatest
number of them went to the libraries, its scarcity
is understood." The little Christmas stories, truly
charming volumes, gems of art and typography,
fetch five or six guineas a set, according to condition. We remember not long since when they could
be procured for three or four shillings apiece. What
is really introuvable is " The Story of the Bible, "
"written for my children, " and which, though printed,
was, we believe , never published. The truth is, the
early editions of Dickens's works have great typographical merit, and are really handsome volumes.
Nothing now produced can compare with " Master
Humphrey's Clock, " its large noble page and type,
and its exquisite Cattermole etchings set in the type. *
Mr. Jarvis, an enterprising bookseller in King William Street, has recently issued a little "Dickens Catalogue, " con- taining all the works, with additional " Dickensiana , " reaching to some four hundred items, all richly bound in " crushed green levant morocco by Zaehnsdorf, " and which includes " an almost unique collection of portraits , some seventeen in num- ber. " Here we find the rare playbills of the amateur performances, the various farces and plays he wrote, and which Mr. R. Herne Shepherd ventured to reprint in two portly volumes,
thereby bringing down on his head a swift and effectual stroke from Mr. Wilkie Collins, who suppressed the work by force of law. They are divided under heads, "The Green Leaf Series, "
the " Bound works, " and " Dickensiana, " all the books and
Grangerising and Dickensiana. 181
This fancy for Dickens is therefore not so unmeaning or exaggerated as might be supposed. It seems to be founded on a certain intrinsic excellence in the
articles that are so recherché ; later editions, being
"cheap " and thrown off hastily, have really few attractions. As I have said, some of the prettiest
volumes ever turned out were the little Christmas
annuals, in their gold and crimson " jackets, " effective and dainty titles, and exquisite engravings . The
way these are combined with the type, the romance
and sympathy in the touches, the beauty and dreamy character of the whole, make these most charming
little works, and quite account for the general desire to possess them. Aset in fine condition is a welcome
treasure indeed.
44
44
pamphlets that have been written on our author or in imitation of him. Mr. R. H. Shepherd has written a very interesting volume called the " Bibliography of Charles Dickens, " in which he has noted all his works, editions, letters, &c. , with the
dates of publication . Here are found all the theatrical adap- tations, the imitations, " catchpenny " and otherwise, such as "Pickwick Abroad, " " Pickwick in America, " " The Penny Pickwick by Bos, " "The Peregrinations of Pickwick, " Dombey and Daughter, " by the notorious " Chief Baron Nicholson ;'
Nickleby Married , " &c. Even an attenuated little volume of
poems by the "horse-riding " Ada Menken is much sought,
owing to a letter of our author which is given in the preface.
A most curious feature is that his wonderful descriptive faculty has been found of value in describing scenes or buildings that have now been swept away ; hence we have volumes on his connection with Old London and its demolished streets and inns "Charles Dickens in Kent, " Rochester and Charles Dickens, " " Dickens and London, " " Dickens in England " --while one person has used his scissors to make up a pleasing little book of sketches of old streets, inns, houses, &c. , described by the great author. In short, the fashion in which this wonderful
master has leavened social talk, allusions , jokes, characters,
places, &c. , is one of the most singular phenomena of the age,
and as unique as it is extraordinary. No other writer, save per- haps Shakespeare, has been so reprinted or so illustrated, and it now looks as though this prestige is entering on a new lease,
44
182 Grangerising and Dickensiana.
I
The " Sunday Under Three Heads, ” like all pamphlets of small circulation, is singularly scarce.
recall the delighted chuckle of a well-known collector
who at a sale bid carelessly for a small volume of
tracts, secured for a shilling or two. He was presently showing his friends , in unconstrained delight,
the " Sunday Under Three Heads, " bound up with the rest. "Worth a couple of guineas, " he cried ;
"the rarest of Dickens's works. " The merits of the
"Sunday Under Three Heads " are set out thus officially : " By Timothy Sparks (the only instance of
the use of this nom de plume by Dickens ) . With all
the woodcuts (early specimens of the work of H. K.
Browne, otherwise Phiz ' ) , and both the wrappers,
fine copy. The first and probably the scarcest of all
Dickens's published works. £11 , 155. 1836." But
for another copy £ 10 is asked, and this has merits of
its own, being " an exceptionally large copy, with the edges quite rough and uncut. It has been generally found in stiff boards , with the edges cut ; the present copy is the largest the writer has ever seen. "
The ordinary mortal might esteem himself fairly
happy in the possession of a good legible copy of "Pickwick " which he can read with comfort. One
more ambitious will show with pride his copy of " the
original edition, sir, very rare, and picked up for a
trifle-old gold. " Alas ! he has but little idea of
the knowledge, the necessary perfections and beauties that go to make up that really perfect and entire chrysolite, a first edition of Pickwick " in a good
" state." That it should be " clean," 66' uncut, " i.e. ,
the edges not pared by the binder's knife, are mere
elementary conditions, but there are far more important questions. Are the numbers in the original green
wrappers with all the advertisements ? Has it the
66
"B
Grangerising and Dickensiana. 183
">
66 suppressed plate " by Seymour, or can it show the
"Buss" plates ? and, above all, the recently dis- covered Buss plate of the Review ? Has it Alfred
Crowquill's set of forty extra illustrations, or the set
of thirty-two illustrations by Onwhyn in the "green
wrappers as originally issued, " or the " twelve curious ones by Strange, or the original cover containing
fourteen portraits of characters, or Sir John Gilbert's
thirty-two illustrations, or Leslie's frontispiece, or,
finally, Mr. Pailthorpe's twenty-four etchings, done
lately, which it must be said are admirable and full
of a Cruikshank spirit. When all these additions
have been secured, and the whole splendidly and
suitably bound in " whole crushed green levant morocco by Zaehnsdorf in the best style, " then indeed
you may sit down contentedly in possession of a real
first edition of " Pickwick, " that is not only " worth
looking at," but worth a great deal of money. Such has been priced at £28.
In this connection may be mentioned the extraordinary Cruikshank controversy, the delusion of an old man the claim to the invention or suggestion of part of the story and characters of " Oliver
Twist." The same claim was made to some of Ainsworth's stories , and finally some members of the Seymour family put forward a similar pretension, Mr.
Seymour's widow seriously urged the claims of her
husband in a tiny pamphlet of a few leaves, but so
scarce and almost introuvable that a copy was lately
offered at ten guineas. To this unhappy and clever
artist we owe the original sporting complexion of " Pickwick," but he committed suicide during its progress,
and threw the young author's venture into confusion.
These claims seem ludicrous . One ofthe last plates,
"Rose Maylie and Oliver," was so inferior that it had
184 Grangerising and Dickensiana.
to be cancelled . "With reference to the last one, "
wrote Mr. Dickens to the artist, Cruikshank, "without entering into the question of great haste or any
other cause which may have led to its being what it
is, I am quite sure there can be little difference of
opinion between us with respect to the result. May
I ask whether you will object to designing this plate
afresh, and doing so at once, in order that as few
impressions as possible of the present one may go
forth ? " This change was accordingly made ; but it
will be undisputed that " the few impressions " that
did go forth have since become exceedingly precious
and rare. An "Oliver Twist " with this cancelled
plate is a thing to be the collector's glory and
pride. *
The " Memoirs of Grimaldi, " which Dickens
revised rather than wrote, is also much recherché
on account of its spirited etchings by the admirable
George. It has become, too, a favourite book for
"enlarging" and illustrating. The quaint old theatre
of Sadlers Wells, where many of its scenes are laid,
the old style of entertainment, the pictures of Old
London life, all furnish, as it were, so many pegs on
which to hang the dresses and properties of decora-
* It is the same with " Nickleby " and " Humphrey's Clock, "
for which various artists have furnished extra illustrations , viz. ,
Sibson, Charley Chalk, " Hablot Browne with his " eight scarce plates, " Peter Palette, Onwhyn, &c. These extra illus- trations have an artificial and arbitrary air, for the first regular illustrations were done under the inspiration and promptings of the writer, Hablot Browne after " Copperfield, " fell strangely away, and his figures seem to have little significance. Yet still,
when a change of artists was made, none of his successors seem to have caught the spirit of the great_novelist. It may be re- peated, however, that those of Mr. Pailthorpe are excellent ,
and the one of the Pickwickians leading the horse and pre- senting themselves at the roadside inn is in the best vein of comedy.
Grangerising and Dickensiana. 185
tion. * Even the little green pamphlets prepared for
the " Readings, " " Dombey
and Son, " " Christmas
Carol, " &c. , and sold at the doors for a shilling, are
now grown to be rarities , and fetch a pound or pounds.
The great "edition de luxe, " issued at vast trouble
and expense, is described as " splendidly printed in
large type, and illustrated with upwards
of 700
engravings, including the whole of the original plates
by George Cruikshank, Seymour, H. K. Browne,
Maclise, &c. , executed on china paper in 30 vols. ,
imp. 8vo, cloth, uncut, published at £40, and offered
for £24, and of which the edition was limited to
1000 copies. "
There live and flourish in London littérateurs
whose industry, at least, cannot be contested-painstaking, industrious men, who make themselves specially useful in compiling what are called " Bibliographies" ofthese works-picking up with a pointed
stick every scrap or chiffon of composition, and
tossing it into the basket on their shoulders. A
* Wethus find copies of this character : -" Grimaldi (Joseph) .
-A number of unique portraits, views, scenes, and play- bills, illustrating the Memoirs, by ' Boz, ' of the greatest of English clowns, consisting of engraved and artistically painted portraits in water- colours by the artist, H. Browne, repre- senting Grimaldi in private dress and in his favourite char- acters ; the Times report of his last appearance, together with his farewell speech ; interesting scenes of himself and son ;
views of Sadlers Wells, coloured ; an etching of the exterior in 1760 ; fishing scene by Woodward, 1794 ; exterior, 1813, 2
views ; races in 1826 ; the Clown Tavern opposite. Also 12 playbills, T. R. Covent Garden, in which Grimaldi is cast for clown in pantomimes, Harlequin Mother Goose, Earth, Air,
Fire, and Water, Asmodeus, Whittington, Dragon of Wantley,
Gulliver, Cinderella, Mother Bunch, Vision of the Sun ,
Mother Shipton, &c. These have an extra interest, as they contain the casts of many of Shakespeare's plays, with such notables as Kemble, Young, Cosway, Miss O'Neill, and others,
a most interesting collection. "
185 Grangerising and Dickensiana.
little work on Dickens is, it must be said, a monument of careful and useful labour, for here we have
every book and pamphlet of the great novelist, with
date, place, and number of the edition, while almost
every letter that he wrote is duly noted. This has
been exceeded by the final tribute, " Dickensiana, ”
for which every conceivable fact and criticism has
been gathered by Mr. Kitton.
It is not unnatural that there should be curiosity
and interest about some of our novelist's earliest and
scarcely acknowledged productions. Who, for instance, is acquainted with the " Library of Fiction,
or Family Story- Teller, Original Tales, Essays,
and Sketches of Character, " 14 plates by Seymour
and H. K. Browne, &c. , 2 vols . post 8vo, half calf,
very scarce, published in 1836-37, and containing
the " Tuggs at Ramsgate, " and a little talk about
"Spring and Sweeps, " by Boz, pieces by Mayhew,
Douglas Jerrold, Stirling Coyne, &c. Rarer still is
what is open before the writer at this moment, a
number of the "Monthly Magazine," containing
"Horatio Sparkins, " the second number to which he
contributed. It is a curious and melancholy sensation to look at the characters of this juvenile attempt.
We stretch back over the long, long interval, to the
gay, spirited, handsome youth, now first trying his
powers the brilliant career-fame, honour, profit --a name to be known all over the world and in
every generation to come ; yet here he was, obscure,
unknown, unthought of—making this first jocose
effort and the tale unpaid for ! Rare, also, the
strange story he contributed to the " Picnic Papers, "
a venture on behalf of a publisher who had shown
singular greed in his dealings with him, and whom
he repaid, as Mr. Pickwick did Job Trotter, with a
Grangerising and Dickensiana. 187
" Take that, sir ! " -not a blow, but the most unwearied exertions for him, and for his widow and
children.
The most wonderful and flattering monument,
however, to the memory of Dickens was the work of Mr. Harvey of St. James Street. This is the
"Forster Life," comprised in thirteen large folios ,
and illustrated by all that industry and money could
acquire. To begin with, each octavo was expanded
into a folio by the process known as " inlaying " or
"insetting," a costly thing in its way, and which
requires pressing and delicate pasting with a "feather
edge, " and which has to be paid for at the rate of fourpence a leaf. Every notable name has its
portrait, and every place visited by our author an
illustration. Every portrait had its autograph letter,
and the author himself was glorified by a series of no less than sixteen . Here were all sorts of interesting curiosities, such as his " Manual of Shorthand,"
written out by himself and dealt with in a very
original way, and a review of a pamphlet done in
the vigorous Crokerish style fashionable fifty years.
ago. There are bills of his early plays, pictures of
the actors who created their parts, scenes and bits of Old London, with even a water-colour sketch of
the " Fox-under-the - Hill, " an old public-house on the banks of the Thames, where the child Dickens
occasionally forgot his early miseries over a glass of ale. It would take long to describe this wonderful
collection, which, I believe, was sold to a wealthy
American, and for which the comparatively small
sum of £350 was asked.
It is evidence of the extraordinary interest in his
works that several of his little early books have been
reprinted in facsimile. The " Sunday Under Three.
188 Grangerising and Dickensiana.
Heads, " before alluded to, has been thus treated
by two publishers ; so have the plays, in a fashion
which can scarcely be distinguished from the original.
Perhaps the rarest of these little trifles is the
"Dance Round a Christmas Tree," a little story
of a few leaves, which was, I believe, written for a
bazaar, and is eagerly sought, and at an extravagant
price. *
One of the least known of our author's works is
"The Loving Ballad of Lord Bateman, " with the
plates by George Cruikshank, in which Dickens
treated the ballad with all the gravity of a classical
commentator, furnishing notes and " various conjectural
readings " in a most diverting fashion ; but we must
see and get the " scarce original issue, ” and, better
still, have "the original " cloth covers preserved.
For his friend Miss Pardoe he was induced to write
something for one of the volumes, gorgeous in crimson
watered silk, that she edited ; and in “ The Keepsake " of 1852 is to be found a story by him, entitled, " To be Read at Dusk. " This, of course,
is rare. Some industrious ones have traced his
very earliest productions, carried by their ardour
Among the “ ana ” is a curious little book on the “ Origin of Sam Weller, " published by Mr. Jarvis, and which certainly supports its title in showing how Sam was suggested, It seems that there was an actor of the name of Sam Vale playing at the Olympic some sixty years since . His chief and most popular part was that of " Sam Splatterdash " in the “ Boarding- House, "
in which he introduced those odd similes which made Sam
Weller so popular, such as " Come on ! ' as the man said to the tight boot ; ' " Why, here we are all mustered, ' as the roast beef said to the Welsh rabbit ; " " Where shall we fly? '
as the bullet said to the trigger ; ” “ ' I know the world, ' as the monkey said when he cut off his tail ; " " There she is , musical and melancholy, ' as the cricket said to the tea-kettle. " This subject has been recently dealt with by my friend Mr. Charles Kent in a curious little volume-“ Wellerisms. ”
"
Grangerising and Dickensiana. 189
"9
into very speculative regions, as when it has been
assumed that he contributed to " The Town,' a
journal of original essays, characteristic of the
manners, social, domestic, and superficial, of London
and Londoners, containing an interesting condemnatory notice of the Penny Pickwick, ' edited by Boz,
and has probably unrecognised contributions by
Dickens. " Another journal, " Figaro in London, '
was also considered to have " probably unrecognised
contributions," and accordingly is priced highly.
may be added that " Bentley's Magazine, " which he
edited, has been found to contain many addresses
and ephemeral contributions which the diligent
collector will take care not to overlook. In the
Daily News, in an odd company, are to be found
several of his poems and letters. Then there
are prefaces, such as he prefixed to Overs, the
"working man's " book, and to Miss Procter's
poems.
It
Ano less extraordinary testimony to the popularity
of this great and charming writer are the number of
imitations, sequels, &c. , to his works, attempts made
during his lifetime to secure one faint puff even from
the full gale of his popularity. These also have been
collected, and fall into the ranks of " Dickensiana."
To this category belong the " Sketch- Book " by
" Boz," containing a great number of highly interesting and original tales, sketches, &c. &c., curious
rough woodcut illustrations (circa 1837 ) , very scarce ;
"Pickwick Abroad, or The Tour in France, " by
G. W. M. Reynolds, plates by Crowquill and Phillips, 8vo, 1839 ; " Pickwick in America ; " " The
Penny Pickwick," edited by " Boz " (the first 54
numbers of this very remarkable plagiarism, many
rough woodcuts, has the curious original wrapper to
190 Grangerising and Dickensiana.
Part 1 , many advertisement leaves, and the title, very
rarely to be met with, 8vo ( one page slightly defective), 1842 ; " The Peregrinations of Pickwick. "
The unfinished fragment of " Edwin Drood " has produced quite a literature in itself, and the commonly
found being, who rushes in where a more supernatural
power might fear to tread, has exercised his art freely
in speculative continuations and arrangements, dra- matic and narrative. There are many of these continuations, such as " John Glasper's Secret. " There
is also " Christmas Eve with the Spirits, or The
Canon's Wanderings through Ways Unknown, with
some further tidings of the Lives of Scrooge and Tiny
Tim, with illustrations ; " and " The Mystery of Edwin
Drood," an adaptation by Orpheus C. Kerr, 12m0,
half morocco uniform, original illustrated covers pre- served.
A celebrated but not distinguished character of
forty years ago was the so-called or self-styled " Chief
Baron Nicholson, " who presided at the " Judge and
Jury" Club. This personage, turning author, wrote
a continuation of Dombey, which he styled " Dombey
and Daughter, by Renton Nicholson, Lord Chief
Baron of the celebrated Judge and Jury Club, with
numerous engravings, the rare original edition , very scarce. " And later, some one, issuing a series of
" Sketches of Celebrated Characters," was pleased to
include our novelist, who was complimentarily marked
" No. 1 " in the gallery of portraits," a mark of
favour that must have been distasteful to its object.
The number of persons who have described him,
recorded their " recollections " of him, sketched the
places he resorted to, is enormous. We have accordingly his " Youth and Middle Age, " his " Childhood, "
"The Story of his Life, " " A Day with Dickens, "
Grangerising and Dickensiana. 191
"Charles Dickens as a Reader," the " Philosophy of
Dickens," his " Humour and Pathos," " About England," with him " In Kent," Dickens as a " Journalist," " In Rochester," also among the " Worthies
of the World, " a title that would have amused him.
Then the adaptations for the stage is in itself a long
catalogue ; and it is remarkable that every one of his
stories have been dramatised, some of them many
times over.
The portraits of the departed master form another
department for the collector. Some of the early ones
show how bright and interesting was the face when
he was a young man, and the eager, quick eyes, so
likely to rivet attention. Maclise had a happy faculty for reproducing this grace. It seems there was to
have been a portrait prefixed to " Copperfield," but
which, being " suppressed " for some reason, has, of
course, become desirable. The Laurence portrait, a
brilliant head, we are told, was " much esteemed by
the family. " Some of Cruikshank's careless sketches
have been reproduced. Some years ago a pencil
drawing by Cruikshank was discovered and reproduced in facsimile by Messrs. Robson & Kerslake.
This characteristic sketch has an interest of its own,
though, of course, it is stamped with that curious air
of aerial grotesqueness which was the author's characteristic. We are told that it is " one of the earliest, if not the first, and perhaps the most interesting,
of all the portraits of Dickens. It appears that in
1836 or 1837 both he and Cruikshank were members
of a club of literary men which had but a brief existence, under the title of the ' Hook-and-Eye Club. '
At a meeting one night Dickens was seated in an
arm-chair beside a table, book in hand, conversing,
when Cruikshank exclaimed, ' Sit still, Charley, while
192 Grangerising and Dickensiana.
I take your portrait. ' " Finally comes the French
translations , such as " Les Aventures de Monsieur
Pickwick,"which read strangely. How, for instance,
can Count Smoltork's broken English be translated ,
"How you well, Peek Veeks ? " There was a regular
series of translations formerly arranged for with Hachette on one of Dickens's visits to Paris ; but
Amadée Pichot, a diligent writer of all work on the
French press, was the first, we believe, to introduce him to the French public.
§ DE Illustrated Books and
"Lururious Editions."
IN further proof of the wonderful growth
of the art of printing, which seemed
to escape, equipped, as from the head
of Minerva, it can be shown that the
now popular form of illustration and
engraving reached almost at once a surprising
perfection. The combining of wood blocks in the
same page with type has always been a matter of
much nicety and difficulty, while copper engravings offer greater difficulties. This seemed child'splay to the early printer, who essayed works of
magnitude which even the most speculative of
modern publishers would hesitate before attempting ;
and as we open their broadly spreading pages, we are
amazed at the abundance, the wealth of resource and
general effect. Some of the most extraordinary productions of those early days of printing are what
many called the great " picture books," folios filled
with copious illustrations in the manner of Albert
Dürer and his school, These are rude but spirited,
with little shading ; and it amazes us to see the freedom and boldness of these things, and with what ease
the difficulties of " working " them were overcome.
N
194 Illustrated Books, Sc.
One of the oldest illustrated books known is an
edition of Æsop's Fables, published about 1471 ,
with numerous initial letters and upwards of 160
very curious woodcuts in the text, bound in the
original thick oak boards covered with stamped leather. The " Libro di Monte Sancto di Dio, "
Florence, 1477, with three engravings by Baccio
Baldini after the designs of Botticelli, so rarely met
with in the book, is considered to be one of the earliest
samples of engraving on copper plates for book illus- tration. But the most celebrated of this class is of
course " The Nuremberg Chronicle, " a huge portly volume, thus lately described by Mr. Ridler : "The
Nuremberg Chronicle, best Latin edition, thick royal
folio, with large and spirited woodcuts, all brilliant
impressions, and uncoloured (except two genealogies
that are coloured), very large sound copy, in old
black morocco, very neat, the sides richly blind tooled,
printed by Koberger, 1493. So fine a copy has not
occurred for sale for several years past. The book is
genuine, and perfect throughout ; no wash'd leaves,
and all the large capitals filled in by the rubricator
in different coloured inks ; it has the blank leaves,
and six additional leaves at end, which Brunet says
are nearly always wanting. " This astonishing volume
contains between two and three thousand pictures or
impressions of the most varied, grotesque, and entertaining kind. There are large plates nine and ten
inches square, one a well-known composition, representing Almighty God seated on His throne, and
which the wary collector turns to, as it is often missing, cut out by the " spoliator. " This was a truly
astounding feat for a publisher, considering that printing and woodcutting were then scarcely out of their
cradles. When we think of the difficulties that always
I
Illustrated Books, &c. 195
attended woodcutting, the warping of the wood, the
tools, it is amazing to see with what ease these
obstacles were surmounted. In each of these there
is good drawing, and a strange lurid imagination in
the display of human forms with animals' head, or
of human heads united by the neck of a snake with
the trunk of a man. In the old cuts of this era, in
initial letters there will be found a suggestiveness
and display of dramatic action, within a space of
perhaps an inch square. These little sketches will
bear study and also repay study. The earlier numbers of Punch exhibit this minute and artistic abundance to an extraordinary degree, and in the floriated
borderings in a single page the astonished reader
will trace hundred of little fairies, goblins, beautiful
nymphs, pursuing strange games and gymnastics
among the capital letters ; all drawn with an amazing
spirit and originality by Richard Doyle.
Here is the style and title of another copy, and
it should be noted what a difference in price the
element of " condition, " i.e. , size of margin, brilliancy
of impression, &c. , causes the former copy costing
only six or seven pounds ; this one five-and-thirty :-
" Nuremberg Chronicle, by Schedel ( Hartmann),
first edition, royal folio, with fine original impressions
of the 2250 large woodcuts oftowns, historical events,
portraits, &c. , by Michael Wolgemuth (the master of
Albert Dürer) and William Pleydenwurff ; very tall.
copy, measuring 18 inches by 12 , beautifully
bound in morocco super extra, dull gilt edges, by
Rivière, £35."
"Avolume, " adds the vendor enthusiastically, " of
which Dibdin says, If Koberger had printed only
this Chronicle, he would have done enough to place
his name among the most distinguished of his typo-
196 Illustrated Books, &c.
graphical brethren.' Many of the initials in this
copy are coloured, and the original owner's coat of
arms, finely illuminated in gold and colours, is added.
Probably no taller copy exists, as the edges of some
of the leaves are in their original state, rough and uncut. Mr. Bedford's copy, in no finer condition,
sold for £49. It is only upon comparison with the
edition with German text, published later in the
same year (a book of much smaller value) , that the
full beauty of the original impressions is apparent. " *
Open before me now-mine own too-is a goodly
exemplar of this monumental old tome, arrayed in solid oak, covered with a brown calf hide scored
and tooled, with an escutcheon of some German
baron deeply sunk, and the date of binding, 1583,
a very rare thing, displayed below. Nothing can
be finer than the title-page, flourishing away with its
great German ecclesiastical letters more than an inch
* These are, in truth , the ordinary copies that come into the market, but they would not satisfy the collector of taste and long purse. Any one that has placed a proof impression of a
fine engraving beside a later worn one, has to own that the two are as different as though they were of different subjects ;
and so with a tall clean copy of a famous work, unblemished and in sound " desirable " condition. Who would not covet
such an exemplar of the " Chronicle " as this ? -" A very large,
complete, and fine copy, with capitals beautifully illuminated in colours, and all the blank leaves " (this is a characteristic touch) ,
"in the original oak boards. " This, " says the enthusiastic
writer of the catalogue, " is probably the largest and finest copy in existence after Lord Spencer's. ' In 1873 a copy measuring 18 by 12 inches was sold as the finest then known ; but the present one measures nearly 18 inches by 123 on the paper only;
while along the boards it is 19 inches by 13, and 31 thick.
This belonged to Mr. Dunn-Gardiner, one of the most accom- plished of collectors, a book of whose is always honourably dis- tinguished as " Dunn- Gardiner's copy. " Dibdin says, " Let me entreat you always to pay marks of respect to the productions of the first printer of Nuremberg, Anthony Koberger. His ample margins betray a thoroughly well cultivated taste.'
Illustrated Books, &c. 197
long, and laid out with good effect. A good and
true copy boasts the wholly blank pages near the
close, which are yet duly paged ; but the author
thoughtfully explains that they have been left blank
purposely, so that, after he had brought all down " to
date," the " courteous reader " might write in any
particulars he listed. In short, a grandly " designed "
book, if one may use the phrase ; and the very
"amplitude " of the title, with its bold stately proclamation of what is within-the inscription on the
portal-impresses us with respect, if not with awe. A
book of this kind is surely a monument, and excites
wonder and astonishment.
Yet another of these wonderful picture-books came
from France in 1491 , and is thus described : -"Orose
(Paul) . History of the World (in French) , with the Book of the Four Vertues of Seneca, black - letter,
3 vols. in one, thick royal folio, with very beautiful
ornamental borders, large map, and nearly 300 large
and splendid woodcuts, all fine bright impressions,
illustrating history from the Creation, large sound
copy in old brown calf neat, from the Sunderland
Collection at Paris. Anthoine Verard, 1491." " This
most rare volume, " says the book- dealer " (which is
the size of the Nuremberg Chronicle), is one of the
most magnificent and splendid productions of the
early Paris press, was fully expected to have produced over one hundred guineas in the Sunderland
Sale ; it has a slight defect, corner oftwo leaves being
mended, otherwise it is in fine crackling state. Brunet could never have seen a copy. He states it was
printed near the end of the fifteenth century, whereas
the date 1491 is given at the conclusion of the second volume. It must be an almost unique volume, since
the celebrated bibliographer only refers to the sale
198 Illustrated Books, &c.
of one copy sixty years ago. " Twenty pounds is
surely not too much. A companion chronicle is that
of Cologne :-" Cologne Chronicle. -Chronica van
der Hilliger Stat Coellen, Collen, J. Kælhoff, 1499.
Gothic letter, folio, with a large number of curious
woodcuts of battles, historical events, portraits of
popes, emperors, kings, and others, all coloured by a
contemporary hand, olive morocco extra, gilt and
marbled edges by Zaehnsdorf, rare, £ 12. " Of this
interesting and important volume Dibdin says, “ There
are few ancient books so rarely seen. I think there
are not three copies of it in this country, and the evidence of De Bure leads us to suspect that no copy
of it was known at Paris. " It contains an important
passage relating to the invention of the art of printing with metal types, in which the author says, “ The
beginning and progress of the before-mentioned art
was told me, by word of mouth, by the worthy man,
Master Ulrich Zell, printer at Cologne, " &c. It contains the suppressed account of Pope Joan, with her
portrait, carrying a child.
Passing bythe " Ortus Sanitas," 1497 , the " Ship
of Fools, " 1488, crammed with strange illustrations,
we come to what is really the most important ofthese
old illustrated books, and with which is associated
some rather ludicrous incidents. This unpretending series has been the occasion of a craze that has
lasted nearly two hundred years, and at this moment
diligently excites the longings of first-rate collectors. I refer to the well-known DE BRY volumes—
a sound at which the bibliognoste pricks up his ears
and feels his heart palpitate between hope and
despair. For he may see a volume of the wellknown Voyages in a catalogue, but this will give him
no satisfaction, for the same editions differ, and only
Illustrated Books, Sc. 199
the most laborious collation can decide whether the
work will suit him. It indeed belongs to the haute
école, and is really only within reach of the greater
circles, the Rothschilds, Crawfurds, and the like.
Near the close of the sixteenth century there was a
publisher at Frankfort named De Bry, who about the
year 1590 conceived a plan of bringing out a series
of travels with illustrations. He was a dealer in
books and also an engraver, which double calling no
doubt led him to this choice of subject. He began
with the work of an English traveller named Hariott,
and issued the book in four languages-English,
German, French, and Latin-using the same engravings for each, and thus " got off" his stock of illustrations in the different countries. This he followed
up with the same travels in two languages, and before his death, which took place in 1598, had issued
some six portions of what he intended to be a long series. There were to be the " Greater Travels " to
the West Indies, and the " Little Travels " to the
East. His widow and sons, finding the venture successful, carried on the scheme, and a period of fortyfour years was covered by the joint enterprise. Of
the first division there were thirteen parts in Latin,
fourteen in German, &c.; and of the second, twelve in Latin and fourteen in German. In due course
the first portions became " out of print, " and subscribers to the later issues naturally wished to "complete their sets ; " hence there were reissues, with
certain alterations and corrections and additions.
And in this fashion the work was completed, so far
as it went and has come down to us. Taking up a
volume of it, we shall find that there is nothing very
attractive about it, the frontispiece being in the style
which was then in vogue, the title being set in the
200 Illustrated Books, &c.
centre of an elaborately florid decoration. Who
would think that to possess “ a set " was the longing
desire of the first-class bibliophilist ? But a reflection or two will show that it possessed the proper
elements for stimulating this craze, i.e. , almost insuperable difficulties in the way of getting a complete
set. At great cost, and as the work of a lifetime,
you may have secured all the successive parts, but
you were only beginning ; had you the parts with
the variations, or had you these parts with the
variations in the different languages ; or, had you
these, did you know that you had all ? The best
collection is likely enough to be incomplete. No one
can conceive the lore, the discussions , the elaborate
distinctions, the exquisite instinct and knowledge
necessary to a genuine part from one that was issued
"made up " of other editions. Mr. Quaritch had
copies of the same editions, which, as he shows,
differed, the one having an “ i ” more than the other.
So if you had the "i "-less one you were undone.
Some, too, of the same edition had the vignettes altered. Under the dreadful fascination of tracing
these things, collectors since the year 1740 have
been writing volumes on the subject -Camus, Brunet,
De Bure, &c. Brunet has over fifty closely printed
columns, De Bure the same ; while, latest ofall, comes
the Earl of Crawfurd with a splendid quarto full of
facsimile illustrations. For thirty years he tells us
pathetically he has devoted his labours to the scientific study of the innumerable DE BRY'S and their
variation of copies, and in this work printed in three
columns side by side these trivial changes and alterations. But the truth is, this investigation seems endless, and there is the secret of its fascination.
66
Almost from these times down to our own times,
Illustrated Books, &c. 201
the line of costly illustrated works has been maintained almost unbroken. The feebly monotonous
character of the "trade " illustrated books in our
day is well known, and has happily tired out the
public. Indeed, there is hardly a single ambitious
work of the kind that can be pointed to with satis- faction. Whether it be Shakespeare, or Milton, or
Tennyson, there is the regular procedure. It is too
often put into the hands of stock artists and wood- cutters, and usually with the same result. There is
little time to prepare the greater engravings. Indeed, one of the single flowing- line engravings out of
the old works would take one of our engravers half
a year to prepare. A curious note, too, of those
moderns' illustrations is that a single glance seems
to reveal all that is in them, whereas the older ones
are full of suggestion and thought, and bear study.
The French have introduced a class of work of this
kind, under the auspices of Lacroix (the bibliophile
Jacob) , Charles Yriate, and others, who have " done
the " arts of the middle and other ages, " Florence,
Rome, Venice, &c. , setting off their work with innumerable illustrations, all of the same weary pattern.
Doré is accountable for a great deal of this "job "
work, and though all admire the inexhaustible variety
of the artist, there grew up at last a sort of sameness
in his work, no doubt the result of the publisher's ceaseless calls on his imagination. His Bible is
considered one of his most successful achievements,
and the execution of this work by printer and publisher is a true specimen of what is artistic in that
direction. As a good illustration of howthe machinery
of trade may vulgarise what is good and noble, it
may be related that when it was determined to adapt
this work for the English market, clichés, as they
202 Illustrated Books, &c.
are called, of the engravings were sent over, and a
well-known firm proceeded to bring the work out.
Large type was selected, good paper chosen, and the
book duly " machined " through one of the great
presses. But the result was anything but effective.
There was no homogeneousness. This compatibility
between the various portions of a book is too often forgotten. The whole should be designed together, like
any other artistic work, so that the smallest duodecimo
may show signs of elegance of design as well as the
greater octavo. It must be admitted, however, that
moderns labour under serious disadvantages compared with their predecessors, for the grand folio and
quarto engravings, after reproduction of the works
of great painters , offer space for breadth of effect
and imposing design which is quite lost in small
efforts.
In the old French work, so exquisitely carried out
by Eisen and others, the appropriateness of their
culs-de-lampe, vignettes, &c. , to the position in the
page, was one of the charms of the work. Type,
spacing, headings, all calculated on principles of
proportion, make up the indefinable attraction of fine
typography. It is thus that the little Christmas
volumes of Mr. Dickens are so deservedly admired
for their elegance and the harmony and appropriate- ness of their illustrations. In the " Chimes," for
instance, we are struck with the fashion in which the
delicate fancies of Richard Doyle are blended with
the text the old church, the bells, fairies, &c. —the eye
wandering from the suggestions of the writer to those
of the artist. But in latter days an idea was conceived of issuing " editions of luxury " on a large scale
-the works ofThackeray, Dickens, Shakespeare, and
others and all the illustrations, great and small,
1
Illustrated Books, &c. 203
were collected, and dispersed through the work on a
large page " with all the amplitude of margin." Artists
of different styles and era were mixed in confusion ,
and a picture meant for a small page was set in the
centre of a large one. It is obvious that this was a
false and inartistic principle.
Ofthe falling off in English typography, looking at
it as an art, there can be no doubt ; and the late
American bibliophilist, Mr. Henry Stevens, of Vermont, who has judiciously investigated the matter,
concurs in this view in a production entitled " Who
Spoils Our New English Books ? -Asked and Answered." " The sinners who combine together to spoil
our new English books are no less than ten, viz. ( 1 )
the author, (2) the publisher, (3) the printer, (4) the
reader, ( 5 ) the compositor, ( 6) the pressman or
machinist, (7) the papermaker, ( 8) the inkmaker, (9)
the bookbinder, and ( 10) the consumer. In what
proportion each one ofthe above contributes towards
the spoiling ofthe books which pass through his
hands, it would be unfair to divulge, for it would simply be taking the spirit out of the little book. Let
every representative of the combination buy a copy of
it for himself, and if authors are thus taught to admit
their ignorance, ' publishers their 'fussiness ' and
their desire to cheapen and ' shoddy ' literature ; printers their carelessness and want of taste ; binders their
greed of ' shavings ; ' inkmakers their shoddy inks,
which turn brown so soon, then we shall have read
them a very valuable lesson."
This is not merely a speculative opinion, but a deliberate verdict founded on investigation. Our author
founds his opinions partly upon long personal observation, and partly upon discussions, in many of which
he participated ; upon reports issued by the juries of
204 Illustrated Books, &c.
the several great Exhibitions since 1851 ; and, finally,
upon the verdict of the last three, held at Vienna,
Philadelphia, and Paris, at which the best and latest
books of all nations were subjected to the closest
inspection of experts. Each of his associates, he tells
us, almost without exception, " felt and expressed his
disappointment at the comparative quality of English
exhibits in this class. " Finally, he hopes "the art of
bookmaking will drift back into the practice of those
same laws of proportion, taste, and workmanship so
well settled and displayed in old manuscript and old
books, large and small, long before and long subsequent to the birth of typography." This is a serious and well-founded indictment.
It has often been urged in regard to original work,
that the round of subjects -novels and fiction-must
have been exhausted, and that there is now no striking
out anything that is original ; whereas the truth is that
the originality is inexhaustible because founded on the
possibility of looking at the same subject from ever so
many different points. This view is oddly fortified by
the instances of Doré and Gavarni, two French artists
who came specially to London to portray for their countrymen " The English at Home." The result was
most extraordinary, for the subjects are little recognisable as English. The two artists unconsciously
brought with them the atmospheric effects and associations of their beloved Paris, and one would think we
were looking at Frenchmen and French scenes. A
more curious effect could not be conceived. It may be
said that the system which has grown up of illustrating ephemeral scenes for the weekly papers has had
prejudicial effects on art. We have grown so familiar with this sort of hurriedly done picture that we accept
it ; but there is no doubt they are as unfaithful as they
Illustrated Books, &c. 205
are superficial. There is no roundness of drawing—
all is coarse " scratching," and those who have witnessed the particular scene will scarcely recognise it.
William Harvey was the last book illustrator who
seemed to possess sentiment, as all who own the
early edition of Knight's " Shakespeare " will admit.
There is here a grace and sympathy, a harmony and
fancy, that is inexpressibly pleasing, and contrasts
favourably with the utter inexpressiveness of our modern illustrations. Another cause of this modern
failure is the realistic spirit in which all modern art
works-most figures and scenes being sketched from
living models, without any attempt at abstract grace.
The older illustrators all aimed at elevating the reader
and putting themselves on a level with the poetry of the narrator.
It is only those who are familiar with the grand
libraries that can form an idea of the splendid scale
on which illustration was carried on a century ago.
The " spaciousness," the grand ambition, and even
splendour, of the older school may be illustrated by
a few of their huger efforts. What will be thought
of a comprehensive work such as the " Grand Theatre
Historique," 5 vols. folio, map of the world, and
many hundred fine plates of battles, sieges, executions, historical events, many English in the style
of Callot, very fine copy, in rich old crimson morocco
extra, full gilt back, gilt and marble edges. Leide,
1703 ? It may be added that nothing can be more
spirited than the battle- pieces often supplied to historical works of this kind. The folio " Strada's
Belgian War" is full of dashing etchings, highly
imaginative, no doubt, but curious as showing the
costumes, arms, &c. Picart was one of the great and
most industrious of artists for this class of work, his
206 Illustrated Books, &c.
labours showing an infinite boldness and variety. One
of his monuments is " The Ceremonies and Religious Customs of all Nations," a most astounding work
for its elaborateness and finish of execution, to say
nothing ofthe encyclopædiac knowledge and accuracy
necessary, for it embodied " all ancient and modern
superstitions." There are eleven great folio volumes,
overflowing with finely engraved copperplates, representing processions, sacrifices, costumes, and the most
extraordinary rites and ceremonies. Every figure is
well drawn, finished, and studied. One might spend
days and weeks over it and find ceaseless entertainment. A copy " bound in rich old red mococco by
Derome " was sold at the Perkins sale, and fetched
£98 ; yet not long since we " picked up," as it is called,
seven volumes of the work on a stall for twenty- five
shillings ! But of this class of work there is no end.
As another illustration I will describe one out of my
own modest collection , and which is a pleasant recreation to look at for a few minutes, so grand and noble
is it. This is an enormous Venetian book, the size of
a large atlas -a huge armful indeed-a collection of
engravings of the antique statues and busts in the
Museum, engraved in a fine "large " style. But the
charm is in the pages of description, each set in an
exquisitely engraved and more exquisitely designed
border. All is worked on one side of the page only
on paper like cardboard. It is heralded by a grand
title-page, a portrait of the King of Sweden, to whom
it is dedicated, with the favourite apotheosis, always a
welcome introduction . It is bound in a massive style,
and came from the Townley Collection , finding its
way to the outside shelf of a stall, marked twenty
shillings. As an old writer remarks, it is a pleasant
humane task to redeem such captives from their de
Illustrated Books, &c. 207
grading slavery. This same Picart brought out another
sumptuous work, " Le Temple des Muses," the rare
original edition, with descriptions in French, English,
Dutch, and German, royal folio, large paper, sixty large
and very beautiful plates, brilliant proof impressions,
each plate surrounded with broad and elegant borders, fine copy, French calf gilt, full gilt back, gilt
edges, £5, 5s. Amst. , 1733. Descriptions in French,
Dutch, &c. ! This shows the clientèle to which the
artist appealed. The fine " style " of the work, its
beautiful borderings, all commend it to the amateur of
taste, though the treatment, however classical, goes
beyond the limits of propriety.
Perhaps the more imposing and more pretentious
work is the " Gallery of Versailles," from Le Brun's
paintings, executed in the old, large, bold sweeping
copperplate style, on board-like paper. One always
admires even the frontispieces of these fine pictorial
volumes, with their gods and nymphs disporting,
combined with some architectural work, the title
mixed up with abundant scrolls and flourishings, the
inscription seeming as though it were carved on the walls of some old monument. This truly regal work
is worthy of the Grand Monarque and the creator of
Versailles. I take the description from the Perkins
Collection, where a copy was sold for £ 130 : -" Cabinet
du Roi. A magnificent collection of engravings executed at the expense of Louis XIV. for presentation to
crowned heads and ambassadors resident at his court.
Bound in twenty-three volumes. " These enormous
volumes are in the binding of the time, secured
between planks of wood, the paper like a " board,"
and the engravings in the fine sweeping masculine
style so effective in these great books. The printing
was no less splendid-large, solid letters, proportioned
208 Illustrated Books, &c.
to the space covered-a matter utterly neglected in
our time. The very title- page, with its fine characters
and the royal escutcheon, is ennobling to look at.
This work was issued at twenty- five francs, and only
1000 copies were taken off, about 150 remaining over ;
these were sold as a bonus for the engravers. In
works like this we are attracted by the vignettes
and tailpieces, conceived in a singularly free and
flowing style, full of fancy in the disposition of shields
and cupids and scroll-work-often, indeed, rising to
the dignity of a regular picture. It is of what is called
"atlas folio " size, with the royal arms on the side.
It contained the King's own pictures, each a finely
engraved copperplate ; the battles of Alexander,
after Le Brun ; medals, French and Roman ; plans
and pictures of the Louvre and Tuileries ; of Versailles (in itself a monument) ; ancient and modern
statues ; the royal tapestries, fêtes, and " carousals "
(always an entertaining form of illustration, from the
admirable spirit, and crowds, figures, costumes, &c.
&c. ) ; all the palaces and celebrated buildings in
Paris ; the battles, sieges , marches, processions, &c.
of the Grand Monarque, &c. &c. It may be said
truly that each copperplate in the collection, in size
about three feet by two, is in itself worthy of being
hung up and framed, the lines are shadows so rich
and bold, and the whole effect so masterly. An
objection is of course the unwieldy, unmanageable
size of these monsters, and the difficulty of storing
them. On the walls of the long galleries in noblemen's houses we often find large prints of this character, and fine portraits of cardinals and French
statesmen hanging, each in its old-fashioned ebony
frame ; and as we pause and survey them to our great
interest and entertainment, we scarcely think that
Illustrated Books, &c. 209
they have formed but one in an immense company,
and have been separated from their fellows.
Another department of these grand art works is
the glorification of theatres. This in England is
unknown ; indeed, there are not more than two or
three English works on the construction or theory of
theatres, and those of an unpretending sort. Abroad,
where a theatre is a public monument for the city, as
much as the Exchange or the Town Hall, the highest
talent of the country is evoked to produce what shall
be an ornament to the city and to the stage. Hence
we have everywhere splendid and interesting buildings, each with a significance of its own ; and almost
every theatre of importance has been celebrated by a
magnificent work, s tting forth all the plans to scale,
with views of the interior and exterior, front, sides,
sections, &c. In these works the amateur finds a
certain charm, a savour of the entertainment of the
stage itself; and the style of engraving, in some instances, is ofthe highest order. The writer possesses
a collection of these great works, the pleasure of looking over which is almost akin to that of seeing a play,
One ofthe best is that noble tribute to a noble theatre
-of atlas folio size-the account of the great theatre
at Bordeaux. The San Carlo, the Scala, the Russian
theatres, the new Opera House at Paris, and our
Drury Lane, have all been illustrated in this sumptuous fashion. Besides the architectural plans, done
minutely to scale, there are given views of the exterior
and interior wrought in artistic fashion ; and in the
case ofthe Bordeaux house we see the audience, composed of innumerable figures in bag wigs and sack
backs, the king and his courtiers in the royal box, the
wax lights blazing away, the whole conveying an idea
of elegant festivity.
210 Illustrated Books, &c.
66
Another department of sumptuous volumes, issued
not for profit, but to minister to the glory of some
opulent patron, is found in what are styled " Galleries."
These noble works, of grand dimensions, noble type,
lavish, if not exquisite art, are a reproduction, with
fine plates and minute description , of the pictures in
some public gallery, issued at the expense ofthe State ;
or in some private collection produced at the expense
of the owner ; or of some artistic palace like that of
the Farnese or Pamphili at Rome. These fine testimonials to art would fill a library in themselves ; and
on them have been expended all the treasure of printing, paper, engraving, and binding. Most costly is
the well-known Musée " of the Louvre, issued by
Napoleon at a time when he had ravished all the
museums of Europe and gathered them in Paris.
The work fills many atlas folio volumes, and is,
indeed, a cynical monument of plunder. For the
Musée Français the Napoleon publishers received
£307 as the subscription price, and a copy sold by auction at Sotheby's in 1860 produced £102. At
the same time, by a proper retribution , it became a
mere temporary memorial, as almost before its completion the works had been restored to their lawful
owners. The engravings in these huge volumes are in
that rather pretty style which was fashionable, and
reflected the finish of David's pictures, then much
copied ; but the effect lacks boldness and breadth.
No expense was spared, but, like other productions
of the Imperial Press at this time-such as Denon's
great work on Egypt "-there is not the general
solidity and boldness of the older works. Its merit is
the vast number of subjects, and the vastness of the
enterprise. Still, these five grand folios are a surprising achievement, having been produced with a com66
Illustrated Books, &c. 211
parative ease which is astonishing to us. Every sort
of engraving is here found, including " line," eau
forte, worked after the fashion of regular engraving,
but all showing honest and finished labour. These volumes do not often come into the market.
The successor of Napoleon was stimulated by his
example to produce the " Gallerie Royale," a work of
the same pretension , full of highly finished engravings,
and finely printed. The " Florence Gallery " and
many others followed, but none rival the state and
splendour of the works of the last century. Two of
the most elegant and finished form the " Gallery ofthe
Palais Royal," describing the collection of the Duke
of Orleans, a series of beautiful engravings in the
Moreau style, each plate having an elegant border,
while the description is engraved below. The " Dresden Gallery " is in two splendid tomes, full of the
finest lithographs, the best and most effective sortto say nothing of the " Gallery of the Pitti Palace. "
The library of the Athenæum Club is particularly
rich in works of this class, boasting a large number
of these costly and entertaining tomes. Many were
bequeathed by the Rev. Mr. Turner. But, as I say,
none are so sumptuous or impress one so much as
those of the last century. Not less remarkable is the
variety of forms in which this royal encouragement
of art would display itself. Such noble patronage
seemed to be ingeniously lavish in devising opportunities.
Yet another sumptuous work was brought out to
minister to the glories ofthe Grand Monarque. Conceive of a fine, crimson - coated folio, stout, but wellproportioned, in old raspberry-tinted morocco, by
the court binder, Ruette. The leaves display the
rich "old gold." On the sides is the escutcheon
212 Illustrated Books, &c.
of Louis XV., the collar of the St. Esprit and Crown
the back exquisitely tooled, the monogram " L.L.”
and crown elaborately repeated. This noble " piece,"
intended as a royal present, is devoted to a series of
pictures of medals illustrating the achievements ofthe
great king. Each page is devoted to a medal, and
there are 318 medals, and consequently pages, but
printed on only the one or the recto side. Each
page is in an exquisitely designed border by Coypel
and Le Clerc, exhibiting a great variety of treatment.
The medal is shown at the top, in two views, the
obverse and the reverse-the first by Edelinck, the
latter by Picart. Then follow a handsome printed
historical description, while at the bottom is a graceful vignette. The whole was produced at the Royal
Press, with a splendid frontispiece by Coypel, and
inakes, from its glorification of the king in every page,
a most flattering and sumptuous picture. It is certainly worth possessing such a memorial, which is as
entertaining as it is beautiful. To this class of work,
so artistic, one can come and come again. Our
modern editions of luxury will not bear these recurring
visits. A more wonderful, amusing, and costly collection could not be conceived.
The Popes, too, have contributed some noble works
to this category, such as the “ Musée Pie Clementino, ”
ten enormous vellum- bound folios, full of pictures of
statues and antiques, wrought in the native rough Italian manner.
It is seldom recollected that the infamous Regent
of Orleans, whose name is odious, was one of the
most brilliant and accomplished men of any age-a
fine musical composer, well and deeply read, a skilled
politician, and an exquisite artist, whose works are
said to bear comparison with some of the masters of
Illustrated Books, &c. 213
his day. A translation of Longus's " Amours de
Daphne et Chloe " was illustrated by his pencil, and
engraved by Audran. This exquisite work, in an
artistic sense a companion tothe " Temple de Guide,"
is sold at a great price.
One of the most extraordinary and brilliant books
of illustration is the collection of Piranesi's views.
These immense etchings are remarkable for their
brilliant coal-black effect. The surprising dash, certainty, freedom, and chiaro- oscuro effects are truly
astonishing-not less surprising are the number. In
many a country house we may find in the library two
of the huge folios and spend a morning looking
through them. But there are some twenty- six volumes
-and there may be more-containing nearly twelve
hundred of these great plates, " comprising," says one
bibliopole, " the grand series of splendid engravings
ofthe buildings and antiquities of Rome, the prisons,
picturesque architecture, classical ornaments, Herculaneum and Pompeii, statues, vases, candelabra, sarcophagi, &c. ; remarkable Rembrandt-like compositions."
And this praise is not overcharged.
An extraordinary feature is the taste the Dutch
have shown for the great works illustrated with
copperplates. Most of the leading engravers were
Dutch or Flemish ; and it is a fact that there is hardly
a town in Holland that has not its folio volumes of
description, set off with profuse plates of its buildings,
&c. , devoted to its glories. One of the most exquisitely done of these tributes is Radamaeker's small
quartos a series of miniature views, done with a
Meissonnier-like grace and feeling. The connoisseur
should secure a copy when he can of this work, as I
have done.
Thus gradually making our way down the biblio-
214 Illustrated Books, &c.
graphic stream, we shall find that each era has a
special taste and treatment of its own, and an originality quite marked. The French have ever been
unrivalled in this elegant taste, and above all in this
tasteful art of combining illustration in its proper proportion with typography. About the middle of the
last century in France, there was introduced a species
of elegant illustrated quarto, rather thin in contrast to
the solidly abdominal English quarto, and something
smaller. And here again we find the homogeneousness of which we have spoken, and which contributes
so much to the artistic merit of a book. It would
seem that in " designing " a book—and the term is
appropriate enough-the publisher took all the departments-binding, type, illustrations, paper-into
consideration. For we find that the binding is uniform-a sort of mottled calf, laid out with a sort of
mixture offruit colour, bordered with three close lines
ofgold, the edges of the leaves wavy, and of an " old
gold " tint, each leaf being distinct, with richest effect.
Such was the binding of the little " Barbou " volumes.
Not so long since I redeemed from the stalls, for
three shillings, a couple of pretty quartos-the plays
of Crébillon, printed at the Royal Press in such style,
with an exquisite vignette on the title of Cupids, &c. ,
"composed and designed by Boucher, painter to his
Majesty," and " engraved by Le Bas, engraver of the
King's cabinet." There is even a delicacy in the way
this little inscription is set down, And how jet- like the
ink, how beautifully composed the page, how charming
the general effect ! This book, as the author tells us,
was printed by order of his Majesty, and is worthy of
such patronage, Such works recovered from the stall
are among the pleasant incidents of the book-hunter's
pilgrimage. In this shape appeared a number of the
Illustrated Books, &c. 215
French classics, such as Racine, Corneille, and others,
and which are all ofthe same pattern. But they bring
large prices now when in fine condition.
66
Of all books, the French seemed to have honoured
the graceful and ever- popular " La Fontaine❞ most,
and the elegance and grace of the various editions are
truly remarkable. It was in 1762 that the opulent Farmers-General of France subscribed to issue an
edition of the Contes which is a model of taste and
beauty. It was printed by Barbou, prefaced by
Diderot, illustrated with " eighty exquisite plates by Eisen," one of the "little masters," supplied with
fifty- seven elegant tailpieces " by Choffard-a combination of printers, illustrators, author and editor
truly remarkable. By a common fiction it was, oddly enough, supposed to be issued at Amsterdam. As
may be conceived, the ordinary price of this work is
large, and the two small volumes, with the additional
merit of Derome's binding, were lately offered for
£520! Seventy-five years before an edition of the
Fables was issued at Amsterdam, which has become
celebrated for Romeyne de Hooghe's vigorous but rather coarse plates.
Three years after the Farmers- Generals' edition
another beautiful edition made its appearance. This
was in six volumes octavo, illustrated with hundreds
of beautiful engravings, vignettes, culs-de-lampe, by
Monnet, Huet, Loutherberg, the letterpress being also
engraved, so that the whole was printed from copper- plates. But the collector must be warned that these
names only belong to the " first state," and ifthe name
of Deslaurier is found at the corner of the plates he
must reject them as inferior, and not of the premier tirage. But the really remarkable edition of " La Fon- taine " is the one in four folios, of the date 1755-59,
216 Illustrated Books, &c.
and finely printed, with humorous and bold illustrations, engraved in the most spirited style, after Oudry,
the French painter. This book is occasionally found in old libraries. The engravings are the work of
Cochin, Tardieu, and others, and there is, sometimes
lacking, a fine elaborate portrait of Oudry. From £60
to £200 has been paid for fine copies of his edition.
It indeed adds to the entertainment to read the pleasant fabulist in this shape.
In our own way, in this country, we can point to enterprising and costly efforts to do honour to the great
classics, and our publishers have never spared money
or enterprise in great speculative ventures of the kind.
It is when we compare the manner in which Shakespeare has been honoured in England with that in
which the great classics of France have been celebrated by their country that we see the extraordinary
interest excited by the English bard. In England
itself no other writer has been so dealt with, or in such
costly fashion. I do not refer to the ordinary editions,
stereotyped and others, brought out to satisfy the
current demands, but to those " labours oflove," grand
editions, on which scholars have expended a goodly share of their lifetime, or to those more sumptuous
volumes, set off with all the magnificence that paper,
print, and illustrations could furnish. But first of all
let us see what our neighbours have done for their
Molière, Racine, and others of their leading and most popular classics. Of the first, whom they usually
couple with Shakespeare-a compliment to us-there
are literally not more than half-a-dozen important
editions, set out with fine margin and plates.
At first there were some poor little duodecimo
sets of Molière's plays, such as are seen on the
stalls ; and not until 1734 do we find a really hand1
Illustrated Books, &c. 217
some edition, in six quarto volumes, adorned with cuts.
There was another quarto edition in 1773, furnished
with the younger Moreau's plates. In 1792 Didot
issued a fine quarto edition. In 1819 there came an octavo edition in nine volumes quarto, with plates ;
while in 1824 there was the Variorum edition in eight
volumes octavo, with notes and plates. There have
been one or two more important editions since, such
as Tony Johannot's, and lately they have been issuing something like our reprints of the original editions of
the separate plays. This exertion , spread over 250 years, does not argue much generosity or enthusiasm.
Not till 1760 was Racine glorified with a fine quarto edition in three volumes. Till the end of the century
there were only three other editions, one of which was
adorned with Gravelot's plates. Thenthe first year of
the century was celebrated by a really splendid effort
in the shape of Didot's magnificent Folios , claimed
to be "the finest edition of any author in any country,"
and set off with nearly sixty plates by the first artists.
Up to 1844 there were about seven more of any pretence, one of these being a superb folio edition in
three volumes, printed by the famous Bodoni, at
Parma, under the patronage of Murat.
For all these varied efforts due credit may be given
to our neighbours, but they cannot compare with what
we have done in our own sturdy, positive way for
Shakespeare. This shows a sterling appreciation, unrivalled by any nation or time.
Mention has been made of Bodoni of Parma, certainly one of the most magnificent and elegant of
modern publishers. Under the encouragement of
Murat he produced some magnificent editions of
the French classics-Racine, La Fontaine, and others,
some of which were taken off on vellum. No one,
218 Illustrated Books, &c.
Dibdin tells us, had such an eye for laying out or
composing a page. These charming duodecimos,
somewhat after the pattern of Barbou, often turn up on
the stalls. I myself possess, with nearly every known
edition, some forty illustrated editions of " the Bard,"
each extending from six to a dozen volumes.
We shall conclude this view with two specimens,
and which perhaps for expense and luxury deserve to
be placed at the head of the list, " Bastard ( Comte
Augustus de) Peintures et Ornemens des Manuscrits
Français, depuis le Huitième Siècle jusqu'a la Fem du
Seizième, twenty parts ( all at present published), in
five portfolios imp. fol . Par. 1835 , &c." " This is,"
says a panegyrist with a reasonable pride, " without
exception the most sumptuous, unique, and costly
work that has ever been produced. Each part contains eight splendid plates, copied from the most
beautiful examples known to exist, coloured and
finished with gold and silver equal to the exquisite
originals. The whole series extends to one hundred
and sixty engravings. No perfect copy of this mag- nificent work has occurred for sale in this country
prior to the present. "
" This wonderful performance is remarkable for
the price at which it was issued (and to subscribers only), as well as for the extravagant patronage it received from the government of the ' citizen
king.' There were twenty parts published, but
the work was to have gone on to a much greater
extent. Each part cost £72, so that the subscriber
had to pay nearly £1500 for his ' five portfolios ! '
This, as we have said , was but a tithe of what was
intended, for there were to be two other sections devoted to France, which would have brought the sum
up to £4500. Ifthe succeeding portions dealing with
萱፡
Illustrated Books, &c. 219
other countries were carried out, the luckless or
insane subscriber would have been bound for some
£ 10,000. The French Government patriotically subscribed for sixty copies, representing a donation in
money of£90,000. One copy, put up in an English
auction saleroom, M. R. Cutler- Fergusson's, brought
only £200. " Yet another of these gorgeous works,
coloured sumptuously in a style that puts our modern
efforts to the blush, is Du Sommerard's " Les Arts
du Moyen Age," in which all the most striking works
in the Hotel Cluny and the Roman Palace at Paris,
and in other collections, were reprinted. This was in
five superb volumes, and contained over five hundred
illustrations, all " so accurately coloured as to convey a lively description of the exact appearance of
the originals." This, auctioneers boast, is more than
warranted. These are all, as were the illustrations of
the time, coloured by handin the most masterly style,
and here one is struck by the difference of the action
of time on works of this kind and on the modern
printed colours. The latter gradually fade and become hard and flat , and even disagreeable. "A
magnificent copy of this most splendid work, admirably bound in smooth red morocco extra," was sold
twenty-four years ago for £92.
All know the celebrated column of Antoninus at
Rome, round which runs to the summit a spiral band
containing hundreds of groups and figures all cast in
bronze. To draw them correctly from top to bottom
must have been a task of amazing difficulty and inconvenience, yet it was accomplished in a most minute and
thorough fashion nearly two hundred years ago ; and
we have a splendid folio, by one Peter Bartoli, contain
ing "seventy- eight large plates of battles, processions,
thousands of figures that adorn this column, brilliant
220 Illustrated Books, &c.
impressions, and descriptions in Latin, quite complete." What astonishes us in this class of work, of
which there is an abundance, is the laborious, conscientious thoroughness with which the task is carried
out, contrasting strangely with the perfunctory, hurried
style in which works of the same kind are attempted
now. Such labour indeed could only be secured at
an enormous cost nowadays.
There is a whole department of illustrated works
devoted to "costume," to the dress of different nations.
There are some sumptuous volumes on this subject,
France being conspicuous—even the military dress of
this nation being pictorially represented from the earliest times. The theatrical costumes are also separately
dealt with from 1600 to 1820 in 104 coloured plates.
So with scenery. Forty or fifty years ago there was
a fashion in England for issuing in quarto parts views
of the different countries, under the name of “ The
Beauties,” while there was a distinct class of writers
engaged in " writing up " " to " the plates. These are
generally insipid representations done on steel. Of
course there were brilliant exceptions , such as Turner.
Nothing, however, can be compared with the older
works.
Any one who set himself to collect books with
architectural illustrations of town churches, cathedrals, castles, &c. , would require enormous and vast
library space indeed. There are booksellers devoted
to this one branch alone, notably Parsons in the
Brompton Road, who within his shop has costly
treasures galore, while outside there is a curious survival in the shape of a bookstall, with boxes ( “ all at
threepence ") and loose prints of all kinds strung together, “ from a penny each. " This suggests the
“ Omnium Gatherum " on the Quai D'Orsay. Among
Illustrated Books, &c. 221
these old strangers and pilgrims there is of course
much that is artistically bad and mediocre, but the true
connoisseur should never fail to secure the fine series
of views abroad of old Flemish and French cities and
churches, done on a grand scale by one Coney, now
forgotten, but a man of singular taste and power.
These are a series of large etchings, atlas folio, represented with a singular breadth, considering they
are in outline, and not in the elegant blackness of the
modern school. There is a poetry, a feeling, a tone
ofthe place shown, and a dramatic animation ; to say
nothing of their value as records of what has long
since been altered or what have passed away. The
courteous reader, securing his " Coney "—-soon to
become scarce for thirty shillings, will be grateful
for this piece of advice.
Such is a glimpse, and a little more, of this vast domain.
§ DE the Auction- Room.
ITH what mixed feelings one regards the
book auction-room ! Many a bibliophilist might look on it as the scaffold
whereon his darling " hobby " will one
day be done to death. Like death
itself, he may think the idea is remote and will not
affect him. Yet each recurring sale seems to say
"to-day for me, to-morrow for thee ! " Considering the costly nature of these operations, the vast
sums involved, the " drawing and quartering ” of
whole libraries, it is astonishing how prosaic is the
scene, how homely the properties, going little beyond
a general tone of " green baize,” and rude, raw-looking
shelves. There must be a secret dramatic history
connected with many a book or library that has
found a few weeks lodgings in these rooms. One
collection, and now another-comrades once, during a
century's span-arrives ; a glorious compact companionship, in all honour and distinction, in a few
days to be disintegrated, sold into captivity, scattered
or adopted into a new collection. With them the late
owner's soul is associated. How has his long life been
bent or coloured by their familiarity ; how has he
stinted or spent for them, to ruin almost ; or it may be
The Auction- Room. 223
some inheriting prodigal who is delighted to find an asset on which money can be obtained, and which he
at once despatches to the auction. Then the smaller
passions of greed, longing, envy, recklessness, all exhibited in the biddings ; the contrasts of character
-the opulent collector with few real treasures to
boast of ; the poor, rustily- clad one who can yet boast
rare and splendid things at home. Then the " seamy
side," the craft and scheming, the wrecking of a sale,
and the robbery by " knock out. " The dealer can
tell you strange legends of the capricious fate of many a rare volume. One wonders as some mouldy fellow
tells the craft of his journey three hundred miles, it may be, down to the country to attend some obscure
sale of a " gentleman's effects," for here he draws in
his lottery or lucky bag. Here he may win for " a
song " or a shilling or two some rare volume worth
many pounds. *
The rooms where these holocausts are offered
up in London are the well-known Sotheby, Wilkinson & Hodge's in Wellington Street, Strand, and Puttick & Simpson's in Leicester Square. These
are the historic marts where all the great sales
have been held time out of mind. To the Sotheby's" * There are stories of a first Shakespeare folio " knocked out for twelve or sixteen shillings and resold for £400. It is in country sales of Great Britain that this system of " knock out " is brought to bear with fruitful effort. The " knock out "
is a nefarious proceeding, and is often carried on in country sales. The principles of the knock out are two- combination against the innocent buyer and combination against the seller or owner. In the first instance the book is bid up against the outsider, who is not allowed to buy save at some extortionate price,
and if it be bought by one of the conspirators at an extrava- gant figure, he is indemnified by the rest or the book sold after the sale. In the second, where it is purchased for some ridiculously low figure-for a song, " in fact-it is allowed by suffer- ance, and a fresh sale takes place at some public-house among the dealers themselves, where it is bought at a dealer's price,
224 The Auction- Room.
modest rooms you scale a steep ladder-like stair. The
place is small and unpretending, the business is transacted in a quiet fashion ; but it is astonishing what
sums have been here transferred in the course of a
few days. More interesting are "the rooms " in
Leicester Square, where the august genius, the shade
of Sir Joshua, hovers over the scene. For this, as is
well known, was his residence and studio, the latter
a noble spacious apartment, serving now as the saleroom. Worn and somewhat roughly used as it has
been owing to the traffic, the visitor will note the
elegance of the town mansion of those days, the airy
stone stair and rail, its graceful pente, the classical
doorways, the fine proportions (it is probably a work
of Sir W. Chambers), and the genuine air of dignity.
Here we see the collectors and the " dealers," and if a
field day, some notable buyers from Paris and Berlin.
The collectors now give their " commission," but
formerly the noble gatherers attended themselves and
did their own buying. As we survey this interesting
scene, one of the most fantastic bibliographical tricks,
one connected with the auction- room, played in the year 1840, recurs to us, when the sale of the Count
J. N. A. de Fortsas' rare and valuable collection was
announced all over Europe. " The sale," says a
pleasant bibliograph essayist, writing in the daily.
paper, was advertised to take place at the office of
a notary residing at Binche, an insignificant town
in Belgium. The catalogue covered only fourteen
largely printed pages, and contained a list of the fiftytwo books forming the Count's collection , each of
which was unique. It was added that M. de Fortsas
would keep no volume if he found it mentioned in any
bibliography. The catalogues were sent to the great
book- collectors of France, England, and the United
66
The Auction- Room . 225
States, and each recipient supposed himself to be
specially favoured, and kept the secret to himself.
Two days before the sale, Brunet, Nodier, Techener,
and Renouard met accidentally in the diligence
which ran from Paris to Brussels, and each hoped
that his neighbours had heard nothing of the wonderful auction which was about to take place at Binche.
It was related that M. Castian, of Lisle, took great
interest in a work said to have been published by
Castman, of Tournay, on the subject of the Belgian
Revolution of 1830, the entire edition of which had
been suppressed , although M. de Fortsas had been so
fortunate as to gain possession of a single copy. Being
a little incredulous as to a library of which he had
never heard, M. Castian stopped at Tournay and
called on the publisher to inquire if such a work had
ever been issued by his firm . M. Castman had himself forgotten all about the edition in question , but his
foreman recollected it and its author, M. Lecocq,
perfectly a fact which at once silenced the inquirer's
suspicions. The Baron de Reiffenber, director of the
Royal Library at Brussels, asked for a special appropriation to buy some of the Count de Fortsas'
treasures, which was immediately granted. One
ardent bookseller made the journey from Amsterdam
to Binche in order to see a single volume-the " Corpus
Juris Civilis, " printed by the Elzevirs on vellum. The
Princesse de Ligne, anxious to preserve the reputation
of her grandfather from obloquy, wrote to a commissioner to buy " No. 48 " for her at any price. The
Roxburghe Club was represented at the sale ; and,
singularly enough, there were books in the catalogue
which appealed to the taste of every distinguished
collector. On the day before the sale the good people
of Binche were astonished at the number of mysterious P
226 The Auction- Room.
strangers who had suddenly appeared in their midst
without any ostensible cause. At last the eventful
morning arrived, and in the newspapers circulated at
Binche there appeared a curt notice that the library
of the Count de Fortsas would not be sold, as the
Municipal Council had resolved to keep it in honour
of its collector, their distinguished fellow-townsman.
It now came out that the Count de Fortsas was a
myth ; his chateau and his library were both apocryphal."
As we walk through the auction- room ghostly figures
seem to rise before us, the old heroes of many an
exciting contest. It would almost seem that for them
the spirit of competition was the charm. The shades
of Lord Spencer, Heber, Bernal and others must
haunt these places. The glory of English collectors
was certainly the Lord of Althorp, who, from the
calm retirement of his library, regarded his son as he
fought political battles ; and waged many a contest in
the auction-room when his heir was " taking divisions "
in the House, Never was collecting pursued under
such magnificent conditions. A fortune splendid as
his taste ; a noble mansion to contain his treasures ; a
period when books were to be " picked up " cheaply ;
while he was guided by an adviser and agent of remarkable ability, taste, and knowledge-such were
the advantages that favoured the noble amateur.
adviser and agent was the well-known Dr. Frognall
Dibdin, F, S.A,, and never was such talent so encouraged and supported. The enthusiasm ofthis enthusiast
seemed to gather every hour. Appetite, " growing by
what it fed on," became at last voracious and incontrollable. No bibliophilist had so enjoyable a life .
He was sent on missions to France and Germany,
visiting all the libraries, and monasteries, and shops,
The
The Auction- Room. 227
and bookstalls, tempting the monks and librarians to
dispose of their treasures by a display of his noble
patron's gold. He published accounts of his travels,
produced in royal style, and sumptuously illustrated.
These noble volumes, set forth in all the epicureanism
of " large paper copies, " are now precious things when found in a " fine state ; "" and a set of Dibdin's works
fetches a very startling sum indeed.
It is pleasant, as it is interesting, to read the amiable
ravings of this honest collector, who by living in one
long dream came at last to persuade himself that he
was dealing with precious stones, and all that was rare
and costly in the world ! His style, from this generous
ardour, was passionately expressive-full of quaint
and gorgeous turns, with a power of delineating character that wins his readers. His career and story is valuable as exhibiting the very highest and most expressive
form of which bibliophilism is capable.
So sumptuous was the system on which his catering for the Earl's taste was carried out, that merely good
copies ofany work were almost considered little better
than having no copies at all, or at best but a substitute, en attendant a fine one. Again, a fine one was
unsatisfactory should a finer appear in the market.
This fastidiousness required the deepest purse, but
the result has been a collection that is unequalled.
It was thus that the Earl purchased a superb Livy from the collection of another amateur, magnificent
in ideas as himself. (" It was, I believe, this book,"
says his Doctor, "and the Psalter of 1457, that the Abbé
Strathman, librarian to the Emperor, declared he
would carry away with him, one under each arm,
should the French come. ") Notwithstanding this
enthusiasm we hear that " his Lordship threw it out"
of his collection ; the truth being that he had found
228 The Auction-Room.
anotherwhose charms surpassed it—a noble copytruly,
bound in blue morocco. This system of "throwing
out " culminated in a formal sale by auction of a collection of “ incunables "—in itself enough to form a distinguished one, but rejected by the Doctor and his
patron as not up to the standard of their library.
"Our failures," he might call them, like Brummel's
valet.
The Doctor devoted some of his magnificent tomes
to a detailed account of the Althorp Library and its
contents. He described the rooms, and gave the
history of each rare work, too often straying off into
raptures —as when dealing with a certain " Pliny upon
Paper." " How can I convey an idea, ” he exclaims,
"of its condition and amplitude. Think, enthusiastic
collector, of the uncontaminatedsnow upon the summit
of the Apennine peaks, and you will have an idea of
the size and colour of the Spencer copy. The press
work of this surprising volume is quite perfect. ” *
By way of contrast it is pleasant to reflect how much
can be done with small resources, but large indeed in
their efficacy, without outlay of little beyond trouble,
time, and patience. In a provincial town of some note
I recall the figure of a retiring man of modest means,
but sufficient—and with nothing to do—who spent his
days during the past forty years in a sort of unexcited,
though careful, sensible, and diligent attendance at
auctions. For him the sale day was a regular gala.
Forty years have been thus spent, and he still pursues
his quiet labours. He had a calm, accurate judg- ment, and a quick eye. The city he lived in was but indifferently stored with " curios,”and our friend's purse,
* A collection of the Dibdin publications, all tall splendid volumes , is rare indeed. One such ( large paper) was the glory of a great American collector's library.
The Auction- Room. 229
as I said, was but indifferently lined-I doubt if he
laid out twenty pounds in the year. But during these
forty years he pursued his course unflinchingly, securing now the print, now the rare play, the old book, the
unique pamphlet, the playbill , the MS. , the picture,
the "bit" of china, until he is absolutely, at this
moment, in possession of one of the most interesting and valuable collections conceivable. It is impossible to name anything rare of which he has not
got a specimen, and generally a very choice one.
will tell you that "he has got a few old plays," but these are sure to proveto be of the rarest sort. "Yes"
-this modestly- " he had a fine copy ( uncut) of Marlowe's ' Faustus,' also of the ' Rich Jew.'" He had
mezzotintos in the finest states, and somehow contrived to have those which were unique, or of which
only a few were in existence. He rarely contrived to
pay more than a shilling or two for each.
He
What a contrast this to the opulent collector, who
looks through his catalogues, and sends an order to
his chosen dealer or broker to bid for him, and has thus
to secure at the highest possible market price anything
he desires to possess. There money is no object,
and things thus purchased in market overt contrast
strangely with the treasures so quietly and cheaply
acquired by the collector just described.
strange good fortune seemed to attend. Perhaps
it was that he never hesitated, but struck in time.
Frappez vite and frappes fort should be the book- hunter's motto.
Him a
Perhaps the most extraordinary of book-gatherers
was the famous Heber, brother of the better known
Bishop. This poor delusionist carried book-collecting
over the borders-into lunacy almost. No poor sot
ever swilled glass after glass so greedily as this Heber
230 The Auction- Room.
devoured books. He bought libraries without seeing
them, and died before he had seen all the books he
possessed. But at last the end came, and the hour
struck when he could see or handle books no more.
No friend stood by his bedside, save the insensible
quartos and folios to which he had sold his soul. That
great auctioneer Death had his hammer raised for the
final " going, going, gone ! " This was in November
1833. No one cared for the loss of this poor foolish
buyer. But now the cry was " the library ! " What was
to become of that? There is an unpublished letter of
the famous bibliophilist, Rev. Mr. Dyce, to another as
ardent, Sir Egerton Brydges, which exhibits a melancholy picture.
Hearken to this brother collector : " Poor man ! "
he wrote, "he expired at Pimlico, in the midst of
his rare property, without a friend to close his
eyes, and from all I have heard I am led to believe
that he died broken-hearted : he had been ailing
some time, but took no care of himself, and seemed
indeed to court death. Yet his ruling passion was
strong to the last. The morning he died he wrote out
some memoranda for Thorpe about books which he
wished to be purchased for him. He was the most
liberal of book- collectors : I never asked him for the
loan of a volume, which he could lay his hand on, he
did not immediately send me. "
The sale of this library is one of the great "book
eras" of the century ; and the prices, appearance of
rarieties, &c. , have all the interest that a leading
case" has for barristers. It took place in April 1834,
and was extended over some years, which was natural,
considering the vast number of volumes that were to
be disposed of. The catalogue is itself a treatise,
extending to six thick volumes, closely printed, and
The Auction- Room. 231
containing a vast amount of bibliophilite lore. There
is a copy in the Athenæum Library-the official one
it may be called —which was presented to it by Messrs.
Payne & Foss, the booksellers, who prepared it ; and
at the commencement is given an exhaustive MS.
analysis of the prices, number of volumes, loss or
gain on the sale of each volume, &c. From this it
would seem that there were 119,613 volumes sold !
which it required no less than two hundred and two
days, or nearly seven months, to sell ; and the sum
realised was £56,774.
Few have a conception of what a serious thing a
well-furnished library is, until he has turned over these
marvellous pages ; or even of a single department, in
which there may be thousands of volumes whose titles he may have never seen or heard of before. Thus
a volume was devoted to " early English " works-old
quaint things of the sixteenth century, prose and
poetry, masques, interludes, dramas, &c. Indeed " it
may be asserted that so complete an assemblage of
plays, extending from the earliest period at which they
were printed down to the closing of the theatres in
1647, were never seen. " The value and rarity of which
may be conceived when it is stated that it is now
difficult to procure an “ interlude ” or pageant—a single
one of which may cost ten, twenty, or fifty pounds.
Book catalogues have ever a certain interest and
fascination, they contain for the fanatically curious
such an odd and heterogeneous amount of information.
The odd notes, the prices, the glowing descriptions, all
make these records pleasant reading, and form part of the romance of the saleroom. Some collectors write
their own catalogue, as did Mr. Henry Huth, whose
five magnificent volumes printed at the Chiswick Press
on hand-made paper and strongly bound in half 66
232 The Auction- Room.
morocco, top edges gilt, Roxburghe style," form a
treatise on bibliography rather than a catalogue. Ten
guineas is the price of this record, and the " impression," we are told, " has been almost disposed of."
Every collection seems to reflect its owner's character ; and there is a curious interest in contrasting the
different sides ofcharacter of men like George Steevens,
Malone, Cole, George Daniel, and others, whose books
and MSS. denote what is delicate and interesting,
but whose character to the world was rough, violent,
and insolent. George Steevens seemed indeed an
odious person-truculent and malignant in his resentments, tortuous in his proceedings, and, as Miss
Hawkins hints, reported to have died like one who had
sold himself to the evil one. Yet among their books
these men were all interesting. I own to a fancy for
collecting the catalogues of certain famous menactors, poets, &c. , which reveal by many little touches their characters. Thus I have the one of Garrick's
elegant library, in all the languages, showing the taste
and accomplishments ofthe owner of Topham Beauclerk's, interesting to the Johnsonian (the owner is
said to have departed but once from his inflexible
rule of never lending a book) ; Kemble's, the junior
James Boswell, a most interesting one full of records
of the Doctor, the famous Perkins, Henderson the
actor, the Stowe, Duke of Sussex, &c.
Among the famous sales were Dr. Meade's, in 1754 ;
Mr. Woodhull's, in 1803, "rich in editiones principes " (he had thus a sale in his lifetime and one
after his death) ; the Lansdowne, in 1806, 31 days ;
Brand in 1807, 37 days, a remarkable assemblage on
typography: " hundreds of uniques, Caxtons, Wynkyns,
a most covetable tout ensemble; this glorious sale
realised £17,000 " (so sings our bookseller), Stanley's,
The Auction- Room. 233
in 1813, 66 which realised over £ 1000 a day, being rich
in Italian and Spanish works ; " the Morley or Willet
sale, in 1813, of block- printed chronicles, vellum and
large paper copies, and other indescribable treasures ;
Borromeo (good name of an owner of volumes), in 1817,
"the rarest and most curious assemblage of early
Italian volumes ever offered ; " the Bindley, in 1818,
a truly remarkable sale of " rare, curious, and early
English literature " ; the Fonthill, of 20,000 volumes,
in 1823 ; the Hibbert, in 1829, a collection formed to
illustrate the history of printing, and therefore offering
the most splendid and unique examples ; George
Chalmers, in 1841 ; Bright, in 1845 ; Upcott, in 1846,
remarkable for its works made up of " cuttings ;
Bernal, in 1855 ; Sir M. Sykes, in 1824 ; Whiteknights,
in 1829 ; G. Daniel, in 1864 ; to say nothing of in- numerable others.
""
It is curious that within recent times there have
been at least two casualties at auction-rooms which
have wrought havoc on famous collections. Mr George
Offers' collection was to be sold in 1865, and was one
of the richest gatherings of early Scripture editionsLiturgies, Fathers, " Bunyaniana, " Caxtons, Books of
Hours, &c. There were to be eleven days' sale of
these treasures ; but the prices are only marked down
to the end of the second day, when a conflagration
took place at Sotheby's, which destroyed almost the
whole. Many purchasers had left their books, but the
wisely cautious book-buyer always takes his purchases
away on the day he buys. The Charlemont collection
was also partially burnt, and many works irreparably
injured by water when they escaped the fire.
Agreat day or days at Sotheby's-not the sale days,
which are theatrical, but the quiet or viewing days,
whenyou can inspect and compare at leisure, for hours.
234 The Auction- Room.
if you will-furnishes a charm and instruction which
would have delighted Doctor Dibdin himself, or the
amazingly erudite author of " Mores Catholici. "
The last four years have been notable for some
famous sales, and opportunities , which will not occur
again, have been offered of seeing some of the most
famous books in the world. Indeed it might be said
that all the Masterpieces of Printing have been laid
open to view in the Sunderland, Hamilton, Beckford,
and Syston Park sales.
The earlier months of the year 1881 were notable for an announcement that went forth, that the
Blenheim Library was shortly to be sold. Already the
fine collection known as the " Marlborough gems,"
which had been celebrated in a volume, had been disposed of en bloc to a private purchaser. The books
were now to follow, while later in the year of grace
1884the gems of the picture-gallery-great and famous
works of Velasquez, Raphael, and Rubens-were sold
to various purchasers. Soon the halls of the great
palace will be left vacant and the walls stripped.
The news of the coming sale fluttered the book-collecting and bookselling circles all over the world, for
it was known that this Sunderland Library was among
the most famous, and stored with articles that would
have rejoiced a Frognall Dibdin to celebrate. The
sale was fixed for December 1 , 1881 , and occupied ten
days, during which Messrs. Puttick's historical rooms
were crowded with buyers from the chief capitals of
Europe. The books themselves astonished many who
were not curious or interested in such things, from
their magnificent character, though it was remarked
that the old calf bindings showed neglect, and were
in rather sorry condition. For some time after were
seen on the stalls many a stray volume, with the florid
The Auction- Room. 235
arms and escutcheons of the ducal house on the sides,
fallen from their high estate and palatial lodgment.
The first portion was announced as being “ a remark- able collection of the Greek and Roman classical
writers, in first, early, and rare editions, with a large
series of early-printed Bibles, in various languages ;
rare editions of the great Italian writers, notably
Dante, Boccaccio, Petrarch, and Ariosto ; of chronicles
in Spanish, Portuguese, English, and French ; while
there were many very curious tracts relating to English
and French politics, with first editions of the writings
of the chief French, Italian, and Spanish poets ofthe
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries." Here were also
found the first editions (editiones principes), nearly
eighty in number, of all the Greek and Roman classics
and classical writers, besides numerous other early
editions in profusion, innumerable Bibles, polyglot
and others. But what this collection was chiefly remarkable for was the vast number of books printed
upon vellum, and which, it was claimed, was unrivalled
in this respect by any library in Europe. There were
no less than fifty-eight of these choice and desirable
works, most of them belonging to the " incunable,"
or "cradle " category, dating from the fifteenth century-noble, splendid works, most ofthem set off with
illuminated borderings on the front leaf, and with
initials in gold and colour at the beginning of every
chapter.
Here too were sold an Anacreon on vellum, " perhaps the only copy known," for £221 ; an Ariosto for
£300 ; the Romance of King Arthur, a manuscript
with annotations, for £535 ; and the " fourth printed
book with a date," to wit " Balbus de Janua," for £285.
There were no less than 166 rare Bibles set up for
sale, of which Cardinal Ximenes' famous " Polyglot "
235 The Auction- Room.
of 1514, in six volumes, brought £ 195 . There also
appeared here the famous Bible of 1462, printed on
vellum, a copy of which, at the Perkins sale, astounded
all by the price it brought.
But the real excitement of the sale was the sale of
the two editions of Boccaccio. The first is stated to
have been the " first book printed at Bruges," by
Colard Manson, who is connected with our Caxton.
This volume was measured scrupulously as being
14 inches by 93. It was sold for £960. But then
the decks were cleared for the Boccaccio, the famous
"first edition of the Decameron with a date," " of
extraordinary rarity." It was described with nice
and minute accuracy as being " printed in Roman
letters, lines without numerals, catchwords, or signatures, four leaves missing, the plain margin of columns
212, 242, 259, and 260 mended, two corners defective.
It measured 12 inches by 8 , being nearly an inch
taller and half an inch wider than the Roxburghe
copy, and made such a sensation at the beginning of
the nineteenth century and realised such a sum at the
sale of the library of John Ker, third Duke of Roxburghe, in 1812, as no single printed volume ever did
before or since. " Such was the only perfect copy
known of the world-famous edition of the Decameron
of Boccaccio, a small folio printed by Christopher
Valdarfar, Venice, 1471 , black letter, in faded yellow
morocco binding, and originally published, it is believed,
for about ten shillings. About this famous work hovers
a sort of bibliographical romance. Only three copies
were known-one in Lord Spencer's library at Althorp ;
one in the Sunderland ; and the third said to be in the
National Library at Paris-but only " a cruelly washt
and cropt"thing. The most famous is the one which
produced the excitement at the great Roxburghe sale.
The Auction- Room. 237
Dr. Dibdin, who styled this auction of the bibliomaniacal Duke " the Waterloo ofBook Sales," gives a
graphic description of it in the " Ninth Day of his
Bibliographical Decameron " (vol. iii. , pages 62 and
117) , from which we gather that no less than three
noble candidates had gathered to struggle for the
prize, the Duke of Devonshire (who at the same sale
gave 1060 for Caxton's " Histories of Troy "), Earl
Spencer, and the Marquis of Blandford (afterwards
Duke of Marlborough). The scene is described by Dr. Dibdin with bated breath. The sale was held at
the Duke's house in St. James's Square, where he had
expired, his bedroom adjoining his beloved library.
The eagerness, the prices given, vast for those days,
were extraordinary.
Mr. Evans, the auctioneer, prefaced the sale of the
articles by an appropriate oration, concluding by informing the company of the regret and even anguish
of heart expressed by a foreign connoisseur that the Imperial Library had not a copy. It was known that
an agent of Bonaparte was present. " Silence followed
the address," says our Doctor. " On his right hand,
leaning against the wall, stood Earl Spencer ; a little
lower down, and standing at right angles with his lordship, appeared the Marquis of Blandford. The Duke,
I believe, was not then present ; but my Lord Althorp
stood a little behind to the right of his father.
"The honour of making the first bid was due to a
gentleman from Shropshire, who seemed almost electrified at his own temerity in offering ' 100 guineas.'
Soon, however, the bidding rose to 500 guineas (the
sum Beloe had prophesied it would fetch) . At length
1000 guineas is named by the Earl Spencer, to which
the Marquis of Blandford quietly added ' ten.' From
this point these two worthy noblemen were the only
238 The Auction- Room.
bidders, neither evincing any desire to yield. '£2000, '
says the Marquis ! For a quarter of a minute the
Earl hesitated, at length he boldly cries, ' £2250 ; '
nothing daunted, the Marquis as quietly adds his
usual ' ten ; ' and after due and deliberate suspension
' in mid air,' down drops the hammer before the
amazed and excited auditory at the last-named handsome figure, namely, £2260. When the Marquis bid
the last £10 Lord Spencer said, ' I bow to you.' Presently, after the Marquis offered his hand to Lord
Spencer, saying, ' We are good friends still, ' his Lordship replied, ' Perfectly, indeed I am obliged to you.'
'So am I to you,' said the Marquis, ' so the obligation is mutual. ' He declared it was his intention to
have secured it at any price."
It seems the Marquis possessed another copy, but
which, alas ! wanted five leaves, so that, as his disappointed rival remarked, he might be said to have
given that great sum for the five leaves. The book
itself, the subject of this mad and ridiculous contest ,
was described as being certainly one of the scarcest , if
not the scarcest, book that ever existed. It is known
that it was a bone of contention among the collectors
in the reign of the first two Georges. Lord Sunderland had seen it , and Lord Oxford cast a longing eye
upon it. In 1497 the work was publicly burnt, and
copies in the beginning of the fifteenth century were
scarce, and this identical copy, it is thought, owed its
safety to the ingenuity of a former owner, a Jesuit,
who had it lettered on the back " Concilium Tridenti, "
and was so accidentally discovered by a bookworm. It
came into the possession of an ancestor of the Duke
of Roxburghe, previous to the year 1740, at the price
of £100, then considered an extravagant sum. How it first reached the Duke was curiously explained to
The Auction- Room. 239
Mr. Beloe, the " septuagenarian," by Mr. G. Nicol. It
appears that this copy was in the hands of a London bookseller, who showed it to Lord Oxford and
Lord Sunderland, then the great collectors of books,
and competitors for rare publications, and asked 100
guineas for it, which they hesitated to give. Whilst
they were deliberating, an ancestor of the Duke's saw
and purchased the volume. The two noble collectors
were invited to dinner, and the subject of Boccace
being purposely introduced, Lord Oxford and Lord
Sunderland began to talk ofthis particular copy. The
Duke of Roxburghe told them that he thought he
could show them a copy of this edition, which they
defied him to exhibit. To their mortification and
chagrin he produced the book in question . " I have
a perfect recollection," goes on Dibdin, " of this
volume in the library of the Duke. It had a faded
yellow morocco binding, and was a sound rather than
a fine copy." It may be said that foreign writers and
book-fanciers were as much amused as astonished at
this fancy price, and threw serious doubts on the
rarity of the volume. They have since, however,
established their claim to be as frantic and extravagant
in the pursuit as the English are. So resolved was the
infatuated Marquis upon the acquisition of this book
that he was prepared to give £5000 to obtain it. The
object of this struggle subsequently came, at the sale
of the Marquis of Blandford's library in 1819, into the
possession of the Earl Spencer for the sum of £918,
in whose library at Althorp it now rests. The Earl
had the book bound in the most superb style by
Charles Lewis, having the arms of the Duke of Roxburghe within, and his own without, on dark green. *
This is perhaps the only instance of an English duke de- voting himself to the bibliomania. His name is honourably associated with the club that bears his name. Dr. Dibdin and
240 The Auction- Room.
At this Roxburghe sale there were other extraordinary prices obtained for objects that seem quite
beyond their value, as, for instance, that " collection of
twopenny portraits of criminals," which fetched £94,
and the selection of old halfpenny ballads, which
would have delighted Macaulay, " pasted in three
volumes," which fetched £477.
66
Caxton's " Recueil " was also the subject of another
ridiculous contest. This was the first book printed
in the English language, but it wanted the last leaf.
Lord Spencer had a copy that wanted the first. It
had been sold at the Steevens' sale, and secured bythe
enthusiastic Earl for £200. Sir Mark Sykes, Lord
Blandford, and Mr. Ridgway, acting for the Duke of
Devonshire, contested for it. Sir Mark retired when
he reached £500 ; the Marquis went to £ 1000. " Let
them be guineas," cried Mr. Ridgway, and the baffled
Marquis making no sign, the book became the property ofthe Duke. Why," says Dibdin, pathetically,
in a letter, " tear open wounds which promise in due
time to be closed. More mischief has ensued, more
bibliomaniacal wretchedness has ensued, than the
healing influence of an undisturbed century may be
able to counterbalance. It has been a sort of book
Joseph Hazlewood were instrumental in founding this club of noblemen and gentlemen, which was limited to forty members,
called the Roxburghe Club, and inaugurated at the Old St. Alban's Tavern, London, dating from Thursday, 17th June 1812.
Each member undertook to give to his brother Roxburghers, in turn, a volume printed for the special occasion. It is now, how- ever, arranged that an annual subscription of five guineas is received, which is devoted to the publication ofsome unpublished MS. , or the reprint of some rare and valuable work. The col- lected works of the club always realise high prices. At Lang's sale in 1828 thirty-nine volumes fetched 111 , 6s.; Hazlewood's,
in 1834, forty- four volumes, 115 ; Sir F. Freeling, in 1834, forty- four volumes, £90 ; and at Harvard's, in 1858, sixty-one volumes (sold separately) produced £125, 25.
The Auction- Room . 241
earthquake. " These people seem to have lost their wits.
With these traditions, one of the cherished glories
of the book auction-room, it may be conceived how
eagerly, after an interval of nearly seventy years, the
reappearance of such a treasure with such a history
was looked for. Still, after all the speculation, it
brought but £585 ; a vast sum certainly, but still a
sad falling off as compared with the £918 and the
enormous £2260.
The second edition of the same book brought £400.
Later came some astonishing prices ; a superb " St.
Augustin de Civitate," printed by Jenson on vellum,
produced £1000 ! Bourbet's " L'Amoroux," £640 ; and
the "Voyages de Bry" ( 1590), in a few parts, the astonishing sum of £750. The grand competitors
through the various contests were Mr. Quaritch of
Piccadilly, and a foreign dealer, M. Techener, who contended with each other regardless of limit ; but
it was rumoured that each represented influential
patrons, such as Baron Rothschild of Paris, the Duc d'Aumale, and other connoisseurs. The total cash
received during these ten days was £ 19,373, 10s. 6d. !
No wonder the hopes of the family ran high as to the
prospective gains from future sales. But these fell off
considerably, and never approached that magnificent
return. Many valuable books went at extraordinary low prices for odd shillings and half- crowns ; and
the skilled amateur, for months afterwards, might have seen on the various stalls innumerable " desirable "
lots to be secured " for a song. " Shrewd American
dealers bought enormous quantities, en gros, as it
were, of these serviceable works, and shipped them
home. The total sum realised was about £73,000.
The Syston Park Library, a model for the splendid
condition of its treasures, offered a curious show, from
Q
242 The Auction-Room.
the quality and rather monotonous tone of the binding.
What the nice connoisseur noted was the absence of
a certain style and character. Every work was plentifully overlaid with gilding, but no volume had a character of its own, and there was often a strange lack
ofappropriateness in the dress adopted for each. The
stately "Fifteeners," as they are vulgarly termed, the
grand old signors of the early years of printing, so noble
and dignified, were mostly dressed in buff coatings,
their backs squared and stiff, the lettering rather thin
and poor, and not very brilliant. Elaborate gold tooling on a pale yellow ground is not effective. How
different is the character imparted by the old bindings !
The rich, deep-toned crimson morocco, and the sparing
use of gold, would surely have been a more appropriate
roquelaure for these hidalgoes. This gives a sinuosity
to the sides, which bend inwards to the edges of the
leaves, while the rounding of the backs and the bold
ribs furnish detail and protection. The remarkable
feature of this library was the collection of first editions of the Classics-books almost like MS. , on which
we look with admiration, reverence, and wonder. They
suggest old Venetian portraits, so stately and noble
are they, so rich and costly and elegant in their
material. As was justly said by a critic, " Those who
admire the magnificent editiones principes from the
famous early presses of Italy and France, when the
printer was the rival of the painter in the love and
worship of his art, will find an ample feast of delight
in reviewing a collection wonderfully fine for condition
and remarkable beyond most for completeness. Almost the only lacunæ are the absence of a Phædrus
and the want of one volume of the Ovid, first edition
of 1471 ofthree volumes, the rarest of all, and of which
only one perfect copy is known, the first book printed
at Bologna, and of which Brunet had never known a
The Auction- Room. 243
copy sold in his time. Many are the choice editions.
of the Aldines and Elzevirs, several on vellum or large
paper, generally in exceptionally good condition and
superb bindings, from the libraries ofsuch high historic
repute as those of Lorenzo de' Medici, Marguerite de
Valois, Diane de Poictiers Barbarigo, Doge of Venice,
and Catharine de' Medici, Thuanus, Maioli, De Menars,
Grolier, and of more modern collectors."
At the present moment the cultured amateurrather the dilettante -flourishes to a degree that has
never before been known, and to all the arts brings a
taste, knowledge, and above all a purse, which has
hitherto never been rivalled. " He holds the field."
He is the "patron. " His gifts are elegant and solid ,
and there is little of that ridiculous affectation and
" airs " which was the stock- in- trade of the old amateur. This cultivated being stamps his own graces
upon his collection to a degree that could scarcely be
conceived. And it is only when we compare a gathering of the kind, to whose selection patience, time,
and taste has been brought, with the larger " omnium
gatherums," that werecognise the immeasurable superiority of the former. Open before me is an elegant
monument of this elegant ease in the shape of a finelyprinted catalogue, significant of the owner and his
library, which is the work of Mr. Frederick Locker
Lampson ofRowfant. Herein he describes his elegant
and valuable collection-a dainty record- adorned
with an etched portrait of the owner, and a Cruikshank sketch of his study ; while Mr. Andrew Lang,
a congenial and well- skilled expert, ushers the whole
in with a ballade on "the Rowfant Books : ".
"The Rowfant books, how fair they show,
The quarto quaint, the Aldine tall ;
Print, autograph, portfolio !
Back from the outer air they call
244 The Auction-Room.
The athletes from the tennis hall ;
The rhymer from his rod and hooks.
Would I could sing them, one and all ,
The Rowfant books !
The Rowfant books ! These long ago Were chained within some college hall ;
These manuscripts retain the glow Of many a coloured capital ;
While yet in satires keep their gall,
While the pastissier puzzles cooks ,
There is a joy that does not pall— The Rowfant books !"
The merit of this collection is that it was formed on
a system steadily pursued-for the illustration of old
English, modern poetry, and drama-to be accomplished by selecting only the rarest and most tasteful exemplars. The test is that the scholar in such
department would here find himself fully equipped.
There is a quaint " relish " in the owner's introduction of his cherished tomes. "It is a good thing to
read books, and it need not be a bad thing to write
them ; but it is a pious thing to preserve these that
have been some time written : the collecting, and
mending, and binding, and cataloguing of books are
all means to such an end. This is my apology for
the present volume. I had intended to annotate some
of the more curious and rare volumes, for I have a
decided opinion about a good many of them. By
doing so I should have given my catalogue the distinct
quality that comes of ownership and affection.”
First editions of poets during that dainty era, 1550-
160c, abound, and forty choice Shakespeare quartos,
headed by the first folio in fine condition , fill the connoisseur with envy and admiration. While, ofa later
generation, the first editions of Lamb, Byron, Tenny- .
son, Coleridge- always dainty things, and now much
coveted-swell the ranks of the moderns. The owner
The Auction- Room. 245
of Rowfant has himself laboriously appraised and
collated each volume, sternly rejecting all that is not
choice and perfect, and has added many a piquant
note of his own, or inscription into the book itself.
It may be added here that this gathering together
of old plays has always had a fascination for collectors.
Those who are not inclined to anything else are drawn
bythe wish to accumulate these elegant little volumes,
with their quaint old spelling and tawny paper, each,
according to strict bibliograph etiquette, a volume
in itself. There is, as usual, a melancholy interest in
looking over such a collection . Many will be found
to have three or four book- plates, showing the different
owners, how it has passed from hand to hand, the
owner himself having passed away ; and each is generally bound in the best style, often " by Bedford."
This cost may be set down at a guinea, while the little
book itself may have been secured for five shillings.
Not long since, we saw one of Mr. J. Payne Collier's
little reprints, issued at Is. 6d. , coming from Mr.
Ouvry's rare and valuable library-a trifle, which yet
had been bound in exquisite fashion, certainly at a
cost of a couple of guineas. Many collectors consider
their books as ornaments also ; they please themselves
by taking them out of the glass- enclosed bookcasesfondling them, as it were. This binding is a difficult
question, for to see some rare little tome " done up "
in ragged " half-binding " -that is, covered with
marbled paper and cheap roan-is revoltingly inappropriate, or, as Lamb would say, heartless. At the
same time, new and brilliant binding, gilt edges, &c . ,
are equally out of keeping with the sober dignity of
an Elizabethan play, though by and by, when thirty
years have mellowed it, it will be fit enough.
Mr. Malone's valuable collection of " Old Plays" now
246 The Auction- Room.
reposes in the Bodleian Library. The foundation of his
dramatic collection was, he tells us, one hundred and
nineteen volumes of old plays printed in quarto, containing on an average eight plays in each volume,
given him by George Steevens, I believe , in 1778. To
these he added forty-eight in quarto, twelve in 12m0
and 8vo, besides an almost perfect collection of single
plays of all the early dramatic writers. Among these
were such rarities as the " Gorboduc ” of 1562 ; also
Lyly's plays in one volume quarto. " This,” said the
owner, " is one of the most curious and expensive
volumes in my library. The plays were purchased
for the most part at very dear rates, and are not to be
had now at any price. For Midas alone ( a ‘ Children
of Paules ' play) I think I paid seven guineas and a half! "
Another “ amateur,” Mr. Ruskin—one of the most
interesting personalities of his time —some years ago,
in protest against what he considered the grasping
dealings of publishers, determined to publish his own
works himself, selecting " Mr. George Ailen, Sunnyside, Orpington," as his agent or deputy. This is
really a unique enterprise, and one of great extent and
importance from the long list of issues, reprints, &c.,
which the author's works now fill. But this dispensing
with a middleman is only to be done by a Ruskin, and
the general principle is not practicable. There is
something specially appropriate in a writer like Mr.
Ruskin supplying his own books ; for as the writing
and matter represent his mind, so does the book-its
type, shape, &c. -express the form and pressure of
the author's mind. There is an elegance of grace
and dignity about his grander works, such as “ The
Modern Painters " and the " Stones of Venice,” that
marks this impress in the most striking way. Even
The Auction- Room. 247
the exceptional size has a nobility. There was infinite
care used in the working, hence the grace of the illus- trations. A fine copy of " The Modern Painters " has
been priced at £40 ! and a fine set of Ruskin is of extraordinary value. His publishing notices are characteristic, and show his own familiar touch :
"Works by Mr. Ruskin published by and to be had
of George Allen, Sunnyside, Orpington, Kent (îve
minutes' walk west of Orpington Station , SouthEastern Railway).
"Advice by Mr. Ruskin : ' I have directed Mr. Allen,
in this and all future issues of his list of my purchaseable works, to advertise none but those which he is
able to despatch to order by return of post. The just
estimate of decline in the energy of advancing age→
the warnings, now thrice repeated , of disabling illness
consequent on any unusual exertion of thought—and
chiefly, the difficulty I now find in addressing a public
for whom, in the course of the last few years of Revolution, old things have passed away, and all things
become new, render it, in my thinking, alike irreverent
and unwise to speak of any once-intended writings as
"in preparation."
" I mayperhaps pray the courtesy of my readersand here and there, the solicitude of my friends- to
refer, at the time of the monthly issue of magazines,
to this circular of Mr. Allen's, in which they will
always find the priced announcement of anything I
have printed during the month. May I also venture
to hint to friends who may at any time be anxious
about me, that the only trustworthy evidences of my
health are my writings ; and that it is a prettier attention to an old man to read what he wishes to say, and
can say without effort, than to require him to answer
vexing questions on general subjects, or to add to his
248 The Auction- Room.
day's appointed labour the burden of accidental and
unnecessary correspondence.'
"Mr. Allen has positive orders to attend to no letter
asking credit. All books are sent carriage paid to
any place in the Postal Union on remittance ( in advance) of the full prices of the volumes required. In
the case of foreign countries, it is suggested that the
cost of registration for the more expensive works be
added to their prices, to insure safety in transit.
N.B.-Correspondents are respectfully requested to
note that the utmost despatch is used in replying to
orders and letters of inquiry ; but as these are very
numerous, it is not always possible to attend to them
at once, especially at the time of issue of new publications. Much trouble and delay will be saved if correspondents will invariably give their full address, and,
in advising change of residence, their former one also.
Stamps not accepted for sums over half-a-crown.
Amounts of less than five shillings not acknowledged
unless a stamped envelope is enclosed. "
The American amateurs now compete with the
British, and some very fine and rare treasures and
choice editions are being collected into libraries by opulent bibliomen with long purses. We hear of
first folios and rare things of the kind finding their
way across the Atlantic. In the very handsome catalogue of an American bibliophile, Mr. Farmer, the
true principles of the collection were set out judiciously
enough.
" Mr. Farmer's theory was large paper copies rather
than small ; the relicures of Hayday, Riviere, &c. , in
preference to cheap store bindings ; limited editions
on fine paper instead of unlimited on wood pulp ;
unique extra illustrated copies rather than volumes
manufactured by the thousand with well-worn plates
The Auction- Room. 249
and indistinct impressions ; the choicest examples of
American printed books, reprinted by the Riverside
Press, or ofthe British printing-offices, exhibited in the
typographical beauties of Baskerville and Whitting- ham-in fact , always editions de luxe; uncut copies not
ravished by the binder's plough, and above all, original
editions, if with plates, but if not, then the best printed
and the best edited the book market has to offer."
The late Mr. Bohn's catalogue, an enormous bulky
volume, weighing many lbs. , was supposed to be the biggest in the world. It seemed by actual measurement to be about a foot thick. He was in truth an
extraordinary man, combining original taste in all
departments of art and literature with singular knowledge. He, like many successful bibliophilists, was a
German. His " Bohn's Library" was a truly magni.
ficent enterprise, carried out with extraordinary spirit
and ambition. His collection of china was vast. He
had also collections of paintings, virtu , books, rarities
of every kind, all selected with the same judgment,
which at his death were sold at very remunerative
prices. He brought to his task powers of tact and
energy, and an instinct akin to the political or finan- cial. He appeared to forecast prospective rises in
value. Like many others of his countrymen he rose
from being a humble assistant in a bookseller's "store."
At all periods the amateur has been eager to indulge
in the luxury of a press of his own. There is much
to be said for this costly fancy ; for if taste and character are present it is sure to impress itself on the
works, and even on the printing. Such form and
pressure of the mind reveals itself. This is particularly manifest in the work of Horace Walpole, whose
books betray an elegance of subject, touch, and senti-
250 The Auction- Room.
ment that betokens the man of congenial refinement,
and makes them quite distinct from the ordinary work
ofeminent publishers. His own compositions-such as
the pleasant apology for Richard III. , and the " Royal
and Noble Authors "—are admirably adapted to the
mode of expression used. It is a claim on posterity
to have issued Gray's Odes. There is a distinct physiognomy in these charming little books. Among them
are Lord Whitworth's account of Russia in 1710, Lady
Temple's poems, Henault's tragedy " Cornelie," Lord
Herbert ofCherbury's Life, trifles by Sir William Jones
and Hannah More, and so serious and important a
work as the "Anecdotes of Painting." On an average
about two hundred copies only were printed of each.
Perhaps the rarest is the hieroglyphic Tales, of which
only six copies are said to have been printed ; the
printer's private copy sold for £ 16. Rarest perhaps
of all are these occasional leaves of congratulatory
verses which the virtuoso used to have " worked " off
for some visitor of distinction . Kirkgate, his printer
for a long period was, however, left by the noble
owner without even the slightest mention in his will.
Another important private press was that of Lee
Priory, directed by Sir E. Brydges, but not at all so
attractive, though the collection is much sought, and
brings in good prices. As of course the subject is
large enough to be treated in a volume devoted to
itself. There were also the Boswell, Philips, and
other presses.
A collector of much taste and judgment was the
late Mr. John Forster-"mine own fast friend ”—whose
handsome library at Palace Gate was richly stored
with rare and interesting volumes, autographs, and
prints, to say nothing of pictures and sketches. The
interest of the collection is found-it can be seen at
The Auction- Room. 251
South Kensington Museum, to which he bequeathed it in the intimate connection of these treasures with
famous men, and particularly with the famous literary personages with whom he had been associated all his
life. His own admirable literary work-always ofthe
best and most finished kind-brought him into further
connection with literary memorials of every description ; and there was no greater treat than to turn over
one of his well- stored portfolios. His artistic friends
seemed to have delighted in recording their connection with the many social hours he furnished them, by
pleasant, spirited sketches-perhaps the happiest souvenirs that could be devised. Among his books he
delighted to have such as had been in the possession
of famous writers, and were enriched with signatures
and inscriptions. He possessed most of the correspondence of Garrick, filling many great tomes ; and
his more precious volumes were bound in a solidly
sumptuous style, to do honour to the subject.
There is another class of amateur not so inviting or
acceptable. He is figured in the worm which feeds
on books. This " prowler " scans the catalogues carefully for anything in his line, and there are dealers
who purvey for his taste.
In certain booksellers' catalogues this department
is often labelled " Facetiæ," supposed bythe innocent readers to stand for books of a humorous or Rabelaisian character. In this class might be included " Macaronic " poetry. It is lamentable to relate,
however, that there is a demand for books written in
Latin and French, and often in very elegant Latin
and French, of such a character as to forbid them the
freedom of the drawing- room table. There are many
such, belonging chiefly to the seventeenth century,
and one, a notorious one, by a professor. There have
252 The Auction-Room.
bore
이
been collectors of these odious things. Selwyn mentions a noble lord of his acquaintance who imported
somethirty copies of one of Crebillon's stories, which
he disposed of to his loose friends-an instance of
rare good nature. There was an English earl who in
1789 " privately" reprinted the works of one Baffo, an
Italian writer, styled Le Rimeur le plus obscène et le
plussalede son temps, to giveawayfor presents ! It is
now, we are told, very scarce. Mr. Beckford enjoyed
the privilege of a copy, which was sold for £11, solely
upon its claimto saleté.
One person not long since dead was held to possess
"oneofthe finest collections " of these things conceivable, and which he later sent to the Continent for sale.
"Facetic !" Heaven save the mark! We should
like to hear the burning tongue of Thomas Carlyle on this abomination.
Asto the insect book-worm, few have an idea of the
ravages caused by these deadly enemies of books.
Their performances excite amazement. As when we see some huge folio- a St. Thomas or Bellarminusbored straight throughwith a tinytunnel, the material in
each leaf being cut out and carried off. One such tunnel literally destroys a book. There is something pain- ful in findi for leaf unto the end thus pierced.
These
the
tiny as to escape detection,
one was captured flagrante
the curious,
n
Df the Shakespeare Folios and
Duartos.
HAKESPEARE, so philosophical and
occult- inexhaustible, almost, in repaying the student's labours-so overlaid
with speculation and commentaries, has
naturally furnished a vast contribution
to the "libraries of the curious. " He stands alone in
this fruitfulness ; Racine, Molière, and other great
classics offering their text without exciting much controversy. But we inust add to this fruitfulness the
strange dispensation which attends the greater genius :
that sense of mystery and obscurity which prevents us
ever reaching, with anything approaching assurance,
tothe knowledge that we have what Shakespeare really
wrote. Depending on various and conflicting versions,
we are forced to hold the general sense, as in the case
of the oracles, but the literal and exact form escapes
us. There is no authorised canon of Shakespeare ; and,
strangest of all, the writer of these immortal pieces,
unlike other authors, seems to have been least concerned with their publication and editing. He who
wrote for all time seems not to have cared to bring his
work before the British public, nor to have bethought
him of editing, printing, or correcting for the press,
254 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
nor of any of the welcome incidents that attend on
authorship.
This curious fate has naturally had extraordinary
results. The plays given to the press by others than
the author, as they were found, picked up, or copied,
naturally reflected their disorderly origin ; each shape
being different, and often opposed to the other. The
plays were clearly printed from notes or recollections,
and rude playhouse copies. Further to complicate
the matter, the compositor did his best to add to the
disorder, and every page of the first folio " teems with
errors." In truth, it is with the works of Shakespeare
as with the Scriptures ; there is no original text, but
only the best, or what is thought to be the best. Inthe
case of the Scriptures there are the various recognised
MSS. , the Vatican and others, while of Shakespeare
there are the little quartos and the four folios. None
of these can be shown to have been in relation with
the author or with his original MS. Hence no one has
more special claim to authority than its fellows.
Round the quartos and the four folios there floats
a cloud of almost romantic details. An army of
laborious commentators has given days and nights
and their whole lives, to the comparing of copies, the
counting oflines, the searching for analogous passages,
in other authors, until a flood of light has been shed
upon the question. Behind these are ranged the collectors and their searchings-the story of the rare
quarto, the restorations, and, above all, the "fearsome " prices. These, it may be conceived, will rise
with every year, owing to the demand in America and
the Colonies.
Nothing is more mysterious than the fate that has
pursued this comparatively modern volume, the First
Folio works a hundred and a hundred and thirty
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos. 255
years older have fared infinitely better, and have swept
down the rapids of time without damage or wreckage.
But this work is usually found frayed, maimed, soiled,
smeared, imperfect, leaves and sheets torn out in the
middle, the beginning, and end. Almost every copy,
save two or three that can be named, is " made up"
—that is, the defects of one are supplemented from
others.
George Steevens supplies a fair, sensible reason. " Of
all volumes," he says, " those of popular entertainment are soonest injured, It would be difficult to name
four folios that are oftener found in dirty, mutilated condition than this first assemblage of Shakespeare's plays,
' God's Revenge against Murder,' ' The Gentleman's
Recreation,' and Johnson's ' Lives of the Highway- men.'
66 The folio Shakespeare," goes on Steevens,
was generally found on the hall tables of mansions,
and that a multitude of his pages ' have this effect of gravy ' may be imputed to the various eatables set out
onthe same boards. I have repeatedly met withflakes
of pie-crust between the leaves ofour author. These
unctuous fragments, remaining long in close confinement, communicated their grease to several pages
deep on e. ch side ofthem. Since our breakfasts have
become less gross, our favourite authors have escaped
with fewer injuries. I claim to be the first commen- tator who strove with becoming seriousness to account
for the frequent stains that disgrace the earliest folio
edition, which is now become the most expensive book
in our language. For," asks the astonished Steevens,
"what other English volume, without plates, and
printed since the year 1600, is now known to have sold
more than once for thirty-five pounds fourteen shillings ?" There is a pleasant quaintness in all this.
He tells us, moreover, that most ofthe first folios then
256 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
extant belonged to ancient families resident in the
country.
Every possible adulteration, he tells us, has of late
years (that is, sixty years since) been practised " in fitting up copies of this book for sale. When leaves
are wanting, they have been reprinted with battered types, and foisted into vacancies. When the title has
been lost, a spurious one has been fabricated, with a
blank space left for the head of Shakespeare, afterwards added for the second, third, or fourth impres
sions. To conceal these frauds, thick vermilion lines
have been usually drawn over the edges ofthe engravings, and discoloured with tobacco-water till it had
assumed the true jaune antique. Sometimes leaves
have been inserted from the second folio, and, in a
known instance, the entire play of Cymbeline, the
genuine date being altered. And this is the more
easy, as the matter of both editions corresponds exactly page by page and line by line, though differing in words."
It is difficult to account for this craze, or indeed to
define the element that is priced so highly. It is not
the text, for that is accessible in facsimile reprints ;
nor is it the scarcity, for there are other works far
more rare, yet not so costly. It seems really a compliment to the surpassing merit of the bard himself
combined with the other elements. Fine choice copies
are also extraordinarily few, and bring increasing
prices. It will be interesting to note the steady growth
of this amiable mania.
In 1821 a pleasant writer, Mr. Davis, in his "Journey
Round the Library of a Bibliomaniac," quotes the
prices given for this interesting monument. In 1792
Daly's copy brought £30 ; Heathcote's (title wanting),
737 ; S. Ireland's, in 1801, £14 ; Duke of Roxburghe's,
0Fa
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos. 257
£100; Sebright's, in 1807 (title wanting), £30 ; Stanley's (title also wanting), £37 ; Sir P. Thompson's, in
1815, £41 ; and in 1818, at the Sanders sale, " a fine
original copy in a genuine state " brought £121. The
third edition is nearly as valuable as the first ; the
second is " adulterated " in every page. Droeshout's
portrait served for all the four editions. " Good or
first impressions of this portrait are valued by judges
at about five guineas ; inferior ones are scarcely worth
a guinea, as the lines have been crossed over the face
to give strength to the impression. "
A leading bookseller was offering some years ago a
set of the four folios. He gives accurately (though
incidentally) copies of the title- pages of each edition,
which is interesting, and shows how damages are
repaired and the book can be " made up." The third
edition, it is known, did not go off briskly, and was, as
it were, reissued with the seven additional plays. The
prices asked were not too much. The titles are given
in full, and will be found interesting ; for, with the
quaint titles of the separate plays, they have been
abolished by modern editors.
"SHAKESPEARE. -Mr. William Shakespeare's Comedies, Histories, and Tragedies, published according to
the true original copies. London, printed by Isaac
laggard and Ed, Blount. 1623. Folio, first edition,
the title containing the portrait and verses opposite to
it infac-simile, so well done as to almost defy detec
tion ; otherwise perfect and genuine throughout. Size,
123 × 81.
"The second impression. London, printed by Tho.
Cotes for Robert Allot, and are to be sold at the Signe
of the Blacke Beare in Pauls Churchyard. 1632.
Folio, portrait on title and verses opposite. The verses
are mended, and a portion filled in, but only an ex- R
258 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
perienced eye could detect it. Some ofthe end leaves
are mended a little at the corners ; otherwise perfect
and genuine throughout. Size, 123 × 81.
"The third impression, and unto this impression is
added seven plays, never before printed in folio,
viz. , Pericles, Prince of Tyre ; The London Prodigal ;
The History of Thomas, Lord Cromwell ; Sir John
Oldcastle, Lord Cobham ; The Puritan Widow ; A
Yorkshire Tragedy ; The Tragedy of Locrine. London, printed for P. C. , 1664. Folio, portrait, with the
verses underneath opposite the title. The portrait,
title, and margins of a few leaves at end are mended
and filled in, and the dedication is entirely infac- simile,
the whole most beautifully done ; otherwise perfect
and genuine throughout. Size, 12 × 8 .
“ The fourth edition . London, printed for H. Herringman, E. Brewster, and Rd. Bentley, at the Anchor,
in the New Exchange, the Crane, in St. Paul's Churchyard, and in Russel Street, Covent Garden. 1685.
Folio, portrait and verses opposite the title in facsimile, beautifully done. The title has the bottom
corner slightly mended ; otherwise perfect and genuine
throughout. Size, 141 × 9.
"A very good set. The four volumes beautifully
and uniformly bound, by Riviere, in the best French
morocco, paned sides, full gilt backs, and gilt edges."
Four hundred and fifty pounds was the price ! But
it is clear these were ordinary things, without pedigree—“ not born,” as is said of an inferior German
prince. " Perhaps, ” says Beloe, “ there is no book
in the English language which has risen so rapidly in
value as the first editions of the works of our great
national poet. I can remember a very fine copy to
have been sold for five guineas. I could once have
purchased a superb one for nine guineas. At the sale
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos. 259
of Dr. Monro's books it was purchased for thirteen
guineas ; and two years since I was present when
thirty- six guineas was demanded for a copy. " But there are notable copies of noble dimensions,
and which can be traced from owner to owner,
each having its story, its life and adventures, as it
were ; while of the owner or possessor something
curiously interesting might be detailed. George
Daniel (the predecessor of Lady Burdett Coutts in
the ownership of a famous copy) had a curious history-himself one of the strange combative bibliomaniacs ; while George Steevens's copy would suggest
the history of a learned and stormy collector. Of his
" second folio," now in the King's Library ofthe British
Museum, this history is given :-" This had belonged
to King Charles I. , who with his own hand had written in it these words : " Dum spiro spero, C. R." And
Sir Henry Herbert, to whom the King presented it the
night before his execution, had also written : " Ex
Dono serenissimi Regis Car. Servo suo Humiliss.-T.
Herbert."
This precious volume came into the possession of Dr. Askew-a well-known scholar-" a fine copy " it
was called-and at his sale it was purchased by
Steevens for the sum of £5, IOS. Yet the new owner
says, " I gave this enormous sum." Askew had
bought it at Dr. Mead's sale for two guineas and a
half. At Steevens's sale it was bought for George III .
for eighteen guineas, thus oddly returning into royal
custody. There is another royal association connected
with this copy. Steevens had written in it that its
former owner, Sir T. Herbert, was Master of the Revels
to King Charles I., whereas it was Sir Henry Herbert who held that office. This mistake was immediately detected and ratified by George III. in his
260 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
own hand, and thus this interesting copy possesses
the autographs of two sovereigns of England. Beneath the words of Mr. Steevens his Majesty has
written thus : " This is a mistake, he [ Sir T. Herbert]
having been Groom of the Bed Chamber to King
Charles I .; but Sir Henry Herbert was Master of the
Revels."
Steevens supposes that the original edition was not
more than 250 copies. Before 1649 they were so
scarce that King Charles, Mr. Malone says, was
obliged to content himself with a copy of the second
edition ; though it is likely his Majesty preferred a
revised and more carefully printed edition to the old
one. Ten shillings, it is supposed, was the selling
price.
But now for the successive appearances of these
four folios in solemn sets ; for " no gentleman's
Shakespearean library should be without them. " At
Heber's sale in 1834 we find the four, the first receiving this handsome panegyric : “ An extraordinarily
fine copy, and one of the tallest known." This had
been Lord Denbigh's, and had come to him from the
Broadley sale. It fetched, however, only £57, 15s.—
a huge price then. But it lacked the Ben Jonson
verses, and the title and his imprint torn off, with other
blemishes. The second folio brought £9, 155., the
third £26, 10s. , and the fourth only £4, 4s. , about
£100 Covering the whole. *
The reader will be amused to see the jealous nicety with which the marks and tokens of this great book have been set down. The following is Mr. Frederick Locker Lampson's " col- lation" of his own copy :-
SHAKESPEARE, WILLIAM. -Mr.William Shakespeares Come- dies, Histories, and Tragedies. Published according to the true originall copies. London, Printed by Isaac laggard &
Ed. Blount, 1623. Colophon : Printed at the charges of W.
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
261
At the well-known sale of Mr. Dunn- Gardiner, a
gentleman who admitted nothing but what was choice
and as nearly perfect as possible, a set of the fourfolios
were sold. They were thus described : —
"Shakespeare. First edition. This copy, from the
libraries of Mr. Hibbert and Mr. Wilks, is one of the
finest copies known, and without doubt the finest that
has ever been sold by public auction. It may, though
bound in russia, with border of gold, in the quiet and
good taste of Montague, be called in its original state,
and may be fairly stated, as far as a book can be so
designated, an immaculate copy.
"Shakespeare's (Mr. William) Comedies, &c. , as
before. The second impression, russia, gilt edges.
The leaf with the lines preceding the title is in this
copy shorter than the work itself, that being unusually
large.
"Shakespeare's (Mr. William) Comedies, &c. , as
before. Third edition.
44 In
Jaggard, Ed. Blount, J. Smithweeke, and W. Aspley, 1623.
Folio. A, 8 leaves : A- Cc2, Aa 3-6: b-g6: gg 1-8 : h-i6:
f 1-6 x 6 : ¶ 1-6 : T¶¶ 6 : ¶¶¶ 1 : aa-gg 3: gg 2-6 :
hh-tti: tt 3 : vv 6 x 1-6 yy 1 y 2-6 : zz-bbb 6.
sixes. Title Ai : Dedication by John Heminge " and " Henry Condell," " To the most noble, " &c. , A 2 : Address " To the great variety, " &c. , by the same, A 3, recto, verso blank :
verses to Shakespeare's memory by L. Digges, 1 M: Ben Jon- son and Hugh Holland, 3 leaves, verses of 1st and 3d blank. '
" The names of the Principall Actors " and "A Catalogue " of two leaves, versos blank : The Comedies, pp. 303 and a blank page : Histories, pp. 232, " The Tragedy of Troylus, " &c. , not mentioned in the catalogue of contents, 15 leaves, the second only paged, and that incorrectly, as 79 and 80 : Tragedies, pp.
309 ( misprinted 993), last page blank.
Beneath the titles and occupying two-thirds of the title-page.
is a portrait of Shakespeare by Martin Droeshout, facing which,
upon the opposite page, are ten lines of verse on the author,
addressed to the reader, " and numbered " B 1. " The volume measures 13 in. x 88.
262 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
"Shakespeare's (Mr. William) Comedies, &c. , as
before, to which is added seven plays never before
printed in folio, &c. Fourth edition. The same portrait was used for this edition, after having been retouched ; it here occupies the upper part of a leaf preceding the title, having the metrical lines beneath it. "
Here begin all the niceties of folio measurements, marginal width, pedigree, and the rest. This
first folio measures 123 x 8 inches, and could be
traced to the Hibbert Collection, where it had been
bought for £85, and to the Wilks ditto, where it had
leaped up to £155. At the Dunn- Gardner sale it was
redeemed from captivity for £250 by Mr. Huth, in whose library it now reposes. In the choice Corser
Collection, sold in 1868, there was, of course, found a
fine quartette of folios. The first, described as " a very
desirable copy of this ever-to-be- coveted volume, was,
with the exception of the letterpress of the title- page
and the corners of a few leaves which have been
admirably supplied in fac-simile by Harris as almost to
defy detection, quite complete." It was tall and broad,
measuring fully 123 by 8 inches. It fetched £160.
The second folio excited attention as being " a genuine
unsophisticated copy in its original state, remarkably
tall, measuring 13 by 87 inches. " It had this oddity ;
the imprint in this copy is different from any hitherto
described, the words " at this shop " being omitted.
It brought £49, while the third fetched £77, and the
fourth £12 ; total, £398.
But now to introduce a more distinguished set still.
In 1880 Mr. Quaritch was offering an extraordinary
collection of Shakespeare editions. There were no
less than three copies of the first folio, the first “a
good andsound copy," desirable and perfect all to two
leaves. It measured 124 by 8 inches, and its price was
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos. 263
£136. It came from the Brand Hollis Library. The
next copy was also defective by two leaves, but was
“a veryfine tall copy, of unusual size,” measuring 13
by 8g, from a well-known library ; a difference which
exactly doubled the price, which was £300. The
third-but let us hear the vendor himself : " With title,
portrait, verses, and all preliminary leaves in splendid
original condition, untouched by the hand of any
modern renovator ; a very fine and large copy ( 12ğ
by 8 inches), red morocco extra, gilt edges, by Bedford, enclosed in a red morocco case with key. Price
£880."
"To some this price for a fine copy may seem surprisingly large, but not to those who are aware that
this is probably the only copy, undoctored, genuine,
sound and fine, which can come into the market for
probably another quarter of a century. Even if the
Huth Library had been sold, as at first announced, it
would merely have produced a short and not overdesirable first Shakespeare. Since the beginning of
this century, only four perfect and satisfactory copies (besides the above) have been sold, and all but this
are now in safe keeping, inaccessible to many eager purchasers on both sides ofthe Atlantic.
"Should it be considered that this first folio, besides
being the first authorised edition of Shakespeare's
plays, contains editiones principes of no less than
twenty pieces, we thus learn to estimate the real
value of a fine, unmixed, unsophisticated copy. As
all the first editions in this volume amount to twenty,
it may be said that a set of separate first editions of
any twenty plays would cost from £500 to £4000."
Note the pleasant bibliophilist phrase. There was
also for sale " a fine large, genuine, undoctored copy
ofthe second impression , measuring 128 by 8 inches,
"
264 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
But there was yet another second folio, which claimed
to be "probably the finest copy in existence," measuring 137 by 83 inches, and in as pure, clean condition
as when issued from the press. The old binding is
also in a fine state of preservation. Sir W. Tite's copy
sold, we are told, for £45, G. Smith's for £58, and
Daniel's, " the largest ever seen," for £148. For this
£84 was asked. There was also a third folio, “ a
fine and sound copy," measuring 12 by 83 inches,
in Bedford's binding ; portrait, " with the verses
printed upside down above it." A hundred and sixty
pounds was demanded for it. The fourth was to be
had for £25. Thus we might equip ourselves here
with the four fine copies complete for the modest sum
of nearly £1200. But this did not exhaust the Shakespearian treasures of our bibliopole. There was a
rare supplementary stock of the dainty quartos, fifteen
in number, early " Hamlets," first edition of " Midsummer Night's Dream " ( 1600) , and a " Taming of
the Shrew" UNCUT-conceive it !-rare, if not unique
in this state ; and for the fifteen , five hundred guineas
was asked. Seventeen hundred pounds for an armful of old books !
When that eminent and noble amateur the Duke of
Roxburghe determined to add a first folio to his
collection, it seems to have been a nervous and serious
business. He empowered his friend Mr. Nichol to
bid for him at the sale, saying in his letter : "If I am
not present, I desire you will be excessively bold ; and
if I should be present, your courage need not fail you
till you see me turn my back and walk out of the room. "
Which sounds something like the soldier before battle,
" If I should fall," &c. He, however, attended the
struggle in person. At the agitating moment of the
bidding, we are told that "his Grace had retired to
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos. 265
one end of the room, coolly to view the issue of the
contest. The biddings rose quickly to twenty guineas
-a great sum in former times-but the Duke was not
to be daunted or defeated. A slip of paper was
handed to him upon which the propriety of discontinuing the contest was suggested. His Grace took out his
pencil and wrote on the same slip, " Lay on, Macduff."
The Duke was of course declared victor, and marched
off triumphantly with the volume under his arm ,
having secured the precious volume for " about £35.”
It measured 13 by 8 inches. This copy was sold at
his sale for £100 to the Duke of Devonshire, in whose
library it now is. Sir M. Sikes, we are told, would
have gone to £80 for the treasure.
But at the famous Perkins sale in 1873, where
everything was of the choicest and finest, there were
to be seen the four folios, justly described as "a
superb set." All were bound in crimson morocco,
with joints and gilt leaves, and by measurement
were 13 inches by 8 inches for the first, 13 inches
by 9 inches for the second, 13 inches by 8 inches
for the third, and 14 inches by 9 inches for the fourth.
It was noted, with just pride, that the first folio was of
exactly the same dimensions as that of the famous
Daniel copy, while the third was " an eighth of an inch taller !"
This Perkins first folio ushered in the series of
startling prices. It had come from the Dent Collection , and now fetched what seems the immense sum
of £585.
The great actor Kemble had, of course, a copy
among his dramatic treasures at his sale, which was
bought by Mr. Boswell, the Shakespearian, the biographer's second son, for £112 -a huge price sixty years
since. But then, was it not very nicely inlaid through.
266 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
out, bound in venetian morocco, enclosed in a russia
bookcase ?
The sale ofhis miscellaneous library was commenced
by Mr. Evans on the 26th of January, and terminated
on the 26th of February. It contained some extremely
curious articles, but the rarest of his dramatic works
were not brought to the hammer, having been previously selected and purchased by the Duke of Devonshire for two thousand guineas. The books fetched
very good prices at the sale. He seems, indeed, to
have been a most indefatigable annotator, and had
compiled MS. indexes to several of his books. The
total amount of the ten days' sale was £2665, 125.
The Drury Lane Playbills from 1751 to 1818, sixty- five
vols. half- bound, with MS. indexes, notes by Mr.
Kemble, and extracts from an unpublished diary of
Hopkins, the prompter, father of Mrs. Kemble, were
sold for £120, 15s. A similar one of Covent Garden,
from 1758 to 1819, sixty-two vols. , brought 68, 5s.
These sets of bills excited much curiosity, and gave
rise to much speculation as to the price they would
fetch. It was a very general impression that they
ought to have been deposited in the British Museum.
Mr. Booth, the bookseller, was the highest bidder, and
is understood to have purchased them for Sir Gregory Page Turner. His Majesty sent a commission of
seventy guineas for the Drury Lane set, and the Duke
of Devonshire one hundred and fifty guineas for the
two sets. The room was excessively crowded.
Mr. Boswell, the younger, when he purchased his
copy of the desired folio, seems to have regarded his
acquisition with mixed feelings. " Ipse miserimus gave
amuch larger sum at Mr. Kemble's sale, but I could not
bring myself to a cold calculation of the value of a copy
which was at once a memorial of Shakespeare and of
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos. 267
Kemble." Ipse miserimus ! Surely a lugubrious
tone for an ardent collector, such as Mr. Boswell was.
At his sale it was disposed of at a small increase, for
£120.
Lord Spencer, that most fastidious of amateurs, felt
that he must have a folio to make his happiness complete. But as a typographical performance he ever
felt that it was not in harmony with its nobler brethren,
and his librarian thus apologises for its presence :-
"The knowing," he says, " need not be surprised at
the price and importance of this impression ; yet a
tougher question is rarely agitated amongst bibliographers than as to what constitutes a fine and genuine
copy of it. After having seen a copy lately obtained
by Mr. Grenville, and that yet more recently by Mr.
James Boswell, and carefully examined the present, I
am abundantly convinced that this is after all but a
disagreeable book. As to typographical execution ,
every leaf ofthe present copy was carefully examined
by the late George Steevens for his Lordship, a task
requiring no ordinary skill."
Mr. Garrick was fortunate enough to pick up a
copy ofthe second folio from " Mr. Payne of the Meusegate "-in York, I presume. "After the death of our
Roscius," says Mr. Steevens, " it should have accompanied his collection of old plays to the British
Museum, but had been taken out of his library, and has not been heard of since." This he secured for
the small sum of £1 , 16s. * It, however, was said to
* In a bookseller's catalogue I have seen the seventh volume ofWarburton's small Shakespeare. It had belonged to Garrick ,
and his wife had written in it, This Book whent with us to
Althorp on Dec. the 30th 1778 : my husband never travelled without some work of Shakespeare. ' How interesting is this,
and illustrative too !
Turning over the catalogue of Mr. Garrick's library, the com-
258 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
want the Ben Jonson verses. His beautiful collection of plays, thus generously bequeathed, formed
with great assiduity during the course of his theatrical
life, is uniformly bound and distinguished by his
initials, and prompted that charming handbook to the
English Drama, " The Specimens " of Charles Lamb,
which has educated several generations in dramatic
literature. The copy of the first folio, however, could
scarcely be ranked in the collection of " Old Plays,"
which were all of the separate "little quarto " pattern ,
and more than forty years later it reappeared in the
sale of Garrick's library, where it brought £34, 2s. 6d.
In 1844 it again changed hands, and was resold to
Mr. Tolley for £86.
66
Garrick's second folio long after was offered for sale,
and seems to have been a “ folio of pretension " from
the description, for it was “ a fine tall copy in russia
extra, gilt edges, with arms stamped in gold on the
sides." Thirty guineas was the price asked. Acopy
ofunusual interest, partly from the fact that it belonged
to David Garrick and contains his bookplate, and
partly because copies are rarely found with such large
margins. It measures 133 by 9 inches, and has some
position whereof was evidence of his accomplished mind, I
came upon a book, " Le Jardin des Racines Grecs, " with this interesting little note in Latin : -" The gift of Gilbert Walmesley of Lichfield to Garrick at the age of sixteen, on the condition
that he shall every day learn a page by heart, word for word,
so that he shall be always ready to repeat without book and in the same words. -3d July 1732."
The worthy Dibdin makes this reckless charge against Garrick without offering any proof. " Garrick had free access to the
library at Dulwich College, founded by Alleyn , and pillaged it without scruple or remorse. He did pretty nearly the same thing with Sir Thomas Hanmer's library. No wonder, there- fore, that the Garrick Collection, now deposited in the British Museum, presents at once an object of vexation, envy, and.
despair to the bibliomaniac. " This is incredible, as such spolia- tion would not have been tolerated.
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos. 269
of the leaves with rough uncut edges, in which state
no copy is on record but that of George Daniel, which
was the largest example known, and sold for £148.
The Perkins copy, measuring half an inch less than
this, brought £44 ; and the Ouvry copy, which was
smaller still, sold for £46. The verse opposite the
title and a portion of the last leaf are in admirable
fac-simile, and a part of the margin of the title has
been skilfully repaired."
This "uncut edge " in so old a book is really a
rare and remarkable instance, for it proves that the
book had not been bound, and had escaped the shears.
It is a nice question whether the original sheets of so
old a book constitute the identity, and whether the
substitution of a sheet, practically the same, makes
any legal difference. The truth is, the original sheets
belong to each other, and acquire from the companionship a special cast-they are found under the same
atmosphere, the same pressure, the same sewing and binding, the same " lie," as it were. A new intruder
is a disturber, and does not belong to the party. It is
curious, too, how this is betrayed to the skilful and
practised eye. Mr. Croker, suspecting from the text
some suppression in the second edition of Boswell's
"Tour," took the book to pieces, and discovered " a
cancel " that is, only a portion of a sheet had been sewn in.
Another notable copy was the Grenville one, now in our Museum. This came from Sanders' in Fleet
Street sale in 1819, and measures 123 by 8 inches.
Mr. Grenville paid £121 , 16s. for it. The Stowe copy
was another giant- 128 by 8 inches-and was sold for
£76. There were copies sold by the Sothebys in three successive years 1854, 1855, 1856 -the first 12
by 8 inches ; the last 12 by 8 , which was bought
270 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
by Lord Gosford for £164, 175. The copy sold in
1855 was ofextraordinary interest from its having " two
cancelled leaves " in the play of " As You Like It."
In the Hartley sale, held in June 1885 , was offered
a " first folio," about which, it was rumoured, hung a
curious history. It was sold at some rather obscure
sale, and adroitly manipulated by the system of " knock
out," being bought for £20, to be later disposed of by
the fraternity among themselves for a much larger
This sacrifice, produced by these " shady"
tactics, was illustrated by the price brought at this
unlawful sale, which was no less a sum than £480, or,
as another account says, £525.
sum.
But we now are arrived at the really great day for
the folio-the greatest since Mr. Herringman issued
his volume in 1623. This was on the occasion of the
sale of Mr. George Daniel's books in 1864, after his
demise. This well-known critic, writer, and collector
had fixed himself at Islington, and dwelt in that
curious old tower which still rises, though in sad
decay, and which has ever had a series of literary tenants from Goldsmith's time. Never was there
such a collection of rarities and uniques offered, and
never again will collector be offered such opportunities,
or be so prompt to avail himself of them. The sale
occupied ten days, but " the Shakespeare day," as it
was called in the Times, drew an eager and excited
audience. There were seen abundance of the rare
Shakespeare quartos, that are well-nigh introuvable, which the wary and enterprising Daniel had
secured in lavish profusion-rare and dainty little
quartos, many of them with but two and three companions in the world . But resplendent among them
all were the four grand folios. The " first " had been
in the possession of Daniel Moore, Esq. , F.R.S., and
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos. 271
by him had been bequeathed to William H. Booth,
who also left it by will to John Gage Rokewode, from
whose hands it passed to Mr. Daniel. An enthusiastic critic fell into raptures over it, called it " a marvellous copy, of unrivalled beauty, unquestionably the
finest that can ever occur again for public sale. The
copy will to all future time possess a world- wide
reputation. It was cased in beautiful old russia
binding, and preserved in a russia leather case."
It was by measurement a grand specimen, After a
spirited and exciting contest, in which the price rose
and rose, the astonishingly unheard- of sum of £716, 25.
was bid by Mr. Radcliffe, to whom it was knocked
down. When it was known that the prize had been
carried off by Miss Burdett Coutts, the room resounded with acclamation. The treasure now reposes
in a stately case made out of the wood of Herne's
oak. Nor is this price excessive, for it is admitted by
experts that in all " points "-condition, dimensions,
and general proportion-it could not be matched.
In its way the " second folio " was no less meritorious, and possibly the finest of its generation.
With a quaint enthusiasm the owner thus expatiated
on its charms. It is like a little biography :-"This
genuine and beautiful copy was bought by Mr. Thorpe
at the sale of the library at Nevill Holt, Leicestershire, and bought of him by me this the 16th day
of September, my birthday. " Adds the collector,
1848, "I never saw its equal for soundness and
size." It was, moreover, the largest example
known, and brought the surprising, for a second
folio, price of £ 142. The third went for £46, and
the fourth for £21. Lord Charlemont's first folio
was pronounced to be one of the finest known,
measuring 12 by 8 inches, arrayed handsomely
272 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
in red morocco with tooled borders. It fetched
£455.*
The grand copy and its price was destined to retain
its undisturbed glories for over twenty years, until the
year 1881 came round—that of the Thorold or Syston
Park sale. This copy shows that the appreciation of
the precious volume has been carried to the highest
point of finish. This copy was described with a tender
minuteness, as though it had been some old picture by
Raphael or Rembrandt. First it is proudly claimed
to be " the largest andfinest copy known," or rather
would be, save for some trifling but sad blemishes. The
titles and verses had been very neatly inlaid, and,
owing to some defect in the paper, it was carefully
computed that about eight or ten letters were deficient
in three of the leaves. An expert declared that these
restorations could not be detected by ordinary observers, so skilfully were they effected ; but in looking
close it might be made out that the " Mr. William " of
the title-page had been put in in fac-simile; the last five
letters of " Shakespere " are also supplied. " Tails "
of letters in the name of the printer, Jaggard, and one
of the figures in the date, are also restorations. Notwithstanding these blemishes-serious in bibliomaniacal eyes-the present " very large copy," was found
to be by measurement 133 inches by 8 inches, or a
quarter of an inch taller than Lady Burdett Coutts'
famous copy. It was interesting to see that noble
lady busily scanning the proportions of the rival copy.
Another extraordinary incident connected with this
copy is that some of the leaves are " uncut," on the
* Copies have turned up in a strange, odd way. In 1857 one was discovered in a carpenter's shop at Maidenhead, which had been bought for a few shillings at a country auction. Another turned up in Germany,
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos. 273
top, front, and bottom margins, which enables us to
know the exact size of the original edition as issued.
In ordinary cases the top margin is of an inch, the
front ths of an inch, and the bottom 1 inch-precious details, that may excite a smile, but are elements
ofvalue when dealing with hundreds of pounds. This
copy was further adorned by a fine red morocco
"jacket " from the hands of Roger Payne. It sold
for the large sum of £590.
Is the collector happy or wretched who can gaze
on the four folios -his own-in " fine condition,"
"pure copies," but representing an outlay of £ 1000 ?
He has virtually to pay £50 a year interest during
his natural life for this enjoyment. Indeed, I have
heard one bewail his folly bitterly, and wish he had
his money back again. Much comes, however, to
the collector who can watch and wait, and he need
then have no qualms of conscience. There are
the ambitious, who set their minds to the attaining
some grand post or alliance, bearing in mind their
Shakespeare declaration, that the " hatted dame" is
as attainable with daring and perseverance as the
lowly maid. In this spirit I determined to watch and
wait patiently, and secure, not only a folio, but the
four, and in less than two years success crowned me !
I began with a second folio, and found an honest,
respectable copy, lacking, of course, portrait, title,
and last two leaves, which could be
fac-simile." For him I paid £2, 10s.
66 supplied in Next came
a damaged fourth folio, secured for " a song," but
which, exchanged, brought a perfect one at a cost of
£7. Next followed a first folio for £12, wanting a play
at the end and the title, but having all the " prefatory
matter." Lastly came the third, for £8. The total
was under £30. These will soon be put in order. I
S
274 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
picked up also some fine russia bindings, discarded by
the late Mr. Bedford for some folios he was treating,
and had them reclothed. Now here was a modest
outlay, unattended by prickings of conscience, and the
quartette, as they stand, are worth a goodly sum. This
little bit of bibliographical adventure is mentioned
pour encourager les autres.
It will amuse the reader to give an instance of what
minute and laborious investigation is brought to test
the merits and defects of these precious tomes, and
reasonably, considering the vast prices given. Here
we find a particular copy thus jealously scrutinised.
The Ben Jonson verses are " neatly inlaid ," that is ,
"inset " in new paper so deftly as to escape the ordinary reader's eye. In the title-page the words " Mr.
William 22 are supplied infac-simile, and the scraps of
paper on which they are displayed are neatly joined to
the rest, matching in colour and texture ; while the last
five letters ofthe name, " peare," are also reproduced,
only the " Shakes being original. This is counting
after the principles of Sir John's stocking. But mark
this "the tails of the letter G in the name of the
printer (Herringman ) and of the figure 3 in the date have also been added."
We speak of the "four first folios " or of the
" first four folios " (according as the grammarians
shall decide), but in strict truth there are five. The
third was issued in 1663, but did not " go off," so the
publisher in the following year added seven spurious
plays and supplied a new title.
this first third edition that the
in the centre of the title- page,
verses face it on another leaf.
cessively rare," says Mr. Lilly, who protests that it is
unknown to Lowndes " in this peculiar and pristine
It must be noted of
copy has the portrait
and the Ben Jonson "In this state it is ex-
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos. 275
state." Nor does "J. Lilly " recall the sale of any copy
save one, which he sold to Mr. Dunn- Gardner, and
which is now in the Huth Library. The reader will
admit that so far few known works offer such perplexing oddities. But there is yet another surprise.
Editions may legitimately differ, but copies of the same edition do not. Yet it has now come out that
there are copies of this mysterious first folio which
disagree. How strange it is that its paging should
be all astray and capricious ! The numerals do not
follow, and many are doubled ; many more are left
out, as though we went, say, from 10 to 15. But,
most singular of all, there are copies of the first
edition itself which so vary from each other as to have
different readings. Thus it is said Messrs. Longmans
once had a copy in which, instead of Roderigo's speech
in " Othello " ( p. 333) , the line ran " And Hell gnaw
his bones." A Bishop Butler possessed a copy with a
proof leafof a page in " Hamlet," and Messrs. Arch
of Cornhill had one with the date 1622 instead of
1623.
Mr. O. Halliwell Philipps has a copy of the first
folio, containing misprints, which indicate the priority
of the impression. * Thus, on the second column of
p. 172 of the Histories, at line 13 and is misprinted
add, and in the second line following, tis instead of
kiss, the correct readings being found in all other
copies excepting in one in the library of the Earl of
Ellesmere. These variations are of course of no
value in themselves, Mr. Lenox, the well-known
American collector, possessed a copy which had
many variations, even in the signatures, and the
title- page had the date of 1622 instead of 1623 ; but
* This, we may presume, is the copy which cost him £410 in 1867.
276 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
it is suspiciously " inlaid " below this date, and the
owner cautiously adds, " If by this means the last
figure has been tampered with, the alteration is very
successfully concealed." As to how these things are
to be accounted for I can offer no suggestion except
it be from carelessness. It is sad and perplexing
to think that this famous volume is one of the worst
printed in the world. The book might almost be said
to be unique in this respect. Professor Craik made
some calculations, and discovered that there were
some twenty mistakes in each page, which made a
total of nearly 20,000 ! It is indeed stated on the
title that it was " published according to the true and
original copies, " but it is believed that these were
burnt with the Globe Theatre ; and the mistakes in
the sense and spelling, and the startling discrepancies
between the folio and the previous quartos, show that
the edition was fashioned exactly as we might expect,
from stray and imperfect copies, recollections of actors,
and such printed copies as could be got. Thus, Mr.
Dyce tells us of the " Hamlet," as it appears in the
edition of 1623 :-"While the editors added considerably to the prose dialogue in Act II., Sc. 2 ,
inserted elsewhere lines and words which are wanting
in the quartos of 1604, &c. , and rectified various
mistakes of those quartos, they-not to mention minor
mutilations of the text, some of them accidentalomitted in the course of the play about a hundred and
sixty verses (including nearly the whole of the fourth
scene of Act IV. ), and left out a portion of the prose
dialogue in Act V. , Sc. 2, besides allowing a multitude of errors to creep in passim." Mr. Collier says :
-"Any editor who should content himself with reprinting the folio, without large additions from the
quartos, would present but an imperfect notion of the
1
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos. 277
drama as it came from the hand of the poet . The
text of ' Hamlet ' is, in fact, only to be obtained from
a comparison of the editions in quarto and folio."
Few can have an idea of the drudgery of collation
and the conscientious enthusiasm that will carry a
book-lover through the monotonous labour of comparing two long works line by line. When the reprint of the first folio was issued, it was hailed with
delight as an aid to students, though published at five
guineas. It was soon discovered, however, that,
though a reprint of a book that teemed with errors,
it had a fresh crop of its own ! All faith being gone,
no one could rely on it, as the mistakes were unascertained. To make all clear, Mr. William Upcott in
the year 1821 undertook a laborious collation of the
reprint with the folio, and with the following result :-
"Four months," he writes, " and twenty-three days
were occupied during my leisure moments, at the
suggestion of our late librarian, Professor Porson, in
reading and comparing the pretended reprinted facsimile first edition. With what accuracy it passed
through the press, the following pages (26 folio leaves),
noting 368 typographical errors, will show."
The booksellers, who had expended a large sum on
the reprint, when they had heard of this grew alarmed,
and made many overtures for the purchase of the MS.;
and " Mr. Upcott was induced to part with it to Arch
& Co., from whom he expected a handsome remuneration ; but all he got was a single copy of the work.
This copy, however, he disposed off to Perry (of the
Chronicle) for six guineas, at whose sale it brought twelve. "
The well-known rude and coarse portrait by Droeshout has been the subject of discussion and debate,
filling books and pamphlets. Every line on it has been
278 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
scanned and appraised. It has been searched with
magnifying glasses and reproduced with laborious
care. It has been found that there are " states " of
this print, and that the shading of the forehead was
deepened for the later editions. Nearly every copy
offered for sale lacks this portrait ; to find it separate
is therefore hopeless ; even a damaged impression
would fetch a great sum. A fac-simile is priced at £2 , 103. Mr. Boaden wrote a volume in which he
compared all the known portraits of Shakespeare, the Chandos, &c. , and others. I fancy it would pay an engraver to re- engrave it with the minutest care, line
for line, and issue impressions on old fly-leaves. *
* Mr. Lenox writes that the common description of the genuine state, that the shading is expressed by single uncrossed lines is incorrect, the genuine portrait being known by ob- serving that the cross lines do not occur on the right side of the face. The cross lines were added for the fourth edition. Among the "fifteen hundred rarities " collected by Mr. O. Halliwell Philipps to illustrate Shakespeare, and preserved at Hollingbury Copse, is a proof copy of the Droeshout portrait of 1623, and is the only likeness of Shakespeare in existence which has come down to us in an original unaltered state. "No other copy of the
engraving in this reliable state has yet been discovered , the only ones in all other libraries being those taken from a retouched plate. The latter is one of the only three impressions known of the title- page of the edition of 1632 before the spelling of the
word coppies was altered , a circumstance which, although appa- rently trivial, is of value as showing that it includes one of the earliest impressions from the plate after it had been used for the first folio. ' Of this portrait Mr. Fairholt wrote : " The portrait in
this state of the engraving is remarkable for clearness of tone,
the shadows being very delicately rendered , so that the light fails upon the muscles of the face with a softness not to be found in the ordinary impressions. This is particularly visible in the arch under the eye, and in the muscles of the mouth ; the ex- pression of the latter is much altered in the later states of the plate bythe enlargement ofthe up-turned moustache, which hides and destroys the true character of this part of the face. The whole of the shadows have been darkened by cross- hatching and coarse dotting, particularly on the chin ; this gives a coarse and undue prominence to some parts of the portrait, the forehead
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos. 279
The passion for these early editions, and the devouring fanatical craze led, not unnaturally, to a
whole chapter of forgeries. The story of the Ireland
forgeries is familiar, carried out, as it was, with such
enterprise and apparent ingenuity, to the extent of
imposing on a generation ; only a few competent
scholars declining to accept what seemed to them a
transparent imposture. Some time ago collections of
these " original " efforts were being offered for sale.
It seems that one such bantling was actually made a
present of by the forger to a friend, as if strangely
indifferent to the propriety of his gift. " These specimens ofmy Shakespearianfabrication," he wrote, " are presented to my friend Mr. Moncreiff with best
regards. -W. H. Ireland. " We might as well conceive the late Mr. Fauntleroy, if happily pardoned,
giving a friend with best regards one of his " imitations " of Miss Young's signature. *
particularly. In this early state of the plate the hair is darker than any of the shadows on the head, and flows softly and naturally ; in the retouched plate the shadow is much darker than the roots of the hair, imparting a swelled look to the head and giving the hair the appearance of a raised wig. It is re- markable that no shadow falls across the collar ; this omission and the general low tone of colour in the engraving, may have induced the retouching and strengthening which has injured the true character of the likeness, which, in its original state , is far more worthy of Ben Jonson's commendatory lines. "
* This cadeau took the shape of a 4to volume, containing a
series of seventeen original fabrications by W. H. Ireland,
specially collected and neatly arranged, with autograph notes describing each specimen by himself. And the contents con- sisted of -1. Tracings from the authenticated signatures of Shakespeare. 2. Three fabricated signatures of Shakespeare.
3. Tracing from an authenticated signature of Queen Elizabeth.
4. Fabricated signature of the Queen. 5. Acrostic on the name of Elizabeth, signed by Shakespeare. 6. Acrostic on the name
of Mary, Queen of Scots, signed by W. S. 7. Spurious signa- ture of Lord Southampton. 8. Facetious Letter to William Cowley, the player, signed by W. S. 9. Singular Portrait of
280 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
If we take some of these things in our hand and
scrutinise them, we shall be astonished to note how
poor and clumsy the imitation is, how feeble and
modern the characters. At the present day such could
not be even attempted. The late Mr. Henry Bradshaw detected the forged " Codex Sinaiticus " simply
bythe smell, when separating the genuine leaves.
A much more skilful and serious attempt was that
which was known as " The Corrector's Folio, " introduced by the late scholar, J. Payne Collier. Its
history, as told by himself, was as follows : -In the
year 1847, when turning over some old books in a shop
in the Seven Dials, he lighted on an old copy of the
second folio, which he thought might serve for " making up" some deficiencies in his own. He paid 30s.
for it. It was, as usual, " much cropped and very
greasy," and did not suit his purpose. By laborious
investigations he traced it to the family of Gray at
Upton Court, where one Perkins , who may have been
connected with the stage, was living a few years after
the date on the folio. It seems extraordinary that the
pages of a work such as this, covered with MS. corrections, should not at once have attracted the wary eye
of our collector. But it was not until later, he said ,
that he noted it. It was illustrated from beginning
to end with marginal notes or " corrections. " These
Shakespeare, of which Ireland writes : " The above document was enclosed in the foregoing epistle, and christened by the believers in the MSS. as a witty conundrum invented by Shake- speare !" 10. Tracing from Heminge's authentic autograph.
11. Spurious signature of John Heminge. 12. The jug water- mark. 13. First signature of Shakespeare produced, and affixed to the spurious deed of Michel Fraser, on vellum. 14. Signa- ture of Fraser written with the left hand (on vellum) . 15.
Shakespeare's signature annexed to the Fraser deed , with the Quintin seal. 16 and 17. Spurious signatures affixed to the deeds purporting to be between Shakespeare and Lowin and Condell the players (on vellum ).
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos. 281
became the sensation of the hour. The writing was
presumed to be contemporary ; some one, probably
with the original MS. copy before him, had corrected
the text. The Duke of Devonshire defrayed the expenses of printing. But at the British Museum there
were some shrewd and competent men, who, when the
original was submitted to them, pronounced it an
imposition. They found by chemical tests that the
writing was not in ink, but in a sort of water- colour
mixed to imitate old ink, while underneath the characters had been first traced in pencil and imperfectly
rubbed out ! There were many other certain indications ofthe forgery, but that one was sufficient. An old and learned scholar like Mr. Collier is entitled to
indulgence, and it would be ungracious to hold him
accountable for the imposition. In any case, one would
prefer to say nothing ; only it is well known that the
fanatical passions of some scholars has led them to
break through all restraints, much as some eminent
mineralogists will not be trusted alone in the cabinets
of the curious. In Mr. Collier's case it would be
affectation to deny the suspicion that attaches to his
attempts to appropriate discoveries brought in aid of
his side of the controversy. *
We now pass from the folios to the little quarto
plays, and nothing is more interesting than the study
In the catalogue of his late sale there was a copy of the "Taming of the Shrew, " on whose title was a " curious contem- porary MS. note "-" 1607 played by the author," the rest being unfortunately "cropped by the binder, " probably the name of the character he played, with more ofthe kind. When the rare "Hamlet " was discovered , it is significant that he declared that some ten or twelve years before he had " a large portion " of a copy of this very edition put into his hands, mysteriously formed of " fly- leaves and linings of bindings. " Strange to say,
he refused to buy it for the modest price of £10, saying he had the use of the Duke's copy, and there was, moreover, a reprint.
282 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
of the contending claims of the different editions and
readings. The labour and cost that has been incurred,
the numberless fac- similes of every page and word, so
that the explorer should have the various editions before him for his studies , is truly extraordinary. These
fac-similes have been several times produced, either in
perfectfac-similes or in ordinary type, and are of great
value to the student. In 1871 that spirited Shakespearian Mr. Halliwell issued fac-similes of the early
quarto plays of Shakespeare, including every known
edition of all the plays which were issued in the
dramatist's lifetime. " There were forty - eight volumes,
small quarto, half morocco. Only thirty- one copies
were privately printed ; five or six sets have been
destroyed, several broken up, and others locked up in
public libraries, so that complete sets are now becoming exceedingly rare." A hundred and sixty pounds
was demanded as the price of this collection ! At
the present moment a fresh edition is being issued
under the direction of the New Shakespeare Society,
which will only cost about £10. They are exact
fac-similes. Unfortunately, a fire at the lithographer's
premises has destroyed some of the impressions.
There have been repeated fac-similes of the folio,
notably Mr. Staunton's, but the effect is not pleasant.
It is curious that as the new series of quartos is
being issued, almost before it is half completed the
first issues are disappearing and becoming scarce.
It is in the fascinating drama of “ Hamlet,” however,
that all devotion centres, bibliographically as well as
intellectually. It is here that the quartos and folios
concentrate all their interest, and the comparison of
the seven or eight copies and their variations has
exercised the wits of all commentators.
The first " Hamlet " quarto is thus introduced :
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos. 283
"The Tragicall Historie of Hamlet, Prince of Denmarke, by William Shakespeare, as it hath beene divers
times acted by his Highnesse Servants in the Citie of
London as also in the two Vniversities of Cambridge
and Oxford, and elsewhere. At London, printed for
N. L. and John Trundell, 1603."
The second quarto :-"The tragicall historie of
Hamlet, Prince of Denmark, by William Shakespeare.
Newlyimprinted and enlarged to about as much againe
as it was, according to the true and perfect coppie.
At London, printed by I. R. for N. L., and are to be
sold at his shoppe under Saint Dunstan's Church in
Fleet Street, 1604."
The third edition appeared in 1605 , and is from the
same "types and formes."
Next followed :-"Shakespeare (William) Tragedy
of Hamlet Prince of Denmarke, newly imprinted and
inlarged according to the true and perfect copy lastly
printed. Morocco, by Bedford, edges uncut, probably the finest copy known. Printed by W. S. for
John Smethwicke, and are to be sold at his shop in
Saint Dunstan's Churchyard in Fleet Street, under the Diall. N.D." This undated edition is assigned
to the year 1607, on the excellent authority of the Stationers' Registers.
(6
Then came Shakespeare (William) Tragedy of
Hamlet Prince of Denmarke, newly imprinted and
enlarged to almost as much againe as it was, accord- ing to the true and perfect copy. Morocco, gilt edges, by Bedford. At London, printed for John
Smethwicke, and are to be sold at his shoppe in Saint
Dunstan's Churchyard in Fleetstreet, under the Diall.
1611." "A perfect genuine copy, with the original fly- leaf. An edition dated 1606 is mentioned in some
lists, but no copy is known. The present, of which
284 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
no copy has appeared for sale for many years, is in
all probability the next edition after the preceding article. "
It will be seen by comparison of the titles of the
two editions that the first was merely from a copy
used bythe players, and with which the author had
nothing to do. The second claims to be "the true
and perfect copy."
The singular variations between the first quarto
and the second are well known to scholars , and show
convincingly how the text was obtained. In the first,
the old Polonius is called Corambis ; and though
there are many speeches in which the subject of the
incident is treated in the same fashion, the words
are quite different. It seems likely that this copy
was, as it were, picked up from hearsay, or from
the actors, altered and made effective according to
their lights, in default of written copies. It has been
suggested, indeed, by Mr. Aldis Wright and Mr.
Halliwell, that they were taken from a vulgar stock
play on the same subject which is known to have been
often acted before Shakespeare took it up. But it is
not probable that Shakespeare would have condescended to borrow the literal handling of a passage
from such a source.
Every one of these editions of " Hamlet" is of a
rarity that seems extraordinary, considering the period and the abundance of other books of the same era. Of
the first edition, that of 1603, there are but two copies
known. Of that of 1604 there are only three copies :
one in the Duke of Devonshire's, one in Mr. Huth's,
and one in the Stowe Collection . Of that of 1605
there is only one perfect copy, which is in the Capell
Collection. There is another in the British Museum,
but it wants the last leaf.
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos. 285
But a curious little romantic adventure attends the
first quarto of 1603. Down to fifty years ago such a
thing was unknown and unsuspected, but in the year
1825 Messrs. Payne and Foss, eminent bibliopolists in
Pall Mall, brought the Duke of Devonshire a little
volume containing some rare and valuable old plays
by Green and others, dated before the year 1600, and
among them, mirabile dictu, nestled this precious little
quarto " Hamlet " of 1603. True, the last leaf was
gone, and no one knew, or was likely to know, how the
piece ended. For £100 it became the Duke's property, and was added to his " Kemble Plays " at his house in Piccadilly. The Duke immediately
ordered a reprint to be made, in which, as Mr.
Collier declared, for a wonder, he could only find
two letters and one " stop " wrong. Thus, with the
most argus- eyed and vigilant corrector, blunders will
escape notice.
The noble amateur might be justly proud of his
" unique," displayed, no doubt, with a pardonable
elation, to the curious. Others might have their folios
in better or worse condition , but the single " Hamlet,"
species and genus together, put to shame the National
Library. Mr. Halliwell Philipps applied for leave to
fac-simile it for his grand folio subscription " Shakespeare ;" but this was refused, possibly under the Collier influence, which had then the ducal ear. But
however that might be, Nemesis came speedily. The
Duke was to enjoy his superiority but thirty years in
all. It came to pass that in 1855 an English student
Iwent to study at Trinity College, Dublin, bringing with him a few old pamphlets as a memento" of his
old home. He took some of them to a Dublin bookseller living in Grafton Street, named Rooney.
Rooney, it was said, "gave a shilling for the lot "-
66
286 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
such is rumour, for he does not directly tell us what he gave. On looking over his purchase, he saw there
was a copy of " Hamlet," and he tells us that seeing
there a character called Corambis, and not Polonius, he
knew at once it was the same edition as the Duke's
unique. Unfortunately, the first leaf was missingthe title, in short. Now this, no doubt, prompted the
first step taken by Rooney, which was the sensible one
of applying to the Duke himself, owner of the precious
unique. The Rooney last leaf would have supplied
the want in his copy ; he might have destroyed or preserved the rest, and he would remain the owner ofthe
play now made perfect. But he, unluckily, took no
notice of the communication, which he no doubt for
the rest of his life bitterly regretted . The next step
was to apply to the eminent Shakespearian Mr. Halliwell, who at first doubted, but was convinced, we are
told, by some quoted readings, though, considering
there was a reprint, this was no proof. He then
offered fifty guineas, but a hundred was asked, which
"could be got from the Museum. " Mr. Halliwell declined to make any advance, adding in an injudicious
spirit, "that he might whistle " for his hundred from
the Museum ; on which Rooney repaired to London,
bringing with him the treasure. He saw the officers
of the Museum, who treated him, he says, de haut
en bas, sneering at its " cut-down " look, finally telling him if he liked to leave it for some indefinite time
they would see about it. This he declined. Again
he offered it to Mr. Halliwell, who declined to go
beyond the fifty pounds. Taking it to Mr. Boone, a
well- known bookseller, he sold it to him for £70, and
Mr. Boone promptly resold it to Mr. Halliwell for
160 ! This sibylline system is more common than
is supposed in book-buying, what is too dear when
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos. 287
the book is cheap, becoming absolutely cheap when
the price is raised later on. *
It may be conceived from this little adventure what
a craze there must be for securing these precious little
volumes, which are really put tenderly in cases and
cabinets like jewels. We take one of these little
dainties in our hands, a pretty little tract of some fifty
or a hundred leaves. Any editions of " Romeo and
Juliet," " Much Ado," &c. , late or early, fetched a
goodly sum ; but the first, of which only two or three
existing copies can be counted up, would be bid for in
hundreds of pounds. Here again has been discovery,
and increase of price by " leaps and bounds. "
<<
Dodd the actor, so graphically portrayed by Charles
Lamb, had the actor's taste for gathering up old plays.
"Dodd," he says, was a man of reading, and left at
his death a choice collection of old English literature,"
of course promptly submitted to "the hammer." He
had " picked up " his plays on the stalls, probably at a
few shillings a piece, and there is an astonishing contrast between the prices at his sale and at that of Mr.
George Daniel in 1864. His " Midsummer Night's
Dream " of 1606 brought £1 , 18s.; " Henry V." ( 1622) ,
£3, 8s.; " Richard III . ” ( 1621 ) , £1 , 135. ; " Merchant of
Venice " ( 1600) , £ 3, 5s.; “ King Lear " ( 1608), £5, 25.
* Apropos of lost leaves, it may be mentioned that a happy piece of luck once attended two eminent collectors in "making up " their defective copies. The Duke of Devonshire and Earl Spencer each possessed a copy of the grand and rare Aldine Homer, each of which, alas ! was imperfect. Fortunately a
third copy, not perfect either, came into the market. The Duke
and Earl joined purses, and bought it between them , each repair- ing their defects from its pages, and each fortunately finding the leaves he lacked. The first volume of Lord Spencer's copy is regarded with a pathetic bibliomaniacal interest, it being the last that Roger Payne bound, or rather, death surprised him in the act.
288 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
6d.; "Romeo and Juliet " ( 1599), £8, 15s.; " Troilus
and Cressida " ( 1611 ) , £4, 10s. , and that of 1578, £7,
IOS.; while the precious " Gammer Gurton's Needle "
( 1575), one of the earliest and rarest of plays set by
Shakespeare, but three guineas,
With these lordly prices let us now compare a
well-known author's collection, sold in 1857 , and the
titles of the plays shall be given at length, as a pleasant contribution to the restoration of Shakespeare.
*
Thus here we read of : " A pleasant conceited Historie called the Taming of a Shrew, as it was sundry
times acted by the Right Honourable the Earl of
Pembrooke his servants. Printed at London by Peter
Short, and are to be sold by Cuthbert Budlie. 1594.
This copy differs from later editions in the same fashion that the first ' Hamlet ' differs from its successors. The names of the characters being changed,
&c." A curious bit of information from a catalogue.
This rarity sold for £21 .
"Shakespeare(William) History of Henrie the Fourth,
with the battell at Shrewsburie between the King and
Lord Henry Percy, surnamed Henry Hotspur of the
North, with the humorous conceits of SirJohn Falstaffe,
newly corrected by W. Shakespeare. Second edition,
fine copy, extremely rare, a few leaves inlaid, morocco
Those who are accustomed to the modern editions of Shakespeare can hardly conceive how much that is decorative has been added. Turning to our early folios and quartos, we
are surprised to find not a word about scenic locality, all being left " general " by the author, to be indicated in a broad way by the words and action of the scene itself. This much is surely gained by comparing the early editions ; for it shows us that was all indifferent to the great mind, and he by anticipation rebuked the late authors of sumptuous revivals. There is no doubt, too,
that for the reader the quaint, pedantic setting out of the title would have a more old-fashioned charm than the ordinary modern abridged one.
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos. 289
<
by Bedford. At London, printed by S. S. for Andrew
Wise, dwelling in Paules Churchyard at the signe of
the Angell, 1599. The present,' says the owner, ' is
probably the finest copy known of one of the most intrinsically valuable of all the early quartos. My other
copy, which is in most wretched condition, cost me
£26, 55. , so largely have these rarities risen in value.
Amongst manyother localities that have been searched,
it may be interesting to some to know that, recollecting
the occupation of Flushing by the English in the time
of Shakespeare, early editions might have been carried
thither, especially as English plays were performed
there, I was at the expense of sending an intelligent
agent through Zealand, unfortunately without any
useful results. In fact, bearing in mind the expenses
of searches of this kind, and the necessity of buying
duplicates for the sake of securing others, I may safely
say no Shakesperian quarto ever came into my hands
at a reasonable rate." This is a melancholy confession.
The copy brought £75.
"Shakespeare (William) Tragedie of King Richard
the Second, as it hath been publikely acted by the Right Honourable the Lord Chamberlaine his Servantes, by
William Shakespeare, a fine genuine copy. Printed by W. W. for Mathew Law, 1608. This edition is of
the greatest curiosity and rarity, and must not be confused with the more common one of the same year,
' with new Additions of the Parliament Sceane. ' It is,
indeed, so scarce that Mr. Collier, in his edition of
' Shakespeare,' vol. iv. p. 105, describes the Duke of
Devonshire's copy as unique." This brought £30.
"Shakespeare (William) First and Second Part of
the troublesome Raigne of John King of England. "
This was sold for £17, 10s.
"Shakespeare (William) Most Excellent and Lamen- T
290 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
table Tragedie of Romeo and Juliet , as it hath been
sundry times publikely Acted by the Kings Majesties
Servants at the Globe. Very fine copy, edges entirely
uncut, morocco by Bedford, 1637. This, and another
sold at the last sale, are believed to be the only entirely
uncut copies of this edition known to exist. " Uncut or
not, it fetched only £ 5 , 15s. 6d .
But now begins a crescendo in prices.
"Shakespeare (William) True Chronicle History of
the Life and Death of King Lear, and his three
Daughters, with the unfortunate Life of Edgar, sonne
and heire to the Earle of Glocester, and his sullen and
assumed humor of Tom of Bedlam, as it was plaid
before the Kings Majesty at Whitehall uppon S.
Stephens night in Christmas Hollidaies by his Majesties Servants playing usually at the Globe on the
Banck-side. Good copy, morocco, gilt edges, by Bedford, Printed for Nathaniel Butler, 1608. The copy
of this edition sold by us last year realised £22, 105.”
This year it brought £20.
"Shakespeare (William) True Tragedie of Richarde
Duke of Yorke, and the death of good King Henrie
the sixt. The first edition , of which only one copy
is known, produced £131 at Chalmer's sale, The
present is the second edition , and is also of the greatest
rarity when, like this copy, in an absolutely perfect
state. " On this occasion it brought £63.
" Shakespeare (W. ) Much Adoe about Nothing, as
it hath been sundrie Times publikely Acted by the
right honourable the Lord Chamberlaine his Servants.
Written by William Shakespeare. First edition ,
extremely rare, fine copy, morocco by Bedford. London, Printed by V. S. for Andrew Wise and William
Aspley, 1600." £65.
66 Shakespeare ( William) Second Part of Henrie the
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos. 291
Fourth, continuing to his death, and coronation of
Henrie the Fift, with the Humours of Sir John Falstaffe and swaggering Pistoll, as it hath been sundrie
times publikely acted by the right honourable the
Lord Chamberlaine his Servants, written by William
Shakespeare. First edition, a perfect genuine uncastrated copy. Printed by V. S. for Andrew Wise, 1600.
It is scarcely possible to overrate the curiosity and
importance of this edition, which is almost the rarest
of first editions of Shakespeare, for to the best of our
knowledge, only one other copy, viz. that which sold
at Heber's sale, ii. 5460, for the then liberal sum of
£40, is the only other copy that has hitherto been
submitted to public competition. It is almost the
only first edition wanting in the Capell Collection .
This edition must not be confused with the spurious
one, which contains two scenes less, but has the same
date, title, and imprint ; for whereas Heber's copy of
the present one fetched £40, the other edition at the
same sale sold for only £2, 10s. Long notes are carefully avoided in this catalogue, but it can scarcely be
thought irrelevant to observe that the present is the
rarest of any of Shakespeare's genuine plays that have
occurred for sale during the last twenty years.
'Nothing,' says a MS. note, ' would induce me to part
with it, had I not a copy largely made up with excellent fac-simile, which, though of slight comparative
pecuniary value, is as useful to me for the purposes of
collation.' " This brought £100.
"Shakespeare (William) True Chronicle History.
of the Life and Death of King Lear and his three
Daughters, with the unfortunate Life of Edgar, sonne and heire to the Earle of Glocester, and his sullen
assumed Humour of Tom of Bedlam, fine copy, printed
by Jane Bell, 1655. The rarest of the latest quartos.
292 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
With the exception of a copy sold by us last year for
£10, 10s. , we do not trace another for many years.
Lowndes notices only one copy. " It fetched £11 .
These prices are extraordinary enough, but it was
at the Daniel sale in 1864 that the astonishing value
of rare exemplars of these little tracts was revealed.
The well- skilled owner had secured about a score of
the very earliest of these Shakespeare plays, and
these twenty little pamphlets-for they did not rise to
greater dignity of shape -fetched about £3500 ! The
play of “ Richard II . " was sold for £341 , 5s.; another
copy for £108, 35.; “ Richard III . " for £351 , 15s.;
"Love's Labour Lost," £346, 10s.; " Henry IV. ,” £115,
10s.; " Romeo and Juliet, " £52, 10s.; " Henry V.,"
£231 ; " Merchant of Venice , " £99, 15s.; " Much
Ado about Nothing," £267, 15s.; " Midsummer
Night's Dream, " £241 , 105.; “ Merrie Wives, ” £346,
10s.; “ King Lear, " £29, 8s.; " Pericles, " £84 ;
"Troilus and Cressida," £114, 9s.; " Hamlet " ( 1611),
£28, 7s. ; and “ Othello ” for £ 155 . These seem enormous prices, and are perhaps owing to the furore
of the sale. But at the Corser sale in 1868, where
about a score of these little quartos were sold, prices
went so low as £2, £7, £ 10, and £26 ; while a copy
of the precious " Troilus, " which at the Daniel sale
brought £114, 9s . , here fetched only £37 , but then
"the headlines were cut offafew leaves."
The little volumes of the Poems, Sonnets , “ Venus
and Adonis," " Rape of Lucrece,” are equally precious.
Mr. Quaritch shall usher in the " Poems : written
by Wil. Shake- speare. Gent. sm. 8vo. ( 12mo), with
the rare portrait by W. Marshall, fine copy in brown
morocco super extra, gilt edges, the sides covered
with gold tooling, after an old English pattern , by F.
Bedford. T. Cotes, 1640. Very rare. G. Daniel's
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos. 293
copy sold for £44. I have since sold a defective one
for £36 ; but these prices are only a slight indication
of the tendency of the market. Good copies will in
the future continue to rise in value. " This was priced
at£70.
Next for " The Rape of Lvcrece, by Mr. William
Shakespeare. Newly reuised, 12mo, blue morocco
extra, gilt edges. I. B. for Roger Iackson, 1624.
Very rare ; only one other copy has occurred for sale
during a great many years. There is none in the
Huth Collection, and there was none sold at Sir
William Tite's sale." For this £42 was the price.
But this is not the first edition, which is dated 1504.
Of this rare little tome it is said that only five perfect
copies are known, of which two are in the Bodleian
Library. Mr. Combe, we are told, could boast a
copy, but " it wanted the last leaf." The fly in the
ointment ! The fifth copy of the little book, " a fine
and perfect copy, extraordinarily rare," was sold by
auction at Baron Bolland's sale in 1840. This amateur, it seems, secured it in a rather odd way. Dibdin
rummaging other books in the Canon's Library at
Lincoln, came upon a little bundle of tracts, which he
says he hoped to tempt them to let him have for £80.
But they refused him. Later, dining with Baron
Bolland, his host showed him in triumph the bundle,
which he had secured for the very sum. A single
tract proved to be this " Rape of Lucrece, " which at
the Baron's sale brought one hundred guineas. The
"Venus and Adonis " is another precious little volume
almost introuvable. Baron Bolland died happy in
possession of a copy, which at his sale was purchased
by Mr. Bright for £91 ; at Bright's sale, Daniel became the purchaser for £91 , IOS.; while at his sale
it brought three hundred guineas ! Last come the
294 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
"Sonnets." The Daniel copy belonged originally to
Narcissus Luttrell, who paid one shilling for it ; it
afterwards passed to George Steevens, and at Daniel's
sale was sold for £215 ! This little book has been often reprinted line for line and in imitation of the
original.
Some years ago a copy with the imprint “ G. Eld,
1609," was sold by auction, and the following interesting account was added : -" The present fine and
perfect copy of the Sonnets is in its genuine original
state, not made up in any way, but is precisely in the condition in which it was found in a volume oftracts
bound up about the year 1725. The original binder
cut the top margins too close, and some of the headlines are cut into the print ; but although the opportunity presented itself of remedying this defect by
means of another copy, it was thought that the
extreme firmness and genuineness of the state of the
leaves throughout, and their sound condition, amply
compensatedfor it, and that it was more desirable in
its original state." We can imagine the bibliophile's
distraction at this crisis. The " top margins cut too
close " and the headlines " cut into the print ” were
terrible things, and prompted the intrusion of the
leaves of the supplementary copy. But then there
was compensation in the " extreme firmness and
genuineness " of the maimed leaves. They had
"sound condition, " at least, and everything, after all,
is “ more desirable in its original state. ”
This question of copies of folio and quarto editions
is not so idle or barren as might be supposed, and
bears in a highly important way on the poet's share
in the work. Thus one of the first interesting points
to ascertain is how many plays were published before
Shakespeare's death, which took place in 1616. There
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos. 295
were some fourteen that thus appeared, and it might
be assumed that so many could not have been issued
in succession without his knowledge and approbation. Yet this presumption wholly fails us, as we
find several editions of a particular play differing in
an extraordinary degree. One speculation might be
that the author did not publish his pieces, but tolerated their being published, and that all he was concerned for was their being acted or published on the
stage. This is shown particularly in the discrepancies
between the quarto editions of " Hamlet ; " and their
variations, though making it a perplexing and almost
hopeless task to search out the poet's mind, still add
a never-failing piquancy to the pursuit, and stimulate
the editorial hound. How few know that in the first
folio of " Much Ado about Nothing " a scene in the
fourth act is headed, " Enter Leonato and Facke
Wilson," this being the name of the actor, which had
slipped in in place of the character. More curious
still is it to find another lapse in the same play, in
Dogberry's well- known scene with the watch, where
nearly all his speeches to the end are headed " Kemp,"
being the name of the actor who played the part.
Still more singular-a unique instance too-this slip
is found repeated in the three successive folios, and,
which is even more singular, in Rowe's edition also. *
* Were we to select a passage which would illustrate the
difficulties of fixing a " canon " for Shakespeare, it would be the perplexing and much-tortured passage in the part of Henry V.,
where Dame Quickly describes the last moments of Falstaff,
"And ' a babbled ofgreen fields. " These, as is well known, are the words of Theobald, the second commentator, but they are univer- sally accepted and even quoted as Shakespeare's, or as the nearest that could be got to Shakespeare. The original reading wasthe despair of all : " His nose was as sharp as a pen, and a table of greenfields." The objection to Theobald's view is that in the previous sentences had been described all that Falstaff did, signs
295 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
These thin, not inelegant little quarto plays, the
shape in which the earliest plays were published,
are inviting enough from their shape and printing,
and it is not surprising that their owner should have
had each dressed separately in a costly “ jacket. ”
A collection of such things has a curious effect ;
it is de rigueur not to bind them together ; and thus we see some thousand of these thin-leaved
veterans ranged on the shelves. Mr. Halliwell
Philipps, the Shakespearian scholar, has, we believe,
the finest known collection of the poetical drama,
a different thing altogether from a dramatic collection. The present writer has no indifferent collection, though without pretension ; as he has about
a thousand plays printed before the year 1700. A
generation ago an " old play " could be got for “ an old
song ; " now the really old articles have disappeared,
and rarely, if ever, come into the market. Rare old
Elizabethan plays bring now from ten to twenty
guineas, and one is not surprised that the owners of
these elegant little tracts should be inclined to lay out
a couple of guineas more in clothing them in citroncoloured or olive morocco. A well- known actor who
died a few years ago, and had amused himself, as so
many actors have done, with collecting old plays,
had gathered a large number of rare curious ones.
of death, fumbling with the sheets , playing with flowers , smiling,
&c. Then his looks are described , the physical signs of death, his “ nose sharp as a pen : " hence the doubtful words are likely to be either an expansion of the metaphor, or further descriptive of his looks. Pope declares that the words were a stage direction (a
table of Greenfields) , i.e. , to be got ready for the actor, which seems specious. But the point in the passage which has been quoted, is that it is simply impossible, under our present light, to come to any decision whatever. It is a riddle which we must
' give up, " and give up for ever, There is no light, and we see not whence light can come
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos. 297
On his death, his heirs hurriedly took numbers to the
nearest old bookseller's, and disposed of themfor a few
shillings a piece. Many of these I secured, but some
of the most precious, such as Marlowe's " Rich Jew
of Malta " or " Faustus," which bring now six or eight
guineas, were then disposed offor three or four shillings.
At this present moment, so scarce are old plays, the collector might search all the leading booksellers' stores without finding a score. Yet two or three years ago
there was scarcely an auction without its department
of " old plays." It is melancholy, too, to note the
waste of money, the sums expended on the mere
binding ofthese treasures, some thin attenuated little
tract being enveloped, as it were, in a rich roquelaire
or mantle of morocco and gold . It is often ludicrous
to see some ill-bred " mangy tract " of, say, ten leaves,
ill-kept, ill-fed, and as bad as bad can be," eked out
with many blank pages of paper to add to the thickness, and the whole bound sumptuously in green morocco, joints, and " blind tooling," or otherwise, by
Bedford, Charles, Lewis, or Rivière, and put into a
cabinet under glass -too precious to be read, but to
be shown to friends as a triumph of " bibliopegistic
skill." Alas ! at the sale the binding will count for
little or nothing in the price fetched, though the cost
will have been a couple of guineas or more.
6.
The English have certainly not been slack to do
honour to their great poet, and contribute all that
print and illustration are capable of. Of either Racine, Molière, La Fontaine, in France there are
few " editions of luxury. " Cervantes owes his finest edition to an Englishman. Of Dante and Ariosto
there are one or two pretentious editions. Goethe and Schiller can boast the same. But Shakespeare,
during the course of two hundred and fifty years, has
298 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
been illustrated in a fashion so costly and abundant
as to do honour to the enterprise and idolatry of
his countrymen. The abundance of fine editions on
which the publishers' capital has been lavishly expended in fine paper, print, rich illustrations, and
editorial work, must be enormous. The present bookfancier has nearly all these fine testimonials on his
shelves, and will now, an' the reader list, take them
down, one by one, and display them. For the
"general reader "-one who, often, is not general in
his reading at all-is like enough never to have seen
these things.
It seems strange that from the year 1685 to 1711, a
period of nearly forty years, no edition of Shakespeare
was called for. The old folios, well thumbed and
worn, lay about the libraries of country- houses or on
the recessed windows. James and William, and
Anne and George, kings and queen, came and passed
away. The glory of being the first editor-the first
to issue Shakespeare in convenient size, with a set of
handsome plates, one to every play-was Rowe the
poet, whose work has been styled the fifth and sixth
editions. These are grown scarce and dear. One may
congratulate oneself now if he secures a maimed,
"cropped " edition, such as mine is. Such was the
favourite one of Charles Lamb.
The four great folios were issued within a period of
sixty years-and it is a thing of mark, and unique,
that so many editions should have been issued in that
size. It is curious that the third should not match
with its fellows, being an inch or thereabouts taller
and wider. In each of these the Droeshout plate
does duty, but touched up, cut , and shaped to fit the desires of the publishers. So desirable is this small,
old, poor, and stiff effigy, and so invariably wanting in
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos. 299
all saleable copies that turn up, that ten guineas and
more has often been given for an impression. This
invariable want, like the " crumb flakes " between the
leaves, is evidence of popularity, for the portraits in
the corresponding folios of Ben Jonson, and Beaumont
and Fletcher, and Davenant are usually found in their place.
It is remarkable that from this time it seemed de
rigueur to issue Shakespeare with an abundance of
illustrations as though the poet was so suggestive
and dramatic as to enforce this mode of setting out
his beauties. Next followed Theobald ; and here is
on the book-fancier's shelves a beautiful tempting
copy, eight volumes bound in bright crimson morocco
and gold, with quaint plates by Gravelot, animated,
but very general. The editions of Theobald, large
and small, were to be very numerous and spread over
the century. There must have been seven or eight,
and the editor made handsomely off his work, and was
probably the only editor who did make profit thereby.
But now with becoming courtesy let us introduce
the stately, solemn quartos, a massive avoirdupois
business, as Mr. Carlyle might say. Those six ponderous fellows in crimson morocco, with great golden
stars and thick board-like paper, large, bright, and open type, these " grand old men are Mr. Alexander
Pope's work, and expansive reading enough. It may
be noted en passant that there is a little discomfort in
reading from these large-type works. The eye does
not seem to take in enough at a time : a couple
of lines will detain it. This may seem mesquinerie,
but it holds. The book-fancier recalls a pleasant
remark of the late Mr. Dickens when showing him
one of the placid black letters on a yellow ground,
stretching to eight or ten feet in length, and which was
300 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
stretched out on the floor. " W ," he said , “ has
to go down on his knees to correct the proofs. "
Pope's was succeeded by yet another fine set of
quarto "armfulls " -Sir Thomas Hanmer's, issued by
the literati of the University of Oxford, and which
was also adorned with large etchings by Gravelot, then
high in favour as an illustrator. But his dainty
figures, bosquets, gardens, are all of Versailles, and are
in the school of Lancret and Boucher. Nothing more
amusingly un-English or un- Shakespearian could be
conceived than those smirking and elegant ladies and
gentlemen in the cocked hats and " sack backs " of
Marly and Versailles performing their graceful antics.
It is strange to think how cheerfully this mode of
interpretation could be accepted by the public, though
it seems almost intelligible when we had nearly at the
same time the spectacle of Garrick playing " Othello "
in a general officer's scarlet, and " Macbeth " in a
court dress.
Anticipating a little, we come to another magnificent series of quartos-Alderman Boydell's monumental " Shakespeare, " perhaps the finest and most
costly enterprise of the kind ever undertaken. His
system was to give commissions to all the leading painters, including Sir Joshua Reynolds, at great
prices, for subjects from the plays. These were engraved by the leading engravers of the day, and in
two sizes ; the first " atlas folio ," a splendid volume
of large engravings, that sell nowfor about £20. The
next size was of a large and spacious quarto to suit
the plays, printed in the finest style. This edition is
difficult to procure perfect, the contemporary purchaser
generally finding a plate or two wanting. The reason
is that the plays were issued in parts, with the result
that a stray plate is taken out, or lost, stolen , or
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos. 301
strayed, with all loose prints a likely fate. " Grand
Old Samuel," when issuing his edition in 1762, a
disagreeable, calf-bound thing, cumbering the secondhand booksellers' shelves, little reckoned that it would
one day come to such glory.
Yet another grand quarto set is on the bookfancier's shelves, " Heath's ", full of fine engravings
by Smirke, then in fashion , and others ; beautiful as
regards print and paper-highly " desirable " in every
way. Coming to later days, there are the two large
"atlas quartos," " Virtue's edition " of our time. These
were proprietors of the Art Journal, and when they
had issued innumerable plates engraved in line, after
pictures by painters on Shakespearian subjects, they
were duly collected, " taken off " on large paper, and
put in at the proper places. Of course, there is a
"hotch-potch " air about the whole from the different
sizes and thicknesses, no single plate being originally
intended for this function.
The last important venture on this great and daring
scale was that of Mr. Halliwell Philipps, carried out
literally regardless of expense, -sixteen solid folio
volumes represent this labour of Hercules, the editor's
design being to collect " all that was knowable " of
Shakespeare. It was issued by subscription in sixteen
grand folios. It was issued at the price of sixty-five
guineas the set -a great price for England-and only
a hundred and fifty copies, it was engaged, were to be
printed, and there was set out in the proposals a
signed promise of the printer, who solemnly contracted
not to print a single copy more, and even to return every one of the wasted or soiled sheets. *
* It may be mentioned in this connection, that the neglect of this last point once led to a very serious embarrassment and liti- gation, connected with the early happy years of the Queen and
302 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
The amount of money represented by the 150 subscriptions was over £10,000. Mr. Halliwell proceeded manfully with his work, bringing out volume
after volume until the whole was completed. Though
stored with illustrations of all kinds-a folio is devoted to a full " life "-it is by no means an artistic
work, neither in printing, illustration, arrangement, or
shape. The text is quite overpowered in the elaborate
and learned notes. For mere reading it is an uncom
fortable book—" heartless " Lamb would call it : more
for the antiquaries. Now, however, it is difficult to
procure, and sells at about the original price.
One of the most wonderful Shakespearian monuments is now in progress, under the auspices of an
American gentleman, Mr, Furniss, whose idea is to
issue an edition of Shakespeare that shall contain
almost everything that has been written on each
passage, or that can throw light on the history, acting,
or interpretation of the plays. It may be conceived that this is a scheme that requires enormous room,
and must, if ever completed, fill fifty or sixty thick volumes. It is a " variorum " edition on the largest
scale. The editor is said to possess the finest collection of Shakespeare's known in the States, while his
editions comprise everything in all languages. His
four folios cost him £500. He exhibits the poet's
glove-a doubtful relic-among his treasures. Another American has happily illustrated the extremest extent
of the Shakespeare craze by writing a pamphlet in
Prince Consort. The royal pair used to amuse themselves
etching plates, and a number of the trial or " waste " copies thrown aside as useless were purchased by a man in Windsor,
who offered them for sale and exhibited them in his windows.
This led to some painful law proceedings , the Queen wishing to recover her property and also to crush libellous pamphleteering,
now deservedly forgotten.
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos. 303
1869, in which he spells the name Shakespeare in four
thousand different ways !
Another editor, Charles Knight, engaged one of the
most sympathetic of artists, William Harvey, who was
full of fancy and poetry. It is impossible now to look
at one of his designs without feeling a sense of being
elevated above mere prose, while the illustrators of
our day seem to draw us down far below the level of
the authors they illustrate into the dull actualities of
daily life. Now there is no suggestion ; everything is
literal, the artist usually drawing from some members
of his family. Harvey was at his best in this congenial
office, and presents us his refined groupings, grace- ful figures, and thoughtful faces. There are scenes
from town and country, and a number of charming
vignettes and culs-de- lampe. All these adornments
are disposed with singular grace to set off the page.
The printing is of a tone and size that is not obtrusive, but makes part of the design, as it were, while
the paper is fine and delicate. It is only when we
contrast this edition with the coarse ones that folhowed, printed anyhow and every how, on thick
paper from worn blocks, that we seem to be looking at two different works. All honour to the amiable,
accomplished, and tasteful Charles Knight.
Two other English artists have ventured to illustrate Shakespeare, viz. , Kenny Meadows and Sir
John Gilbert. The first is an almost ludicrous
performance, from the extraordinarily unintentional
grotesquerie which always intruded into this artist's
drawings, and made them recognisable at once. All
This characters, the women notably, seem Londoners
of the suburbs, of the pattern described by Albert Smith. Sir John Gilbert's illustrations were supplied
for the edition of a chess- player editor -Howard
304 The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos.
Staunton. This accomplished colourist imparted á
certain flowing grace and richness of effect to his
figures and costumes, always of a
flamboyant sort.
But there is no idea conveyed ; it is all historical
and conventional. It would indeed be a most interesting speculation to consider how, and on what
principle, should Shakespeare be illustrated. The
answer would seem to be-the principle on which he should be acted. It is thought now, and surely
erroneously, that rich glowing dresses, &c. , nay, the
ingeniously devising of newer pomps and shows, out
of some fanciful hint let drop by the bard, must be
the true mode. But this makes the poetry earthier
and yet earthier.
Treatment in the abstract —the
central figures standing out-scenery accessories-
"supers " all indistinct and far off, like shadowy figures
on a
tapestry-such would be the note. So with illustrations ; central figures full of thought, mind,
beautiful in form, but with little regard to dress and
show.
It was on this principle that a spirited publisher,
Bell-on many a stall we find " Bell's British Poets," or
Bell's British something else-brought out his "Bell's
Theatre," and " Bell's Shakespeare.” The "Theatre,"
in over fifty pocket volumes, is a work such as we
cannot conceive of now-a really pretty series, each
volume containing some four elegant copperplates,
with figures of famous actors and actresses in character ; excellent likenesses on the whole, the scene
spirited, and the whole engraved within an oval frame.
The "
Shakespeare " in twenty volumes, but on large
paper, the plates, &c. , on fine paper, is a truly handsome work,
desirable in every way, and worthy
of him that buys as of him that sells. A “ large
paper " " Bell's Theatre " and accompanying Shake-
The Shakespeare Folios and Quartos. 305
speare, bound, say, in his best chocolate livery by
Calverley, such " a set " might be coveted by a fancier,
and do honour to his shelves. It is well known that
at the time of his death Gustave Doré was engaged
on what he hoped should be his most signal achievement-Shakespeare's plays illustrated throughout on
the scale of his Bible. He had made, it is said, some
progress in the work. But it seems certain the result
would have been failure. No Frenchman seems to
understand Shakespeare, and we should, to a certainty, have had put before us a series of melodramatic, if not violent scenes, conceived in the Porte
St. Martin spirit. Hamlet, Macbeth, and other heroes
would have been shown as Frenchmen, just as like
views of London by the same artist are unrecognisable, and seem bits of Paris.
There are other illustrated Shakespeares of less pretension, but marked by much artistic merit. Such
are the small editions of Whittingham and Tilt, full
of spirited and expressive little woodcuts ; an edition
issued by Scholey, remarkable for a curious series of
woodcuts in a free and open style ; and a little known
edition,with some graceful plates by Stothard and others
of his school. These are in that refined and delicately
finished if not sentimental manner, which is at leastin
a spirit of respect suited to the great poet. Of minor
editions there is almost no end. In short, the lavish
extent to which the great master has been illustrated
may be conceived from a startling and daring act of
Grangerism. AMr. Wilson in 1824 attracted attention
by having devoted a portion of his life to the illustration of Shakespeare. He had set himselfdiligently to
the work of stripping and spoliating every book of
plates that were on the subject, ruthlessly cutting out
every plate from each illustrated edition, and incorU
305 The Shakespeare
Folios and Quartos
.
porating them into his own, with a thousand processes
of"insetting," " laying down ; " the result of which promiscuous slaughterwas a collection of manythousands,
which was thought so important that either he or another foolish person printed a list of the prints, “ with
a view," said the preface to the volume, " to furnish
the collector with a catalogue from which he may select the more attainable materials for the illustration
of our great bard, ” i.e. , cut out and paste down every
suitable print, maim and maul every Shakespearian volume.
But a more elaborate tribute to Shakespeare is
preserved in the library at Althorp. Lady Lucan,
mother of the bibliophilist Lord Spencer, and Dr.
Johnson's friend , devoted herself from the fiftieth to
her sixty-sixth year to the duty of illustrating the historical plays with pencil and brush. With laborious
care she copied portraits, arms, devices , illuminations,
scenes representing towns and palaces, the result
being five magnificent and richly decorated volumes,
Boydell's edition being selected as the foundation to
work on. These sumptuous tomes were “ clothed " in
green velvet with silver gilt edges.
There are actually two wholly Shakespearian
libraries existing ; one in England at Birmingham,
the other in America, known as "the Barton,” each
devoted to the collection of editions of Shakespeare,
books on Shakespeare, or books that deal indirectly
with Shakespeare. A vast number of volumes are
here collected ; in each some thousand works.
§ L'Envoi.
F the courteous and sympathetic reader
shall have attended me so far, he may
have enjoyed a tranquil stroll through
the prim, quaintly laid-out gardens and
agreeable plaisaunces, where all the old.
conceits, trimmed yews, &c. , of letters and bibliomaniac lore live and flourish. So do we read in the
old dramatist-
" That place that does contain My books, the best companions, is to me Aglorious court, where hourly I converse With the old sages and philosophers. "
Or, as another enthusiast hath it, "A man loveth his
books as a lover loves the portrait of his mistress ;
and, like the lover, he loves to adorn that which he
loves. He scrupulously takes care of the precious volume which has filled his heart with keen sensations
of delight or sorrow, and clothes it in all the glories
of gilded cloths and moroccos. His library is as resplendent with golden laces as the toilet of a favourite ;
and by their exterior appearance itself his books are
worthy of the regards of consuls, as Virgil wished his
own to be. " For there may be plenty who love the
garden, yet know nothing of the flowers and their
botanical names ; and there have been many passionate
308 L'Envoi.
collectors of fiddles who could not and did not care for
playing. That there has ever been this interest in what
is a mere book, its covers, associations, owners, &c. ,
has been shown in the foregoing pages, where the
abundance of goodwill may be accepted to supply
other shortcomings. And so to bibliophile, biblionoste,
and bipliopegist, and above all to the " courteous
general reader," I commend this little volume.
are for
what
s, &C. ,
re the
supply
noste,
rteous
INDEX.
ADVERTISEMENTS, should they be | Bodoni of Parma, 217.
bound up with the volume, 179.
Alibone, dictionary of, 96.
"Arabian Nights, The: " their "scatological " merits, 162.
" BABBLED of green fields, " specu- lation on, 295.
Ballads, halfpenny, collections of,
160.
" Barbou" volumes, 214.
Baskerville, 78.
Bastard, Comte de, his work the most costly, illustrated work known, 218.
Bedford Missal described , 103.
the modern binder, 115.
Bellows, his miniature French dictionary, 141.
Bell's Shakespeare, 304.
Bible, rapid printing of a, 146.
with "nicknames, " 147.
the Penny Testament, enor.
mous sale of, 147.
Bibliography, writers on, 92.
Binders' mistakes in lettering, 128.
Binding, eccentricities connected with, 121.
prices for, at Sunderland and Beckford sales, 105.
Bloomfield's History of Norfolk Grangerised, 175.
Boccaccio, exciting sale of the Roxburghe copy of, 236.
Bohn, Mr. , his monster catalogue,
249.
Book repairers, 20.
plates, 128.
worm insect, the, 252.
Bowyer, the printer, anecdote of,
58, n.
Boydell's Shakespeare, 300.
Brandt on the foolishness of book buying, 2.
Brunet, originator of the craze for bindings, 102.
Bry, De, the mania described,
198.
CARDS, works upon, 151.
Catalogue, British Museum, 86.
difficulties of making a, 86.
Catalogues, interest of, 232.
"Cat and mouse " device, a note of merit, 166.
Catholicon, the, described, 30.
Caxton, number of copies known,
prices, 68 et 82.
Caxton's relative inferiority as a
printer, 36.
"Chained Books, " 82.
Charles I., 731 portraits of, in a
Grangerised book, 172.
Charlotte, Queen, her purchases from the stalls, 5.
Cheap books, 161.
-marvels of typography, 143- 145.
310 Index.
Chippendale, rarity ofhis treatise,
155 Cloth, first introduced in binding,
132.
Clutterbuck, his "Grangerised "
History of Hertfordshire de- scribed, 170.
Cocker, his rare arithmetic, 164.
Codex, the, or P-alter, 28.
Coloured papers and inks, books with, 137- "Corrections, " heavy instances of, 64 "Corrector's," or Perkins folio,
the story of, 285.
Coutts, Miss Burdett, purchaser of the Daniel First Folio, "
271.
Cruikshank, the artist, his claims ,
on Oliver Iwis* , 183.
"Cuttings, " collectors of, 149.
DANIEL, George, lis " First Folio '
Shakespeare, 271.
Daniel sale, great prices at,
Shakesperian quartos, 292.
Delphin Classics , the, 79.
Dickens, portraits of, 191.
for
i
Forster, Mr. John, his collection ,
251.
his "Grangerised " copies of Granger, 169.
Fortsas , Count de, "bogus "
sale, 224.
French artists, their failure in English illustrations , 204.
homogeneous treatment of their books in binding, paper,
print, and type, 214.
Furniss , Mr., his edition of Shakespeare, 302.
"GALLERIES, " illustrating picture collections, 210.
" Gallery ofVersailles, " Le Brun's,
207.
Garrick, contributions to his his- tory from a catalogue, 267.
Germans, the, excellence of the early printers , 37- Giant books, 142.
Gladstone, Mr. , a " stall hunter, "
8, n.
Glasse, Mrs., her famous cookery book, 164.
"Grangerising, " account of, 168.
Dibdin's ridicule of, 169.
Dodd, the actor, his collection of "Great Expectations, " curious plays, 287.
Dore's Bible, 201.
Doyle, Richard, his particular merit described, 195.
Droeshout portrait, its rarity, 278.
"Dummy" backs of books and their titles. 125.
Dutch, remarkable for their cop- perplates of cities, buildings,
&C., 214.
ELZEVIRS, the, and their publica- tions, 47.
" Errors, " printers' , 62.
FACETIE, " so called, 251.
Farmer, Mr. , the American, his canons for a collection, 248.
Farthing epic," the, 145.
"Fire of London, destroyed in, ”
a recommendation, 162.
Fontaine, La, various editions of,
215.
Forgeries, Shakesperian , 279.
reasons forits scarcity, 179.
Grolier binding, rage for, 108.
HALLIWELL PHILIPPS, Mr. O. , his unique Droeshout impression,
278.
his editions of Shakespeare described, 302.
Hamlet, Devonshire, story of the,
284- Harvey, Mr. F., his Grangerised Boswell, 173, and his Granger- ised Life of Dickens, 187.
W.. his graceful wood- cuts for Shakespeare's plays,
303.
Heber sale, 230.
-the collector, his sad end,
230.
Heinsius on the library, 83.
Human skin, bindingin, 122.
"INCUNABLES " described, 32.
Index, the. 97.
Ireland, W. II. , his forgeries,
279.
Index. 311
JACKE WILSON, " the actor's Playbills, 161.
name, introduced into text of "Ploughing " and margin, 119. first folio by mistake, 295. Poole's Index, 96. Jarvis, Mr., Dickens' bibliogra- | Portraits for Grangerised books,
phical catalogue, 180.
Jenson, "the glory of his press, "
44.
KEMBLE, J. , suppression of his poems, 167.
Knight, C., charming edition of Shakespeare, 303.
now LAMB, C., on books, 89 ; early editions of his works sought, 156.
" Large paper " copies, 121.
Libri Library, 109.
Livy, miniature Elzevir, 51.
Locker, F., his collection scribed, 243.
deLucan, Lady, her illustrated Shakespeare at Althorp, 306.
Lucian on book- buying, 2.
MAGLIABECCHI, his oddities, 2.
Maioli binding, 107.
Mazarin Bible, account of, 19.
Medals, sumptuous work on, 212.
"Men of the Time, " droll acci- dent connected with, 152.
"Midget" type, 139.
Miller, Joe, 165.
Molière, various editions of, 216.
171.
Presses, private, 250.
Printing, English, falling off in modern times, 202.
QUARITCH, Mr., and his system,
14.
Quartos, reprints of, 282.
Quarto Shakespeares, comparison of prices, 287.
"
READER, the, 58.
Register, " the, 94.
Reprints, facsimile, 87.
Restorers of books, 76.
Richard, Jules, his idea for a col- lection, 118.
Robinson Crusoe, 166.
Roman type, its original model,
38.
Rothschild, the late Baron F. de,
account of, 116.
Rowfant books, Mr. A. Lang's lines on, 243.
Roxburghe Club, 239.
Ruskin, publisher of his own works, 246.
SACY, SILVESTRE DE, his comment over his books, 1 .
Sales, famous, 232.
Schoolboy magazines, 161.
NUREMBERG CHRONICLE described, Scotch printers always eminent,
194.
PAYNE- COLLIER, Mr. , 280.
Payne, Roger, 112.
Perkins sale, 23.
Photogravure, an inferior method,
159.
Picart's 206.
Pickwick, genuine state and re- quisite conditions of, 182.
Piranesi, his grand collection of etchings, 213.
Ceremonies described,
Plantin printing- office described,
52.
79.
"Setting " without MS. , 65.
Shakespeare, why the first folio SO scarce, 255 ; "adultera- tions" in the copies, 256 ; early prices given, 256 ; King Charles I.'s copy, 259 ; splendidly illus- trated in England, 297.
Shakespearian libraries in Eng.
land and America, 306.
Shepherd, Mr. R. Herne, Dickens'
bibliography, 181 .
" Signatures," 95:
Single copy, editions of a, 163.
" Snuffy Davy " and his " find, " 8.
Spencer, Lord, described, 226.
312 Index.
Spiras, De, their Livy described,
43 ; their Pliny, 45.
Stalls, celebrated buyers from, 4.
Stealer, the book, 84 Sterne's Diary found in a plate- warmer, 158; typographical oddities of, 138.
Sternhold and Hopkins, 164.
Stevens, the American dealer, on the decay of modern English printing, 203.
Sunderland sale, 234- Suppressed books, collection of,
152.
Sutherland, forty years "Gran- gerising " one book, 172.
Syston Park sale, 5.
TEDDER, Mr., his monograph on Baskerville, 77 n.
-, tract on librarianship, 85.
Tennyson, early editions of his works, 155.
Theatres, works on, and their charm, 209.
" UNCUT, " 269.
Upcott's collection of errors of the first folio reprint, 277.
VELLUM, printing on, 34.
Virgil, Aldine, genuine and spuri- ous, 43.
WELLER, SAM, origin of, 188.
Wellington, Duke of, anecdote of,
167.
Westreenen, Baron de, his collec- tion of " Incunables, " 33.
Wilson, Mr. , his " spoliating "
Shakespeare, 305..
ZAINER, one of his books de- scribed, 40.

