
Round and
about the
book-stalls
J. Herbert Slater
140
ANTIQUARIAAT C.P.J.VAN DER PEET N. SPIEGELSTRAAT 33-35 AMSTERDAM
1.000
,
11N
ROUND AND ABOUT THE
BOOK- STALLS.
(
Pat S..XIX 957
9090- 18908
8198
ROUND AND ABOUT
THE
BOOK-STALLS.
A GUIDE
FOR THE BOOK- HUNTER.
BY
J. HERBERT SLATER,
Editor of "Book Prices Current "; formerly Editor of " Book-Lore " ; Author of "The Library Manual," " Engravings and Their Value, " " Book Collecting" ("Young Collector " Series), " The Law Relating to Copyright and Trade Marks," &c.
LONDON :
L. UPCOTT GILL, 170, STRAND, W.C.
1891.
CIAN
DE
INLE
LONDON:
A. BRADLEY, LONDON AND COUNTY PRINTING works,
DRURY LANE, w.c.
PREFACE.
THIS is essentially a work for the book-hunter.
In it I have endeavoured to point clearly and
concisely to those classes of books which are
now but little thought of, but which should rise
in value in the near future, and also to those
books of present value which, though of mean
appearance, are likely to be met with on the
stalls of the dealers. The principles upon which
books of all kinds derive their value and importance are also stated and discussed . In each
of these respects the work is, so far as I am
aware, unique.
J. H. S.
CROUCH END, N.
March, 1891.
.
CHAPTER
CONTENTS.
I. MONEY AND BOOKS .
II. THE GOLDEN DAYS .
III. THE MODERN BOOK- HUNTER
IV. TEN YEARS HENCE OR LESS
V. UNCONSIDERED TRIFLES
VI. ROUGH DIAMONDS
VII. RULES TO FOLLOW .
VIII. TO THE READER
PAGE
I
ΙΟ
• 34
47
82
94
IC8
117

ROUND AND ABOUT THE
BOOK- STALLS.
CHAPTER I.
MONEY AND BOOKS.
HE true book-hunter considers himself a
discoverer rather than a purchaser, and it
is the essence of his skill to find value in
those things which in the eye of the ordinary
possessor are really worthless . There are obviously many descriptions of book- hunters, for some
few at least rely on the depth of their purse rather
than on the height of their discretion ; others
regard their books as so many handsome pieces of
furniture, arranged for ornament rather than use ;
others, again, rejoice in a bargain for the mere
love of gain, and trouble themselves not so
B
2 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK-STALLS.
much with the contents of their books as with
speculations on their probable worth and the
chance of their increasing in value as time goes
on. As the angler whose patience is fortified
with the thoughts of the pecuniary value of his
catch, is regarded by his brother Waltoniansthat is to say, with derision and contempt- so
is the hungry book-hunter who buys to sell again
at a profit, and whose whole soul is absorbed in
the contemplation of prospective gain.
Let it not be supposed, therefore, that although
it is the province of the true book-hunter to find
value in those things which in the eye of the
ordinary possessor are really worthless, his ambition is grovelling or his hopes mercenary ; on
the contrary, the " value " of a book to him lies
in the nature of the contents, or perhaps in its
history or in that of the man who wrote it, or
in the special circumstances which give it an
importance and a place upon his shelves .
Don Vincente, a priest of Barcelona, outbidden
in a competition for a rare volume, strangled the
purchaser in his own house, and by adding arson
to murder and theft concealed the crime for
many months. At last he was detected with the
missing volume in his possession, and when the
Crown advanced as a proof of his guilt the
argument that the book was unique-as indeed
it was believed to be-his counsel showed that
MONEY AND BOOKS. 3
without doubt there was another copy in the
Louvre. What said Don Vincente ? Did he treat
the bibliographical discovery with indifference as
being immaterial so far as he was concerned,
under the altered circumstances ? Quite the contrary, for falling on his knees he exclaimed, " Ah!
my error was great indeed : my copy was not
unique."
It would require more than the sophistry of
Euthydemos to palliate the conduct of Don
Vincente, but there is no gainsaying the fact
that he was, his barbarities notwithstanding, a
true lover of books . Though no crime was too
atrocious for him to commit, it may be more
than doubted whether he would have aped the
thief who stole a transcript of the " De Consolatione " of Boethius, "the last of the classics "
as it has been called, from the Vatican, and within
a few hours sold it to another library at Rome.
We could easily credit him with the theft, but
with a vulgar sale, never-unless indeed the purchaser had yielded up the book with his speedy
death, as happened in one or two other instances.
in which Don Vincente was suspected of being
concerned.
Let not, however, lovers of books protest
against any fancied resemblance between themselves and the renegade Spanish priest, for no
such comparison is possible. Their affection will
B 2
4 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
prompt to no more inconvenient act than that
of the old bookseller mentioned by Lord Lytton ,
who having parted from sheer necessity with a
valued book from among his stock, paced all
night in the cold and damp before the house
of the envied purchaser, repenting bitterly that
the pangs of hunger should have so warped his
soul.
Thus it is with all genuine book- lovers, over
whom the inevitable hour of parting hangs like
a cloud, and to whom each particular volume
within reach seems to say, " I was another's
yesterday ; to-day I am yours ; to- morrow and you
will see me again no more. "
Between the lover of books for their own
sake and the mere book- hunter there is indeed
a wide distinction , and the former perhaps needs
to be reminded occasionally that there is such
a thing as trade in books, and that there are
plenty of genuine book-hunters who will without
compunction send whole rows of life's companions
to the block. Such as they never buy a book
without weighing the price, and if the object is
to gather together a representative assortment
of volumes, the element of value, present or
prospective, is continually associated with the
collection.
With the book-lover the case is different, for
although he may in all prudence have husbanded
MONEY AND BOOKS. 5
his resources originally, the question of pecuniary
value is for ever after eliminated from his mind.
These two classes of bookmen have little in
common, and each views the other with feelings
akin to pity. The one regards the worldling as
sordid, and a man without heart ; while he, on
his part, looks upon his more enthusiastic rival.
as a dry-as-dust .
:
"All my friends, " says a recent writer, " must
bear about them a literary flavour, however
faint if they have a delicate appreciation of
poetry, so much the better shall I be pleased.
They should be bookish to some degree, for
otherwise our conversation would be wanting in
its finest points, our sympathy slight, and the
rush of soul to soul altogether absent. They
must know more than the outsides of the volumes
they claim acquaintance with, and infinitely more
than their catalogue prices. If a friend exhibits
with reasonable pride, say a clean uncut copy of
' The Lives and Characters of the English Dramatic Poets ' . . . I share his pride with him ;
but to please me as I wish to be pleased, he
should have knowledge of the curiosities to
be found within its covers. Let him know that
Sir William d'Avenant was 'the son of John
d'Avenant, vintner of Oxford, in that very house
that has now the sign of the crown, near Carfaxa house much frequented by Shakespeare in his
6 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
frequent journeys to Warwickshire, ' concerning
which frequenting our author says : ' Whether for
the beautiful mistress of the house or the good
wine, I shall not determine ;' and that he, the
said William d'Avenant, wrote several plays, one
of which, 'The Law Against Lovers,' a tragicomedy, was ' taken from two plays of Shakespeare, viz. , Measure for Measure and Much Ado
about Nothing, the language much amended
and polished by our author ' : let my would- be
friend but know these facts concerning d'Avenant, especially that he ' amended and polished '
poor Shakespeare's language, and he establishes
my interest in himself, and shall, if only for an
evening, share with me the comfort of my study
and the companionship of my books. "
What would such a dreamer, if he will pardon
the word as being uttered in no unfriendly or
objectionable sense, say of the conduct of that
man who would, while knowing as much about
" The Lives and Characters of the English Dramatic Poets " as he does himself, part with itnot to satisfy the pangs of hunger, as did Lord
Lytton's bookseller, but because, like Gallio,
he " cared for none of those things " ?
What to such a man the Vintner of Oxford and
Sir William d'Avenant's polished verse, or the
pretty mistress of the " Crown" near Carfax ?
What in this book more than, or indeed as much
MONEY AND BOOKS. 7
as, can be read every day for a shilling in the
divine pages of that same William Shakespeare
who made the " Crown " his house of call, whether
on account of a fair face or the quality of the
wine is now immaterial ? Why dreamily doze
over what has long ago been learned by heart ?
Why treasure even a "clean uncut copy " of
"The Lives and Characters of the English Dramatic Poets, " which from almost every point of
view except a sentimental one is of but little
importance ?
Thus are the characters of two typical bookmen displayed in words which one has uttered
and the other perhaps often thought. Each pursue
different paths : they part almost at the outset
of a literary life and meet afterwards only
occasionally, and then in competition for some
long-coveted volume which both would like
to have, though for very different reasons.
On this platform of rivalry the spectator takes
his stand, and if he is a good judge of character,
either naturally or by reason of a close acquaintanceship with the pages of Lavater, the great
master of a decaying art, he will find much to
amuse and instruct him. The ardent book- lover,
touched though ever so faintly with the spirit
which pervades the whole craft, can no more
conceal his anxiety than could the French bibliophile whose purse gave out just at the hour of
8 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
triumph. Shaking his fist across the table, and
almost in the face of his antagonist, he shouted,
"Never mind : I will have it at your sale " ; and
history records that he did, for his poor brother
died within the year.
There was indeed in this scene more of instruction than amusement, and I cannot help
thinking that the lesson to be learned was that it
is far better to be tinged even with the spirit of
mere vulgar trade than to be saturated with the
selfish eagerness of the bibliomaniac.
This, however, is after all a question for the
moralist, and affects but in the slightest degree
the great book market, which is regulated, not
by the whims and fancies or even by the cravings
of individuals, but rather by the fiat of the
mass.
This fiat goes forth at intervals. It distributes
itself into rules, and binds the typical book- hunter,
no matter of what description, as with bands of
iron , so that in his journeyings round and about
the book-stalls he is constrained, though perhaps
against his reason, to judge as he knows the vast
majority of his fellows would judge under similar circumstances.
It is this unison of thought which controls the
market and makes it possible to survey its ups
and downs regardless alike of enthusiasm on the
one hand or of indifference on the other.
MONEY AND BOOKS.
Book- men, of every kind, whether maniacs like
Don Vincente, lovers of choice editions like
Grolier in France or Beckford in England,
readers like Dr. Johnson, Dibdin, or Lamb-the
last of whom was once seen to kiss a copy of
Chapman's Homer which he had just picked up
for a trifle ; collectors of the type ridiculed long
ago by Seneca as being possessed only of a vulgar
emulation which prompted them to accumulate
volumes of which, he says, they know nothing
except the outsides, many of them possibly barely
that all these sorts and conditions of men, no
matter how learned or ignorant, how enthusiastic
or indifferent , meet in rivalry on every occasion
in which a book is to be bought and sold.
In the great book world as in every other,
there is power in wealth, and he whose means
are limited must buy in the cheapest market,
remembering always what he owes, not merely to
himself, but to those who will some day read, or
perhaps even be compelled to sell , what he has
accumulated with such energy and toil. It is to
these that the following pages appeal.
CHAPTER II.
THE GOLDEN DAYS.
HE quality of a people is mirrored in its
current literature, and as that is in the
main grave or gay, learned or frivolous,
just in the same degree is the character of those
who support its existence with their money or
their applause.
Nothing at first sight seems so easy to gauge by
an application of this rule as the popular character
at any period of time, nor would there be any
difficulty in doing so if the course of the demand
for books of a certain class flowed in a single
current. Just, however, as the river which we
see making its way to the ocean is swollen with
innumerable streams and rivulets, so the popular
taste in the matter of literature is composed of
a vast array of individual preferences. These
must be separated, analysed, and classed before
any idea can be grasped of the magnitude which
THE GOLDEN DAYS. II
would be assumed by a social history founded
upon books.
From a practical point of view, there are good
reasons why it should be clearly understood at the
outset that no book was ever yet sent into the
world without an audience, and that the success
or the reverse of every literary venture indicates
to a nicety the popular taste of the hour, or the
phase of it to which the class of work appeals.
Attempts are made every day to anticipate results in this respect : some of them succeed , the
majority fail, but all afford valuable evidence for
future guidance.
The publication of new books is nearly always
dominated by one fixed principle, and that a
pecuniary one ; the purchase of old books, or
books at second hand, may be actuated by a
variety of motives, among which, perhaps, the
question of money never enters at all. Many
persons buy books to read or to consult, and do
not trouble themselves with speculating on the
probabilities of their rise or fall in the market
in the near future or at any distance of time.
These are the genuine bibliophiles, who read
what they collect and can derive as much pleasure
from the perusal of a battered volume, with which
no bookseller would encumber his shelves, as the
latter-day collector takes in contemplating the
bindings of rare editions, kept out of harm's way
12 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK-STALLS.
behind glass doors, and which he bought because
they cost money and because he thinks that in
ten or a dozen years to come, or perhaps less,
the pecuniary value will have increased. This
type of bookworm rules the market, and ninetenths of those who search the costermongers'
burrows in Farringdon Road and the New Cut
do so in the hope of picking up something which
will not shame their judgment when the account
comes to be balanced . I would not be so unjust
as to suggest that books acquired from such a
motive are never read : some of them doubtless
are—many are not ; most are merely skimmed, and
then put away out of the reach of dust and dirt
and the fingers of the unappreciative.
The quality of this class of collectors, like that
of every other, is mirrored in what is to them.
current literature. The books they hunt after
so laboriously, and buy from the dealer at great
cost, or occasionally from the stalls for less than
the market value, are indicative of the motive
which prompted the purchase, and in a large
number of cases this may be summed up in a
single phrase-expectancy of gain. Collectors of
this type may follow the fashion of the day, or
they may bridge over time, and cast their speculations like bread upon the waters, in the hope
that they may be recompensed hereafter for their
present self-denial. The former practice is easy,
THE GOLDEN DAYS. 13
and leads to tangible results ; the latter is just
the reverse, for the future decrees of fashion ,
though they may be anticipated more or less
successfully, can never be foretold with absolute
precision.
At this moment there are books to be purchased
for trivial sums which will eventually be worth
their weight in gold : this much we know from a
contemplation of the past ; but to identify them
among the mass of worthless literature visible on
every hand is a matter of great difficulty, and, to a
large extent, of impossibility.
For anything we know to the contrary, popular
taste may some of these days find itself forced in
the direction of philology, as was the case two
hundred years ago. In this event the Latin or
Greek Grammar which can to-day be bought for a
few pence, may then be worth as many shillings,
or perhaps pounds ; and collectors will sigh for the
good old days, just as they do now when they
allow their thoughts to wander to the beginning of
the century, and see in their mind's eye early
Shakesperian quartos knocked down in dozens
for two or three pounds each. Shakespeare has
now become a name to conjure with, and in the
place of two or three pounds, we must write four
or five hundred, and that with difficulty.
How, then, can we prepare ourselves to take
advantage, not only of present opportunities, but
VE
INTE
14 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
also of those which may, or at any rate should,
occur in the future ? There is only one way, that
adopted by old Marley's ghost, which reproduced
to the vision of Scrooge the events of the past and
of the present, which inevitably led, or would have
led, to those which were to come.
In journeying round and about the bookstalls
nothing must be left to chance . When a book is
taken up and thrown aside at the first glance,
the reason which prompts the act must be based
upon something more than the mere expression,
" I do not want it ; it is no use to me" -from which
it will readily be perceived that it is not to the
reader, who has guides enough at his disposal,
but to the collector. who has but few, that these
remarks mainly apply.
In brief, we must search the past and critically
examine the present before it becomes possible to
speculate on the future. The ordinary course has
been to reverse these processes, and the result has
been precisely what might have been expected :
the collector has in despair adopted the motto,
"Sufficient for the day," and tamely followed the
fashion. It remains for a new generation of bookhunters to make the fashion follow them ; or, if
this cannot be done, through lack of time or
means, to come up with it on the instant of its
turn. This sounds desirable : the question is, Can
it be done ? For my part, I feel confident that it
THE GOLDEN DAYS. 15
can, and I am confirmed in this belief by the result
of one or two ventures which, though apparently
more than speculative at the time, fell out eventually exactly as I had predicted.
It is well known that, in this country at any
rate, books were, for at least a hundred years or
more after Caxton established his press at Westminster, both scarce and costly. In 1545 the
library of such a powerful noble as the Earl of
Warwick contained only forty printed books. At
this period a private gentleman of average means,
however many manuscripts he might manage to
collect, was accounted fortunate if his library
numbered a dozen volumes from the press. One
collector, who lived in the early days of Henry
VIII. , has catalogued his books on the fly-leaf of
a copy of Cicero, and proudly added up the grand
total. There were copies of Sallust, the Cicero
referred to, Virgil, Xenophon, Alexander, and
Horace, also a Greek Grammar, probably by
Lascaris, a book on logic, and six works of
divinity-fourteen printed books in all. The value
of these would be great ; the task of collecting
them difficult in the extreme.
From this and other evidence it is clear that the
popular taste which then prevailed in the matter
of books was directed mainly towards the classics ,
while works of divinity occupied a good second
place. It may possibly be asked why this was the
16 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
case, seeing that many other works of a less
abstruse nature-Caxton's " Game and Playe of
Chesse," and Brandt's " Shyp of Folys," for
example—had already been published in England,
and were doubtless as easily obtainable in those
days as foreign editions of the Epics of Virgil,
or Odes of Horace.
The reason is not far to seek. Most manuscripts copied by the monks were either theological or classical in their nature, for laborious
writing was not to be employed save on works
which were worthy of the necessary sacrifice of
time. When printing came into active operation
all over the Continent, and to a lesser extent in
England, the same considerations prevailed in the
main, and classical and theological treatises held
almost undisputed sway. The first work ever
printed with movable metal types was the Bible,
and the printers of the early days would have
regarded with disfavour the employment of the
press for every trivial, or indeed for any, purpose which they might not consider worthy of
the application of the art.
The few people who could read had been
trained in a narrow school, and knew their Virgil
better than we do now, while a knowledge of
theology formed part of their early training.
Hence it is not surprising to find that the desire
for knowledge was limited to a few, and practi-
THE GOLDEN DAYS. 17
cally confined to the graver subjects of interest.
For many years this continued to be the case,
and even during the 17th century, men still
remembered the days of their ancestors and
chose their books accordingly. In 1632 the
house of the Gray Friars at Roane was furnished
with three shelves, fifty-six paces long and one
above the other, upon which were ranged the
2000 volumes of theology and philosophy which
formed the library ; while even in 1700 the
collection of books which was presented to the
Grammar School of Leigh, in Lancashire, consisted entirely of the classics and the religious
writings of the Puritan Commonwealth.
The catalogue of Spinoza's books was discovered by the Hague archivist, Servas van
Rooijen. There were 135 volumes in all, consisting of lexicons in various languages, Bibles,
rabbinical works, and medical and mathematical
treatises. The classics comprise the Iliad, Cæsar,
Tacitus, Livy, Sallust, Cicero's Letters, Martial,
Ovid's Metamorphoses, Plautus, the Alexander of
Curtius and Arrianus, Seneca, Pliny's Letters,
Aristotle's Rhetoric, Lucian's Dialogues, Petronius
Arbiter, and Epictetus. Spinoza also possessed
Josephus and an epitome of St. Augustine.
Broadly speaking, it may be asserted that
during the 15th, 16th, and first few years of
the 17th, centuries, and later still in certain
C
18 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK-STALLS.
instances the book-buyers of this country contented themselves with serious literature . They
bought their books to read, and had plenty of
time on their hands to ponder over them.
The first book auction ever held in England
took place at the house of Dr. Lazarus Seaman,
in Warwick Lane, in 1676 ; and between that
date and 1682 no less than thirty sales of
books took place in London. The catalogues
of all of them consist almost entirely of the
works of the Fathers and Schoolmen, learned ,
critical, and philological works, the writings of
contemporary English and foreign divines of
the Puritan school, and a goodly number of
books and pamphlets, chiefly of the controversial
kind, printed in the reigns of Henry VIII. ,
Edward VI. , Mary, and Elizabeth. Here and
there appear works in foreign languages giving
accounts of the early voyages to America, which
are now of immense value, but were then thought
so little of as to necessitate several of them being
put together to make one acceptable lot .
In short, books had not then begun to be
multiplied at the same alarming rate as at
present, and many years had yet to elapse before
it would be thought worth anyone's while to write
an oration in praise of mud, or a treatise in
eulogy of an egg or of a glass phial, or even
of a saucepan.
THE GOLDEN DAYS. 19
John Norris, the Platonist, used to say that if
the angels used their quills we should have no
more folios, and in those days writers had much
of the angel about them. They wrote comparatively little, but what they did compose was
solid, perhaps a little pedantic, but always
conscientious.
It took a long while for the works of Marlowe
and the succeeding dramatists of the Elizabethan
age to be regarded with favour. They were
doubtless bought and read and then thrown
lightly aside as befitted the character they had
earned, The collector, such as we see him,
hardly existed at all, and no extortionate prices
were ever paid for books : there was in fact as
yet nothing in the nature of bric-à-brac about
them . The modern collector may be said to
have sprung into being during the progress of
the Duke of Roxburghe's sale, which took place
during forty-one days of May and June, 1812.
Never had a collection of 10,000 volumes on
such a diversity of subjects been got together
by an English gentleman before . Theology,
jurisprudence, philosophy, art and science, philology, poetry, the drama, romance, criticism ,
geography, history, and antiquarian literature in
most of their branches were all represented,
and attracted a crowd of newly- fledged bookworms who seemingly did not care what they
C 2
20 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK-STALLS.
paid for some of the choicest lots . One
MS. on vellum, descriptive of the Arms of
the Knights of the Round Table, brought
£36 ; Bellenden's " Croniklis of Scotland," £65 ;
a copy of the first folio of Shakespeare's complete works, 1623, brought £100, while the
Marquis of Blandford broke all previous records
and constituted himself the pioneer of the modern
book-hunter by writing out a cheque for £2260,
that being the figure at which a copy of Valdarfer's
Boccaccio of 1471 was knocked down. Caxton's
"Recuyell of the Historyes of Troye, " 1471,
realised £1068 18s. , the very same book having
sold for £32 IIS. at the West Sale, held some
forty years before.
In fact, it may be said that the excessive
increase in the value of certain kinds of books
dates from the sale of this Roxburghe Library
and the formation of the Roxburghe Club, in
1812, an increase which has become still further
accentuated as the reports of the Sunderland,
Syston Park, Crawford, Hardwicke, and other
important dispersions which have taken place
in our own day, conclusively prove. Before
that time, books were cheap so long as they
were not new ; and, exceptions apart, rare
editions could bebe picked up on the stalls
for ridiculously small sums. They were worth
no more, however, for collectors had not yet
THE GOLDEN DAYS. 21
The
commenced to work in unison , and seldom
found it worth their while to enter into competition. Books were numerous and scholars
few, besides which the foreign demand was
simply nil, and public libraries practically nonexistent. Most of the essentials of competition
were therefore absent, and goodly tomes changed
hands without a thought of the morrow.
Roxburghe Sale, however, did more than add
for the time being to the pecuniary value of
a certain class of books. It steadied the market,
and for the first time a code of rules was
established for the guidance of a new school
of collectors. Many of these rules exist to this
day, and are acknowledged to be of binding
force by those who, as Naudæus would have
said, set about " erecting " a library which shall
do justice to a refined and educated taste.
During the greater part of the last century
collectors of repute were mainly recruited from
the ranks of the aristocracy, or perhaps from
among country gentlemen with plenty of time
on their hands and means at their disposal.
Here and there some pale student, whose clothes
smelled of the lamp, might deny himself food
in order to obtain a coveted volume which for
days had been the object of his thoughts, but
such instances were rare, and besides by no
stretch of imagination could such an enthusiast
22 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK-STALLS.
be termed a " collector " in the technical acceptation of the word. His books were good, but
not magnificent ; they were, moreover, bought to
read, and to be gradually thumbed almost out of
recognition ; they can be seen now, littering
the stalls -dead, like their owner, and as ragged
as he perhaps was when he parted with them
for the first and last time.
The bookworm of the past was either very
rich or very poor, or else a pedant. In France
it was different, for as early as the year 1700
there were many who denied themselves necessaries for the sake of collecting into a library
(where other books were perhaps scarce enough)
as many of those little works from the presses
of the Elzevirs as they could lay their hands
on. They were dying of hunger, some of them,
but their consolation was to be able to say,
" Here are all the poets whom the Elzevirs ever
printed. There are ten examples of each, all
with red letters and all of the right date."
In such a spirit did Richard Heber wander
about the Continent buying up books by the
thousand, and Resbecq purchase the contents
of half- a-dozen booksellers' shops, each of them
for the mere pleasure of turning over a heap
of miscellaneous literature, and perhaps of extracting an occasional rarity from among the
mass. These men were rich of course, and had the
THE GOLDEN DAYS. 23
true mania for accumulation grafted on their
souls. They have their humble followers in
plenty now, but the school is a new one in
this country notwithstanding.
At the beginning of the present century the
English book- lover would have thought twice
before he tortured his stomach for the mere
sake of possessing a book, and moreover the
feebleness of competition warranted no such
sacrifice. Even the rich bought merely to
please themselves, since there were no rules
to guide them-no fashionable outlet, in fact,
for their money as there is now. They
bought anything, and left the ups and downs
of the market to those who made their
living by its fluctuations. Still they had
their likes and dislikes in a mild sort of way,
and this fact of course had some influence on
the degree of estimation in which particular
classes of books were held. In short, the object
of the book-buying public was to accumulate
a number of good works upon as many subjects
as possible, so as to form an all -round library
which they flattered themselves they would some
day explore . Some of these subjects were more
popular than others , and hence a distinction
arose which kept the prices down or raised
them, as the case might be.
The following tabular analysis will show the
24 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
position of the book market about the beginning
of the present century :
1. Theological Works. -Latin Bibles were not
much sought after, even although printed in the
15th century ; English Bibles not much sought
after unless of the 16th century. Macklin's edition
of 1800 sold well, so did Baskerville's Bible .
Greek and French Bibles were in low repute.
Theological, or in fact any, works printed by
Caxton and De Worde, brought high prices . Biblical commentaries, criticisms, and works of the
Fathers sold for very small sums, unless quite
recent editions. Polemical works travelled very
slowly, original editions of the works of John
Knox and one or two other famous divines alone
excepted. Volumes of sermons hardly sold at all ,
and mystical works, like those of Jacob Behmen,
went for a shilling or two each. Early Scotchprinted works of this class sold well, the works of
the Freethinkers but slowly, being for the most
part despised or held in abhorrence.
2. Works of Jurisprudence. These sold very
badly unless perfectly new or exceedingly old, so
as to rank primarily as specimens of ancient
typography. Volumes of reports and statutes,
however, sold well.
3. Social and Political Works. Generally
speaking, of trivial importance. About this time
THE GOLDEN DAYS. 25
a copy of Machiavelli's " Princeps, " printed sine
loco in 1589, sold for 6d. ; the Amsterdam edition
of More's " Utopia," 1643, for Is. 6d. , and
Hobbes's " Leviathan," London, 1651 , for 6d.
These seem to have been the prices usually
obtained for works of the kind.
4. Books relating to Parliamentary Procedure
and Practice sold well, Prynne's " Parliamentary
Writs, " 4 vols . , 4to, 1659 , &c. , frequently bringing
as much as £18 . The " Journals of the House of
Commons," 55 vols. , folio, were worth about
£14 14s. , and the " Journals of the House of
Lords," 33 vols. , folio, about £8 8s .
5. Works on Ancient Philosophy.-These sold
well, and, generally speaking, for more than they
would do at the present day. The same remark
applies to works treating of modern philosophy,
morals, &c.
6. Mathematical Works of the 17th and 18th
centuries, mostly in 4to and folio, sold fairly well.
7. Works on the Arts and Sciences.-These
covered an immense field . Works containing plates -such, for example, as " The Houghton
Gallery "-now came into fashion . Architectural
treatises, printed either abroad or in England, and
mostly in folio, sound works on natural history
like the Paris edition of Buffon's "Histoire
Naturelle des Oiseaux, " 10 vols. , folio, 1771 , and
26 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK-STALLS.
Lewis's " Birds of Great Britain ," 7 vols . , 4to, 1789,
sold very well ; but works on agriculture and
gardening, with very few exceptions, fell flat .
Medical works were hardly sought after at all
unless quite new. Works on magic and witchcraft sold fairly well, but good treatises on physiognomy and kindred sciences, like Hunter's
translation of Lavater's Essay, 5 vols, 4to, 1789,
brought as much or more than they do now.
Poetical Works. -These were mainly classical,
and sold well, as classics were then in repute .
Some of the early Italian poets, such as Dante,
Torquato Tasso, Alamanni, Ariosto, and Aretino,
were highly esteemed. French poetry of an early
date was, however, in much greater repute, the
old Romants especially. Old English poetry or
treatises on the poetic art, such as Webbe's
" Discourse," London, 1586, and Puttenham's
"Arte of English Poesie," 1589, 4to, and in fact
all English-printed works of the 16th century on
this subject, sold rapidly and well . The quartos
of the early part of the 17th century were also
much in vogue. Under this head rank Fletcher's
"Purple Island, " 1633, Rowland's " Diogenes'
Lanthorn," Mill's " Night Search, " and a vast
number of compositions in pamphlet form.
Poems which then were modern, like those of
Gray, Chatterton, Burns, Ogilvie, Bloomfield, and
Southey, were at a very low ebb.
THE GOLDEN DAYS. 27
Dramatic Works. -The works of the Elizabethan dramatists had recently begun to attract
attention, and some of the early Shakespeare
quartos brought £2 and £3 apiece, prices which
had never been realised for works of the kind
before. Bell's " British Theatre, " in 34 vols. , 1797,
once brought more than £20 by auction, and an
anonymous play entitled " Patient Grisell," 4to,
1603, no less than £9 ; but as a rule the plays
of Beaumont and Fletcher, Mrs. Aphra Behn,
Isaac Bickerstaff, Henry Carey, George Chapman,
Colley Cibber, d'Avenant, Dekker, Dibdin, Dryden,
Forde, Ben Jonson , Massinger, Shadwell, Shirley,
Wycherley, and many other dramatists, could
frequently be met with for a shilling or two each,
even in the original. Isolated plays like Marlowe's
" Dido, " 1594, would, however, sometimes sell
for as much as £15 or £20 : in fact at this time
Marlowe's works were much more expensive than
those of Shakespeare, the first four folios only
excepted. Some of the plays of Middleton and
Heywood were also very scarce, £4 and £5 for a
small 4to being an ordinary price to pay.
Romances. All things considered, perhaps old
works of romance were at this period the most
expensive that could possibly be bought. The
chivalries of Amadis de Gaule, Florimont, Guy of
Warwick, Huon de Bordeaux, Olivier of Castille,
Palmerin of England-all written in French and
28 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK-STALLS.
published at Paris or Rouen during the 16th century, had long been objects of intense interest to
many who never thought of forming a library,
but were content if they could gather together
half-a-dozen of these old romances. During the
16th century, works of this class had poured from
the Press in prodigious numbers, and most had
probably been torn or otherwise mutilated or
altogether destroyed at the advent of the present
century. For long years these mendacious narratives had supplied the place of the modern novel.
The same remarks apply more or less to the
"Decameron" of Boccaccio, the " Novelle " of
Bandello, and the " Don Quixote " of Cervantes,
and also to other books which crossed the borderline of romance-as, for example, the Legends of
King Arthur, of which a considerable number
were extant, of Robin Hood, Parismus Prince of
Bohemia, the Mythical Knight of the Sea, and
the histories of Jack of Newbery and Thomas
of Reading. " Robinson Crusoe," "The Castle
of Otranto" " The Monk, " and Psalmanaazar's
Description of Formosa," all come within this
category. Books such as these had formed part
of the literature of the people, and old editions
in a good state of preservation were consequently
""
scarce.
Works on Philology and Criticism.-These
sold well, particularly if comparatively new, like
THE GOLDEN DAYS. 29
Walpole's " Anecdotes of Painting," 4 vols. ,
4to, 1762, or very old, Seventeenth century
editions were, however, for the most part in ill
repute, as also were those of the sixteenth, unless
printed in England.
Satirical and Amusing Works were in high
estimation, whether classical, like the " Golden
Ass " of Apuleius ; mediæval, like the works of
Rabelais ; or modern . Original editions of Robert
Greene's black-letter quartos sold for several
guineas each.
Fables and Emblems sold fairly well, the most
in favour being old editions of Esop and
Holbein's " Dance of Death."
Tracts. These occupied a curious position,
and their importance depended entirely on their
subject- matter. Theological tracts were nearly
all worthless, so were most of those in foreign
languages, classical or otherwise . Many tracts
printed in England during the Elizabethan age
were, however, scarce, as also were some of
those published in such numbers during the time
of the Civil Wars. Anything that could be
classed under " Drama " or "Romance," or in
some cases " Poetry," received attention.
Geographical Works were in good repute if
they contained old maps. Blaeu's " Atlas Major,"
in 12 vols. , folio, 1662, for example, was worth
30 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
£8 or £ 10, and Saxton's " Atlas " almost as
much. In any other event new works were
better than old.
Voyages and Travels. -Modern treatises , like
Cook's " Voyages " sold for large sums, but the
older books appear to have been regarded as
out of date, and consequently of but little value.
English-printed 16th century books were, however, as usual, competed for at good prices. The
few 15th century books of this class in the
market, e.g., Breydenbach's Voyage, folio, Lyons,
1488, brought most of all, doubtless as curiosities.
Works on Ancient History, Jewish, Greek, or
Norman, were but little sought after, unless 15th
or 18th century editions, when they sold well , the
latter especially. Gibbon's " Decline and Fall, "
in 6 vols. , 4to, 1776-81 , was worth more, for
example, than many of the 15th century editions
of Sallust or Tacitus.
Works on Ecclesiastical History were thought
little of, and sold , as a rule, for small sums.
Works on Continental History were generally
arranged in large libraries, under the countries
to which they related. Many of the more modern
ones were regarded with great interest.
Works on English History.-Upon the principle that it is disgraceful to know nothing of the
history of the country to which one belongs, it was
THE GOLDEN DAYS. 31
the ambition of all large collectors to show as
varied an assortment under this head as possible,
and prices in the main were excessively high.
Topographical works were included under this
heading, and prices which were often paid for
these would now be considered absurd. Dugdale's
"Monasticon " of 1655 , for example, would sell
for £50 or more, and the same author's " Historie
of Imbanking and Drayning," 1662, for nearly
£20 if well bound and in good condition .
Works relating to America.-Many of these
were getting rare and sold for tolerable sums.
Modern works were, however, still in greater
request than old ones.
Antiquarian Works, if modern, were much
sought after, particularly if in folio with large
plates. Works on architecture and gems, in
folio, had a good sale.
Biographical Works, unless of recent date,
travelled slowly. An exception occurred, as usual,
in favour of 15th century works-such, for example, as the editio princeps of Cornelius Nepos,
Venice, 1471 , which about this time was worth
£7 or £8.
Such was the position of the English book
market at the commencement of the present
century. Henceforth collectors vied with each
32 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
other to procure works which had been authoritatively regarded with approval, and libraries
were built up to a very large extent on the
Roxburghe catalogue alone. The institution of
the Roxburghe Society also acted as a stimulant
to the book-collector, and testified to the growing
interest in many ancient tracts and works of
general interest which the Society was founded
to reprint.
Several generations of collectors have lived
and died since these early days, and the present
century has witnessed a partial revolution in the
tastes and desires of their successors. Even now,
however, the state of the market can be directly
traced to the influences which were at work
eighty years and more ago, and any competent
person who had then thought it worth his while
to prophesy what would happen in our day
should have been able to do so successfully from
the evidence before him. We have more details
at our disposal than our forefathers ever had,
and there can be little doubt that the record of
twenty years to come is already staring us in
the face if we choose to look at it for the benefit
either of ourselves or of those who are destined
to take our place.
The popular taste of to-day has grown by
degrees. It is , moreover, evolved, not created.
The popular taste of the next century will be
THE GOLDEN DAYS. 33
the outcome and natural result of that which
prevails now. It is necessary, therefore, to study
the present, and to draw a comparison between
it and the past. This proposition has been laid
down previously, and the reasons in support of
it will be sufficiently apparent from what has
already been said .
D
CHAPTER III.
THE MODERN BOOK-HUNTER.
O
F late years the number of illustrated books
has increased with marvellous rapidity.
The Bewicks were the first to rescue the
art of engraving from the degraded position into
which it had fallen in this country, and no sooner
was their genius recognised than collectors began
to look around for any works which might contain their woodcuts. Thomas Bewick, the more
talented artist of the two, adopted a method of
exciting the cupidity of his admirers by publishing his works in limited editions and on paper
of various sizes, and of course at various prices.
This system stimulated the sale and amounted
to a practical recognition of the collector as a
being distinct from the ordinary man of letters.
From the days of Bewick until now, collectors
have been eager to secure illustrated works which
for any reason would be likely to increase in
THE MODERN BOOK-HUNTER. 35
value as time went on, and it is only fair to
say that authors and publishers have done their
best to keep pace with the demand.
Putting aside the visionary William Blake,
who worked from conscientious motives, and
Bartolozzi, who will be referred to subsequently,
we recognise in Rowlandson, the apostle of
the new cult- a partner, in fact, with William
Combe and a number of other literary hacks,
whose sole object it was to minister to a taste
which a few years before would have been looked
upon as depraved, but which nevertheless was
all but universal at the time. The " Pleasures
of Human Life, " by " Hilaris Benevolus and Co., "
"Advice to Sportsmen, " by " Marmaduke Markwell, Esq. ," " Adventures of Qui Hi in Hindostan, "
and a number of other publications of a similar
kind, the titles of which proclaim their frivolous
nature, took the place of sober treatises , and
educated the public for the advent of Pierce
Egan and his school, who went still further in
the same direction. These books were bought
with avidity, partly on account of the lightness
of the text, which afforded an agreeable relief to
the style which had hitherto been prevalent, but
chiefly for the sake of the illustrations , more often
than not coloured by hand, and always grotesque
or bizarre.
The revival of pugilism-originating, in the
D 2
36 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
opinion of a learned divine of the age, “in a
ferocious disposition and a contemptuous opinion
of man "-and the prevalence of such sports as
bear-baiting, badger-drawing, and cock-fighting,
afforded a rare field of enterprise, and during the
first quarter of the present century numerous
works with coloured plates were published for the
amusement of those who took a delight in pastimes of the kind. " Life in London " and " Life
in Paris " furnish good examples of the kind of
literature which was in circulation about the year
1820, and which afforded ample scope for the
rising genius of Cruikshank.
Some ten or a dozen years after the completion
of the second decade a visible reaction set in ,
and drawing-room tables all over the country were
soon littered with a new phase of art. At this
epoch fine steel- plates became the fashion, and
many excellent artists, such as Finden, Harding,
and Prout, contributed , though not for long, to
exalt the popular taste.
The public, however, soon got tired of Fisher's
"Drawing Room Scrap Book, " and the host of
elegant miscellanies which were served up for
their delectation , and returned to their old love
under the guidance of Cruikshank and Leech,
Ohwhyn, " Phiz," Seymour, Alken, Doyle, and
other artists of the same racy school. Not that
all these artists can fairly be classed either to-
THE MODERN BOOK-HUNTER. 37
gether or with Rowlandson and his followers ; on
the contrary, they differed widely both in style and
excellence, and the intervening period of moral
depression had unmistakably qualified the tendency to vulgarity which had been so conspicuous
in the earlier part of the century.
Of all the books sought after by the collector of
average means, the productions of the old sporting,
gambling school yet remain pre- eminent, or at any
rate rank equally with those illustrated by Cruikshank, "Phiz," and the other masters whose merit
lies not so much in fidelity to nature as in the
strangeness of their compositions. All these
books, and many more of the same class , passed
through many hands before they became scarce ;
and the contrast between the value of a clean and
sound copy and one which bears the thumb-marks
of a generation of readers, is often exceedingly
wide. Still, whether dirty or tattered or the
reverse, perfect or imperfect, in the original
binding or in the best style of Rivière or
Bedford, these books never fail to sell at a
price which seems to be increasing every day.
This result might indeed have been anticipated
a hundred years ago, for at that time, or a little
later, the plates of Bartolozzi, Gillray, and Rowlandson, though widely different in every respect,
clearly pointed to the success which would be
attained by any future artist who should be so
38 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK-STALLS.
fortunate as to fall in with the popular taste.
Rowlandson is the connecting link between the
past and the present in one respect at least ;
he set a fashion which has only ceased to attract
because there is no one capable of filling his place .
The book- hunter, however, has plenty of scope,
and no works are so eagerly sought after at the
present time as those which are illustrated by one
or other of the artists I have named. It must be
distinctly understood that reference is not made
to " Art Books, " popularly so called, as these, with
but few exceptions, among which the works of
Ruskin and Hamerton stand almost alone, have
been distinctly deteriorating in value of late years.
Whether they will ever recover their former
position is a question for the next chapter rather
than for this.
The Roxburghe Sale taught many lessons.
One we have learned, the others have mainly
to do with that class of works which relate to the
American continent and were printed during the
16th and 17th centuries, specimens of old typography from early English presses, works printed
in Scotland at any time previous to the year
1715, or within a few years after that date, early
editions of old English authors, works on natural
history with coloured plates, English Bibles of
the 16th century, old romances, antiquarian folios
with large plates, topographical works of the
THE MODERN BOOK- HUNTER. 39
better class, and ancient English or Scotch poetry.
At the beginning of the century, books which
answered any of these descriptions were rising
in value every day ; and it was therefore only
fair to assume that others of a like nature,
though perhaps not exactly similar, would do
the same.
When people begin to collect articles of any
kind it is always found that the scope of their
operations eventually becomes too limited, and
other articles similar in their nature are in
process of time classed with the rest. Hence,
when we know that at a certain date English
Bibles of the 16th century were in request, it is
easy to see that it was merely a question of
time for those of the 17th century to be regarded
with favour also. At the time of the Roxburghe
Sale such Bibles were of very little value, and
might be bought for as many shillings-or lessas they often now cost pounds. There would
have been no magic in this prophecy. The
newest books grow old at last the touch of time
may sober their bravery, prices may increase or
decrease, readers may change, but the future of
the bookworm always lies in the same direction .
All classes of books which were rising in value
at the time of the Roxburghe Sale-which we
have taken as being, on the whole, the most
satisfactory dispersion for our purpose-are, with
40 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
a solitary exception, sought after now. Others
which were then in ill repute are, without any
exception, in ill repute now. Theological works
of the more ponderous kind, such as commentaries and criticisms, which were all very well
in a Puritan or bigoted age ; volumes of sermons
delivered with much pomposity and show of
erudition, like those of Donne, who interlarded
every other sentence with a Latin or Greek
quotation ; 17th century works on philology and
criticism, geographical works too old to be of
any practical use but not old enough to be regarded as curiosities, historical and biographical
works of a similar nature : all these, which at
one time were read and re- read by the studious,
had fallen upon evil days and came to be sold
for a song. Would they ever recover their position again ? a bookworm of eighty years ago
might have asked, and had he done so his instinct would have supplied the answer. When
education should be limited to the few, and
narrow controversy come to usurp the place of
religion, then would such works once again
stand pre- eminent over all others .
The solitary exception alluded to consists of
classical works, which were in 1812 largely purchased, possibly by many who would have found
considerable difficulty in reading them.
At that time such works sold well, and in
THE MODERN BOOK- HUNTER. 4I
fact they continued to increase in value until
some thirty or forty years ago, when they suddenly, and apparently without any reason, lost
favour, and have continued to fall in the market
ever since. Reference is not made to editions
which rank as curiosities, such as the Virgil
printed by Sueynheym and Pannartz at Rome
in 1469, for a copy of which an enthusiastic
collector recently paid no less than £590 ; but
to scholarly editions like those of Hearne, Bryan,
Bekker, Heyne, and other learned editors of the
18th century. It is these which have fallen so
low of late years, to such an extent indeed that no
modern edition of any classical author whatever
has maintained its former reputation from a
pecuniary point of view. Even the masterly
productions of Aldus Manutius are esteemed no
longer by any but the student, while the reprints
of the Elzevirs have long since ceased to be
regarded with the enthusiasm of Charles Nodier,
who left a space which he declared should never
be profaned by any Virgil but the little Leyden
edition of 1636 with its passages in red and
textual errors on every page. Fifty years ago
a "tall " copy of this " right " Elzevir Cæsar
would have sold for £70 or more. In 1878 such
a copy actually brought £50 ; the other day these
prices had fallen to £2 1OS. In England, as in
France, it was, and indeed is, customary to
42 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
measure these little books to the twenty-fifth
part of an inch, and the "taller " a copy the
more it is likely to be worth ; but I think I
am justified in saying that there is no copy of
the Cæsar of 1636 existing on the earth at the
present moment, however fair and however
"tall," which would bring a sum of £70 at
auction, or anything approaching that amount.
It may indeed be taken for granted that unless
an edition of a Greek or Latin classic is from
such a noted press as to rank primarily as a rare
and important specimen of ancient typography,
it is, as a rule, of very little value. The text may
be accurate, infinite pains may have been taken to
secure the most authentic readings, words and
sentences may have been studied and pronounced
of doubtful authenticity or the reverse, in elaborate
notes indicative of the profoundest learning,—
everything, in fact, may have been done to insure.
perfection as far as that quality is capable of
being attained, but all to no purpose from a
pecuniary point of view.
The classics indeed are out of date, and for
the simple reason that scholars are rare. At the
beginning of the century the case was otherwise ;
the spirit which prompted the purchase of solid
works was not yet quite extinct. The cumbrous
theological folios had indeed fallen into obscurity, but the classics were admired, not only
THE MODERN BOOK-HUNTER. 43
by thousands who took a genuine pleasure in
reading them, but by many others who sought
to acquire a reputation for learning, and thought
that the accumulation of a number of grave and
learned books was the easiest way of attaining
their end. That the pecuniary value of such
books should have increased for a time is not
so surprising as that it should now have fallen
to almost zero.
This is a genuine example of the vagaries of
fashion, to which even the staid book- collector
is subject with the rest of mankind.
Classical works are not fashionable now : of
that there cannot be the shadow of a doubt.
Lighter literature has usurped the position
formerly held by the poets and historians of
Greece and Rome, and it is fortunate for us that
it is so, for we hold in our hands the shadowy
link between the present and the future. One
of the most powerful facts which it is possible
to adduce in evidence as a guide to the future
state of the book-market, lies in this apparent
neglect of a time-honoured literature . Can it
continue ? Time alone will show. In the next
chapter I hope to bridge over the intervening
period in this and other respects, and the bookworm of the future will know whether the
prophecy is warranted by the result.
It may be useful at this stage to call attention
44 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
to various special works of reference which are
commonly consulted by modern collectors.
For Anonymous and Pseudonymous Literature-Halkett and Laing's "Dictionary," 4 vols.,
impl. 8vo, 1882-88.
-
et
For Collectors of Works from the Elzevir
Press Willems' " Les Elzevier, Histoire
Annales Typographiques," Brussels, 8vo, 1880 ;
Goldsmid's "Bibliotheca Curiosa," 8vo, 1889
(a valuable work in this series for those who do
not read French) .
For Collectors of Works from the Aldine
Press Renouard's " Annales de l'imprimerie
des Alde, " Paris, 3 vols. , 8vo, 1825 .
-
For Black-letter Collectors - Ames' " Typographical Antiquities, " with additions by Herbert
and Dibdin, 4 vols . , 4to, 1810-19 ; the British
Museum "Catalogue of Early- Printed Books in
English, " carried down to the year 1640 ; Maitland's " Early- Printed Books in the Lambeth
Library," carried down to 1600.
For Collectors of Privately- Printed Works—
Martin's " Privately- Printed Books," 2nd ed . ,
8vo, 1854.
For Collectors of Broadsides-Lemon's " Catalogue of Broadsides in the Possession of the
Society of Antiquaries, " 8vo, 1866.
THE MODERN BOOK- HUNTER.
45
For Collectors of American Works-Stevens'
" Catalogue of American Books in the Library
of the British Museum, " 8vo, 1866.
For Collectors of Bibles-Dore's " Old Bibles,"
8vo, 1889.
For Collectors of Greek and Latin ClassicsDibdin's "Rare and Valuable Editions of the
Greek and Latin Classics, " 2 vols . , 1827 .
For Collectors of Works on Occult Philosophy
-Scribner's "Bibliotheca Diabolica, " New York,
4to, 1874 ; also the catalogues issued by George
Redway (Trübner and Co., Ludgate Hill).
For Dickens Collectors - C. P. Johnson's
"Hints to Collectors of Original Editions of
Dickens' Works," 8vo, 1885.
For Thackeray Collectors -C. P. Johnson's
"Hints to Collectors of Original Editions of the
Works of W. M. Thackeray, " 8vo, 1885. The
same author's " Early Writings of William M.
Thackeray," 8vo, 1888.
For Cruikshank Collectors -G. W. Reid's
"Descriptive Catalogue of the Works of George
Cruikshank, " London, 8vo, 1871 .
For Collectors of the Works of Carlyle,
Swinburne, Ruskin, and Tennyson R. H.
Shepherd's catalogues of the works of each of
46 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK-STALLS.
these authors. See also the " Ruskin Bibliography " (Richard Clay and Sons) .
For Collectors of the Works of Hazlitt, Leigh
Hunt, and Lamb - Alexander Ireland's catalogues of the works of each of these authors.
For Bewick Collectors-Hugo's " Bewick Collector," 2 vols. , 8vo, 1866-68. *
* This list is extracted from my " Library Manual," 3rd edition, 1891 (L. Upcott Gill, 170, Strand, W.C.).
CHAPTER IV.
TEN YEARS HENCE OR LESS.
HE same reasons which forced a book up
in the market about the time of the Roxburghe Sale, and have continued to exalt or
debase it, from a pecuniary point of view, during
the period between then and now, are useful for
the purpose of ascertaining what the popular
taste of the future should be. Several of these
reasons are explained in the previous chapters ,
and the book-hunters of the 20th century will
be as much bound by them as our progenitors
were, and as we are bound to- day.
Most people look upon fashion, even in bookcollecting, as the outcome of mere chance, but it
is founded rather on well- defined rules, not one of
which can be broken with impunity. The times
change certainly, and we change with them, but
not suddenly. On the contrary, what we call
48 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK-STALLS.
change is either advancement or retrogression
along the same beaten track.
When someone acts contrary to the ordinary
usages of society he is called eccentric, and if
very eccentric, mad ; and though I doubt not there
are many who would be prepared to follow a
great personage, no matter to what height of
eccentricity he might soar, the fashion thus set
would be a fashion only in name, and as unstable
as extraordinary and irrational.
The book-hunter is in one respect in a much
more favourable position than the mere follower
of a fleeting custom, for he has the records of
many past years to guide his course of action.
Should he desire to establish a rule of his own
making however, it is almost certain that others
would regard his example with indifference.
There is a reason even for this, and it lies
in the fact that a man who collects books is
offended if it is suggested that he does not, or,
worse still, cannot read and understand them,
and as he actually or nominally buys his books
to read, he is prepared to resent any interference
with regard to his method of spending his time
among them. Suggestions and advice are also
thrown away, for although the name of a new
or particularly good book is often received with
thanks, no one likes to have a course of reading
mapped out for him.
TEN YEARS HENCE OR LESS. 49
The collector's reason for his choice is always.
dominated by his own likes and dislikes, and
he chooses, in the vast majority of cases, to move
along the beaten track, simply because he sees
others traversing the same course . When fifty
or a hundred people simultaneously rush in the
same direction, the motive which actuates them
is founded upon a reason of some kind, and is
not the outcome of chance.
The position taken up, therefore, is that no
man however exalted can set a fashion in bookcollecting, unless he has good excuses for his
choice, and unless also the just grounds of his
conclusions are obvious to others at a glance.
It is useless trying to support a fashion by argument, for this would be to pre-suppose a doubt.
The reason must be patent, or it is worthless.
In this chapter we hold in our mind's eye
the collector of the future, and endeavour to point
in the direction towards which his inclinations
should turn . Then, as now, he will be guided
by the popular movement, for which he may
have no explanation to offer, but which, nevertheless, is certain to proceed according to rules,
well or ill-defined. These must be analysed, and
if the operation is skilfully conducted the result
should be relieved of much of the uncertainty
which has hitherto surrounded every movement
of the book market.
E
50 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
1. Books of a racy description, with coloured
plates by such artists as Rowlandson and Alken,
are, as we have seen , tolerably scarce, particularly when in good condition . They comprise
facetiæ, sporting books, and works more or less
fantastical. Some of them are prurient, others
are vulgar to our taste, but every one commands
a ready sale at prices which cannot fail to increase
as time goes on. Similarly, books illustrated by
the later school of artists, which includes the
Cruikshanks, Hablot Browne ("Phiz ") , Seymour,
Leech, and some others, are also a good investment, if in sound condition, but not otherwise.
Most of the original editions of Dickens, Thackeray,
Ainsworth, Surtees, and Lever come within this
category, but there is not the same demand for
second editions, and I do not think much will
be made out of them for
A second edition in fine
preferable to a dirty or
point worth bearing in mind by those who buy
inferior copies because they are cheap. The
plates in some of the works of this class are
occasionally coloured by hand ; some copies on
the contrary are found with the plates uncoloured .
A familiar example of this dual state is
afforded by Cruikshank's " Loving Ballad of
Lord Bateman," 1851. When coloured the value
is considerably higher than it otherwise would be.
many years to come.
condition is, however,
mutilated original, a
TEN YEARS HENCE OR LESS . 51
One word may be added on the desirability
of purchasing imperfect copies. If these can be
procured at a greatly reduced price , they might
be accepted, but not if the edges of the leaves
have been cut down by the binder. Such works
are dear at any price, and will never be of any
greater importance than they are now.
The leaves, and particulary the plates, should
be counted, and if time permits, the book collated
with some other copy known to be in sound
and perfect condition, for the loss of a plate
will frequently reduce the value of a book by
as much as twenty-five or thirty per cent.
If a collector is asked why he accumulates
works of the description referred to, he will
generally reply that it is because the authors
enjoy a high reputation, and the original editions
of their works being produced under their own
superintendence are much more likely to be
textually accurate than ones which were not so
closely scrutinised. This reason is so far satisfactory that it must at last universally prevail,
though there can be very little doubt that the
illustrations are really the main attraction in
almost all cases of the kind.
2. If, therefore, we search for original editions
which are not illustrated, but which can be brought
within the reason mentioned, we must be on the
right track. It must, however, be understood that
E 2
52 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
the pecuniary value of an original copy of any
author's work is in exact proportion to the degree
of estimation in which his genius is held, not at
the time when he lived, nor at any intervening
period, but now. Hence we see the early quartos
of Shakespeare selling for enormous sums, though
there is not a woodcut in any of them. Original
editions of Scott's single works, which might be
expected to bring a fair price, according to this
rule, do not sell for more than a few shillings each.
Byron is almost in the same condition, Shelley is
better, but still at a comparatively low ebb. All
these works, and many more, were produced
under the respective authors own eyes, and yet
they are of trivial account. How is this ? Simply
because the rule is yet undeveloped to its full
extent. I feel persuaded that any book- hunter
who will take the trouble to purchase originals of
Scott, Byron, or Shelley , and to keep them free
from dirt and damp, will reap a rich harvest
before long.
A little while ago, first editions of Tennyson's
"Maud, " 1855, " Idylls of the King, " 1859,
"Enoch Arden," 1864, " The Holy Grail," 1870,
" Gareth and Lynette," 1872, and " Harold,"
1877, sold by auction for less than £1 each, and
this, notwithstanding the fact that they were all
uncut and uniformly bound by Rivière at considerable expense. These books, too, should be
TEN YEARS HENCE OR LESS. 53
worth five or six times as much as they are now
in the near future, and the same remark applies to
the works of Browning, and, in fact, to those of
every poet who rises above the common level .
These remarks have reference to single pieces
only, and not to "complete editions," which,
unless of a respectable antiquity, or the best in
the market, have no upward tendency, but rather
the reverse.
3. All books illustrated by the Bewicks, especially
those on large paper, should increase in value,
but such increase will be slow. In addition to the
"Quadrupeds," " Birds," and " Fables, " Thomas
Bewick illustrated a considerable number of minor
volumes, such as the Poetical Works of Burns,
Alnwick, 1808, Way's Translation of "Le
Grand Fabliaux," 1796-1800, Gay's " Fables, "
Newcastle, 1779, the Letters of " Junius," 2 vols. ,
8vo. , 1797, and Somerville's " Chase, " 1796, 4to .
Books of this kind have every prospect of rising
proportionately higher in the market than the
more important productions of the same master.
4. An " Art Book " is one which depends for
its reputation upon the quality of its plates, combined sometimes, though not always, with excellence in the text. As a rule, there has been a great
fall in the value of books of this kind. All Ruskin's
and Hamerton's works, however, are sure
increase in value, and so are those containing
to
54 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
plates of first-rate quality by or after Hogarth,
Turner, or Stothard, as for example the 1830
edition of Rogers's " Italy, " and the 1834 edition
of the same author's " Poems." As a rule, these
"Art Books " are dangerous in the extreme, and
it is no uncommon circumstance to find a work
which was originally published at £40 or £50
sold at auction for a tenth part of the money. In
my opinion, all works purely artistic will either
deteriorate in value for many years to come or
else remain at the same dead level at which they
now are. What are known as " Galleries," that
is, works containing engravings of noted picture
collections, should especially be avoided. There
is no prospect of any bargain in them, but rather
the reverse.
5. Works relating to the American continent,
and printed either in England or in any European
country during the 16th and 17th centuries, have
recently made extraordinary strides in public
favour. Many years ago, indications of an upward
tendency were clearly discernible, though perhaps
no one ever suspected that the rarest of such
books would realise the enormous sums which are
occasionally paid for them. At the sale of the
Wimpole Library, in June 1888, nine small tracts
bound in a single volume, realised £66, and
another lot of twelve tracts, no less a sum than
£555. These pieces were, of course, so excessively
TEN YEARS HENCE OR LESS. 55
rare that it is hardly worth while speculating on
their future in the market. It is safe to assume,
however, that none would ever be allowed to pass
either now or hereafter without strong competition. Many works of this class, however, are not
so hopelessly out of the reach of the private collector, and there is, moreover, a very fair chance
of an accidental " find," for they mostly look
mean, and are not infrequently small in bulk.
They should never be put aside if they can be got
for a reasonable price, as they are certain
increase in value. All books printed in the States
during the 18th century are in the same position
and a similar remark applies to any works printed
in Scotland at any time previous to the year 1715 .
Irish printed books are not of the same importance,
and it is not worth the while of any but a very
few to collect those in the vernacular . These are
few in number and rare.
to
6. Of late years a large trade has sprung up
with the colonies, and books descriptive of any
country find a good and ready sale in that to
which they refer. Thus Gage's " Survey of the
West Indies," 1648, folio , worth here some 25s.
or 30s. by auction, would sell for more at Kingston
Jamaica. Books relating to Australia or New
Zealand would also sell well at Melbourne,
Sydney, or Wellington, and the same is true of
other colonies possessing a rapidly increasing
56 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
population and a literature of their own. As a
consequence, books of this character are bought
up to be exported, and of their ultimate rarity in
this country there can be little doubt. Books of
African travel, about which there was recently so
much talk, are in precisely the same position , only
in this case the market is not yet developed. It
must be understood that reference is not made to
newly published works, but only to those which
are out of print. The former usually fall considerably in the market immediately after publication, and it takes many years for the value of a
second-hand copy to equal the published price,
and longer still to exceed it. Books of this class
should seldom be bought new, and very rarely
subscribed for. Occasionally a book published by
subscription will justify the expectations so lavishly
raised in the prospectus, but not often. The rule
is to buy second-hand a month or two after publication . For one increased amount that will have
to be paid, there will probably be ninety- nine
instances in which 50 per cent. or more on the
published price will be saved.
7. Early editions of old English authors, whether
prose or poetry, have always been great favourites
with collectors. Many libraries, indeed, hardly
consist of anything else, and as the records of
the past disclose a steady upward tendency, and
as, moreover, this is just the class of literature
TEN YEARS HENCE OR LESS. 57
which an educated man is likely to wish to have
at his fingers' ends, old books of the kind are not
only certain to keep their position in the future
but to become more valuable as time goes on.
It is not every book, however, even of this description which is valuable or likely to become
so. On the contrary, some are quite worthless,
and great care has to be exercised in their
selection. Then there are certain rules which
all collectors follow, and as these ought to be
well known, even if they are not, it becomes
necessary to run through them, even at the risk
of being considered prosaic or hypercritical.
Of all the old English- printed books the most
valuable are those which rank primarily as specimens of ancient typography, indeed, it is no
exaggeration to say that these are not as a rule
within the reach of the ordinary collector at all.
They are either bought, on the rare occasions
on which they occur for sale, by the owners of
large private libraries to whom the expenditure
of a score of pounds more or less is a matter of
no moment, or else they become buried in the
public institutions of this country or abroad.
The latter destination is the more probable,
and inasmuch as there is no instance on record
of the voluntary dispersion of a public library, it
is safe to assume that a book once within the
walls of such an institution is practically buried
58 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
for ever. For this reason, among others, the
works of Caxton and other early English printers
of the 15th century are not to be got except by
the merest accident, and then only at an exorbitant price.
Occasionally, indeed, news of a discovery more
or less authentic finds its way into the columns
of the press, but the occurrence is so rare as to
amount to nothing more than a nine days wonder.
The details of some of these " finds " are very
amusing, and not infrequently reflect rather unfavourably on the common sense of those who
participate in them. For instance, one of the
half- dozen perfect or imperfect copies of the
" Book of St. Albans," printed by an unknown
typographer in 1486, was sold to a pedlar for
9d. when the library at Thorneck Hall was
weeded of its superfluous volumes. The pedlar
sold it to a chemist at Gainsborough for 3s. , who
in his turn handed it to a bookseller for £2.
He made £5 by re-selling it to another bookseller,
who eventually sold it to Sir Thomas Grenville
for £80, and at his death it found its way with
the rest of his books to the British Museum,
where it can be seen at any time gorgeously
bound, and no longer a subject of speculation.
All this took place notwithstanding the fact that
a very imperfect copy had sold many years before
for £147, and that Dibdin assessed a perfect
TEN YEARS HENCE OR LESS. 59
specimen at £420. At the present time the value
must be close on double that amount, for in 1882
Messrs. Christie, Manson, and Woods disposed
of a copy by auction for 600 guineas.
These specimens of early typography, whether
English or foreign printed , disclose their character
on their very face. The quaintness of the type,
the rudeness of the woodcuts, if there are any,
and the general tout ensemble are sufficient in
themselves to put the most ignorant vendor on
his guard. It is consequently an accident of an
accident for such a book to find its way into the
market at anything less than its value , while the
occasion of its appearance is rare in the extreme.
A single leaf of any of Caxton's works is worth
£ as a curiosity, and, in fact, all his books
and those of many other printers anterior and
subsequent to him are nothing but curiosities.
I think, therefore, we may leave all 15th century
books (though many of those printed abroad are
not of much pecuniary value) with the remark
that there are no bargains to be made out of
them, since the possessor is more apt to overvalue
than to undervalue any example he may have.
Books of the 16th century are, however, legitimate objects of search, and with regard to these
great discrimination has to be used. If printed
abroad they may be of value, though the chance
is against their being so ; if printed in England
60 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
the rule is precisely the reverse, and so far as
works of this description and date are concerned
it is better never to pass one by without being
quite certain that the price asked is too high.
As English- printed books of the 15th century
are exceedingly scarce and valuable, so these
16th- century books will some day be worth far
more than they are now. Time is slipping along,
and their numbers are decreasing yearly. Buy,
therefore, whenever possible, always remembering
the probability that the price asked will be either
as much as or more than it should be, or else
considerably less . The sum demanded is really
of very great importance, for we may be very
well certain that no one would ask as much as
£1 for a book unless he had satisfied himself as
to its actual worth. If he asks pence the chances
are at least even that his knowledge is limited
or non-existent.
Book-hunters who beguile their leisure moments
in searching costermongers' barrows and diving
down pestilential courts and alleys in the hope
of snapping up some unconsidered trifle in the
shape of an editio princeps are but mortal after
all. They sometimes drive hard bargains, and
are not infrequently strangers to the truth in
their dealings with those whose want of knowledge
would make them a still easier prey were it
not for that strange psychological influence
TEN YEARS HENCE OR LESS. 61
which tells them they are being imposed upon.
When one of the fraternity takes from its shelf
a remarkably fine copy of a rare book, for which
he informs you in a stage whisper he gave
sixpence, he frequently omits to mention several
other little items which ought to be brought
into the account, and which Chatterton would
have made out in his own peculiar and very
original way. It seems as though the scarcest
book is sometimes paid for too dearly, and when
this is the case it is usually because it has
cost not the most but the least.
Foreign- printed books of the 16th century
are, comparatively speaking, common, and five
out of six are worthless . Theological and philosophical treatises and classical works, particularly
those in Greek characters, are very rarely of
value, and the same remark applies to the
Latin works of the grammarians, as well as to
medical and law books. These comprise a no inconsiderable portion of the contents of the bookstalls in this country as well as abroad. The books
of this class , which are valuable and likely to
increase in value as time goes on, include the
French romances, travels in any language, poetry
in any language, historical works in any language
except Latin and Greek, for many of these consist
of bad editions of the classics, than which there
are none worse than the majority of those
62 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
published during the 16th century . Books printed
by Aldus Manutius, at Venice, though scholarly,
have of late years much deteriorated in value ,
as already explained. It would be advisable to
buy any of these (which cannot be dated earlier
than 1495 , nor later than 1515 ) , as in my opinion
they are certain to regain their former position
in the market before many years have elapsed.
Already there are signs of an increased interest
in the classics, and those printed by Aldus
Manutius are the best of their kind, even
in these days of school editions. This branch
of the subject is referred to more fully later
on.
From what has been said the book-hunter
will have learned to keep a sharp look-out for
15th and 16th century books, particularly those
printed in England. My practice has latterly
been to buy any book answering this description ,
even although I know nothing about it ; for even
if it should turn out to be worthless the experiment is worth trying-assuming, of course, that
the work can be got for a small sum.
No one
can possibly tell the value of every work he
sees-many indeed he may never have heard
of in his life before ; and when this is the case
all he can do is to exercise his judgment.
This he does by assigning the book which puzzles
him to a particular class and comparing it
TEN YEARS HENCE OR LESS. 63
with others of the same class which he knows
to be of value or the reverse.
During the reigns of Elizabeth , James I. , and the
two Charles's the English press was busily occupied in the production of a good deal of light and
ephemeral literature-if indeed the works of the
poets and dramatists merit the former appellation
as those of the pamphleteers certainly deserve the
latter. Many of these are of the highest degree
of rarity, and here again the primary rule to be
followed is based upon the maxim already
elaborated. As is the genius of an author, so is
the pecuniary value of the original editions of
his works. As that genius is highly or lightly
esteemed at different periods of time, so does
the value of his works rise or fall in the market.
It must be understood, however, that in the vast
majority of cases it is only original editions
which are of value-unless indeed the reputation of the author is sufficiently high to carry
the value on, so to speak, to a second or subsequent edition. This rule holds good all but
universally, except that in more recent times
a second or subsequent edition may be worth
more than the first, by reason of its containing
for the first time illustrations by some artist of
repute. I am not speaking now of collected
works published in a number of volumes, but
of single pieces as they were published by the
64 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK-STALLS.
author-as, for example, Robin Greene's " Farewell to Follie, " 1617, or Thomas Heywood's
" Silver Age, " 1613, both in small 4to.
Also let it remembered that a book to be of
value for its text alone must have been published
during the lifetime of the author. If published
after his death, any value it may possess will
depend upon other considerations , as is the
case with Halliwell's edition of Shakespeare's
works, 16 vols. , 1853-65, a copy of which
recently sold by auction for over £70. Here it
was not the reputation of Shakespeare so much
as that of his great critic, Mr. Halliwell- Phillipps,
which caused the book to sell so well. So far
as the works of Shakespeare are concerned, a
marvellously correct modern edition can be got
for a shilling.
When a book-hunter happens to come across
a single piece (never mind collected works unless
almost contemporary with the author) , particularly if in small quarto, let him consider whether
the edition is original or not. Most likely he
will be unable to remember, but at any rate he
can guess to within a few years. If the price
asked is small, the book should be bought at
a venture, particularly when the author is a
celebrity in the world of letters, for in this case
his name will impress a value on many editions
subsequent to the first. Thus, any edition of
TEN YEARS HENCE OR LESS. 65
the quartos of Shakespeare are valuable, though
the reader is hardly likely to be troubled with
a superfluity of these.
This reminds me to mention an important fact
connected with the great dramatist. Not only
are early editions of his own works valuable, but
also those editions of other works which he consulted during the compilation of his inimitable
plays. It is well known that Shakespeare borrowed many of his plots from the works of other
authors, who thus absorb no little of his reflected
glory. " Shakespeare's Library," as it is called,
which contains a collection of the romances,
novels, poems, and histories used by Shakespeare
as the foundation of his dramas, was edited by
J. P. Collier, and published in 1843 in 2 vols . , 8vo .
From the foregoing remarks the works of
Milton, even when in the original, must to a
large extent be excluded. The " Paradise Lost,"
for example, was first published in 1667-9, and
a good copy of this edition is of no greater value
than about £ 15. Some of his other works, such
as "Lycidas," 1638, are, however, worth four
or five times this amount, though even that, as
prices go, is not a very large sum to pay when
the rule as to personal reputation is taken into
consideration. The reason of the exception is
that Milton's works, particularly those of later
date, were published in large quantities ; they
F
66 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
appealed also to a very different class of readers
than did those of the dramatists. Shakespeare's
early quartos must have been destroyed in hundreds by the reckless frequenters of " The Globe, "
when the staid and sober Puritans of Milton's
age were yet unborn .
One other rule has to be noted before we leave
the old English author and his productions. This
is, never to pass a volume of poetry in English
dated before 1700. Many, or indeed most, of
these are particularly scarce and valuable . The
names of the poets who flourished during the
18th century are known to nearly all , but
not so those of the previous century. It might
be easy to pass by the " Purple Island " of
Phineas Fletcher or the " Lucasta " of the
courtly Lovelace, but not if this latter rule is
kept continually before the mind's eye.
8. For many years it has been the custom to
collect editions and versions of the Old and New
Testaments, either in Latin or English, or both.
Some of the Latin Bibles are very old, dating
as far back as the 15th century, but curiously
enough they are not particularly valuable. The
vast majority bring no more than £2 or £3 by
auction ; many produce even less. Of course
there are exceptions, such as the famous Mazarin
Bible, the first book printed with movable metal
types, a copy of which sold at the Syston Park
TEN YEARS HENCE OR LESS. 67
sale for no less than £3900. As a rule, however,
these old Latin Bibles are not worth much, and
they can certainly never be bought for much
less than their value. Their antiquity betrays
them at the first glance, and, as in many other
cases, the owner is nearly always under the impression that he has a small fortune within his
grasp. The value put upon these books by nonprofessional owners is usually greatly in excess
of their real worth.
English- printed Bibles are , however, in quite a
different position. Some are of very great rarity,
particularly when perfect and in the original
bindings. As a rule, the original edition of each
version is the most important, and the older the
work the more valuable it is likely to be. The
first English Bible is known as "Coverdale's
Bible, " and was printed in 1535 ; the latest in
date which interests collectors is dated 1717,
and is known as the " Vinegar Bible " from the
heading to the twentieth chapter of Luke, which
reads, "The Parable of the Vinegar. " The
numerous, and for the most part cumbrous Bibles
issued after 1717 are well-nigh worthless , and
this although many of them are profusely illustrated . An exception, however, occurs in favour
of Bentham's Bible, printed at Cambridge in
2 vols. , folio, 1762, the whole of the edition, with
the exception of about six copies, having been
F 2
68 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
destroyed by fire . Collectors of New Testaments
commence (when they can) with Tyndale's version
of 1525 , and seldom or never do more than look
at any work bearing a later date than 1679.
It may, I think, be taken for granted that all
Bibles and Testaments within the specified limits
will certainly continue to increase in value . Many
examples, however, which are offered for sale are
either imperfect, or, what is worse, have been
rebound and cut down in the process. These for
the most part bear date between the years
1616-80, and sell for a few shillings each. The
best book for collectors of old Bibles to study is
published by Eyre and Spottiswoode at 10s. 6d.
The author-Mr. J. R. Dore—is the first living
expert on this difficult branch of bibliography, and
has made it a life study.
case.
9. Works on natural history are nearly all
illustrated. In fact, the very nature of the subject imperatively demands that such should be the
A botanical or ornithological work, for
example, without illustrations, is of very little use
from a practical point of view ; and so well is the
force of this recognised, that nearly all biological
treatises are furnished with plates, which in many
instances are found coloured . There seems to be
little doubt that works on natural history , in order
to hold their own in the market, must have the
plates coloured. Those which are destitute of
TEN YEARS HENCE OR LESS. 69
plates, or have them uncoloured, have been decreasing in value for some time, and I do not see
how they can recover their position. Works of the
kind are, however, very rarely met with casually,
and under any circumstances always command
their value, which on the whole seems to be stationary. As one exception at least may always be
confidently anticipated to every rule, it may
noted that clean and good copies of Yarrell's be
" British Birds " and " British Fishes," Bewick's
"British Birds " and " Quadrupeds, " particularly
when the examples are on large paper, are increasing in value, even although none of the cuts
are ever found coloured.
10. Works relating to antiquarian subjects are
much in the same position, so far as regards their
pecuniary value and the probability of their increasing in price. Books on armour, ancient
dresses and costumes, sculpture, marbles, pottery,
numismatology, stained glass, mosaics, cameos,
tablets, vases , ancient monuments, brasses,
heraldry, and similar subjects, are nearly always
furnished with coloured illustrations. Where the
contrary proves to be the case, the value may
confidently be expected to decline. When,
however, the plates are coloured, it should remain
stationary for some time to come. The exceptions to this rule are few, and occur almost
entirely in connection with very old works, which
70 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
are valued primarily as examples of early printing.
These are, of course, very highly prized whatever
the state of the woodcuts may be, or even if
there are no illustrations at all . In heraldic
books it is customary to announce the proper
armorial colourings in the printed description of
the quarterings, and works of this class are not
often emblazoned. When they are, however, the
value is correspondingly increased .
Works on archæology and general antiquities,
referring chiefly to architectural remains, cathedral
antiquities, monastic surveys, and the like, are
sometimes illustrated and sometimes not. In
either event the value appears to be stationary,
and I do not think is at all likely to increase—at
any rate for the present. Antiquarians of the
peripatetic sort are a very limited class, and the
literature they affect is seldom seen outside their
own library walls, the London sale- rooms, or the
shops of the larger booksellers.
II. Topographical works were at one one time
more valuable than they are now, but of late
years the interest in them has somewhat revived.
The larger and more expensive works—nearly
all in folio-must, as a rule , be paid for ; and it is
safe to say that the person who does not know
their worth has yet to be found. The truth is
that the better class of topographical works
carry with them their old reputation, and the
TEN YEARS HENCE OR LESS. 71
tendency, if anything, is to overvalue them. It
is, however, quite usual to find octavo books
offered for sale at a few pence, or perhaps
shillings, each ; and when I say that everyone of
these is rising slowly, but none the less surely,
in the market, the collector will perhaps see
the advisability of accumulating as many as can
be got at a reasonable price. Even if the full
present value is paid, the investment should by
no means be a bad one.
12. It has already been pointed out that
classical works-by which I mean the productions of the Greek and Latin authors of
antiquity are just now at a discount. Not
many years ago their value was five or six
times as great as it is now. Indeed, so lightly
are they esteemed, that numbers of them may
be seen in the booksellers' shops awaiting a
customer almost at any price. These remarks
do not, however, apply to the editiones principes, or first editions, nearly all of which were
printed during the latter quarter of the 15th or
the first quarter of the 16th centuries, and are
for the most part very valuable.
Here again
these early editions are valued for reasons other
than the purity of their text. On the other hand,
most of the productions of Aldus Manutius, of
the Elzevirs, and nearly all the English- printed
works of this class, more particularly the 18th
72 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK-STALLS.
century editions, have fallen in value to an extent
almost incredible, and that within the past ten
or fifteen years. I cannot think, however, that
the depression is likely to continue for long, and
it might be worth the while of the reader to
set about collecting works of this class. Only
the other day I saw a copy of Combe's edition
of Horace, in two vols. , 4to, 1792, nicely bound
in vellum, with gilt edges, awaiting a purchaser
at 2s. How many days it had stood on the
bookseller's shelf I know not : it is probably
there yet ; but this I do know, that thirty years
ago the work would have been considered dirt
cheap, not at 2s. , but at £1 or more.
In the days of the great bibliographer the
Rev. T. F. Dibdin, classical works were held
to supply the appropriate literature for gentlemen
of learning, and what Griswold calls " elegant
leisure." Dibdin even wrote a book entitled
"Introduction to the Greek and Latin Classics,"
and that such treatise should now be tolerably
scarce, while many, or indeed most, of the
numerous editions he so laboriously describes
are just the reverse, is a curious satire on the
times in which we live. Dibdin's book will be
found indispensable to the classical collectorwith this caution, that no reliance whatever can
be placed on the author's estimate either of the
scarcity or value of a single work he catalogues.
TEN YEARS HENCE OR LESS. 73
He teaches his readers, however, to discriminate
between good and bad editions, for it goes without saying that there are a vast number of the
latter in the market which never
slightest value and never will be.
were of the
The editions of the classics printed by Aldus
Manutius at Venice are all of high quality,
those of the Elzevirs at Leyden and Amsterdam ,
just the reverse. The former, himself a splendid
classical scholar, criticised every word which
issued from his press, and even kept a staff of
experts to make assurance doubly sure ; the
Elzevirs blindly copied whatever came in their
way, from Homer and Virgil downwards, and
they seem to have not only copied mistakes,
but to have made many original ones of their
own. Nevertheless, the productions of the
Elzevirs were always esteemed more highly by
book-men than those of Aldus ; for they excelled
all other printers in the beauty of their type
and the general get- up of the little volumes
they turned out in such quantities. Many of
these are to be seen on the book- stalls, but it is
rare to find one that has not been cut down or
otherwise maltreated. That the value of these
works depends chiefly upon their measurement
in millemètres, about 25 of which go to the
inch, is sufficient reason for avoiding mutilated
specimens.
74 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
On the whole, I am of opinion that all classical
works, but chiefly those from the presses of Aldus
Manutius and the Elzevirs, as well as all the
English-printed editions of the 18th century
which possess a classical reputation, will shortly
come into favour again. Should this surmise be
warranted by the facts, there will be more money
gained and lost over the works of the classical
authors than over any other description of book
whatsoever. Present prices are so low, future
prices may again be so high, that the margin will
be of the widest. Doubtless the persons to gain
will be the dealers, for they are overstocked, and
in all probability the quotations for works of this
description will leap up at a bound, for they fell
mysteriously in the same way.
13. If anyone were to search industriously for
a bad investment, he could not possibly find a
worse than theological and technical works afford .
I do not mean to say that all books so classified are necessarily worthless ; on the contrary,
some few of them are both rare and valuable.
Even a volume of sermons may be an object of
intense interest to the book-hunter if the contents
are in any way associated with a religious
revolution in which the author was a prominent
figure. Thus the works in the original of Luther,
of any of the Marian martyrs, or of John Knox,
would run a good chance of being snapped up
TEN YEARS HENCE OR LESS. 75
within a short time of being exposed for sale at
a price less than they were worth.
The sermons of Manning and Newman always
sell well, for obvious reasons ; but in hardly a
single case out of many thousands are theological
treatises of any kind worth much more than the
paper on which they are printed .
Technical works are in the same position,
unless perfectly new or very old , i.e. , of the 17th
century at least. Nothing deteriorates in value
so quickly as scientific treatises, and many of
them are obsolete almost from the day of publication. This is the case with all cyclopædias,
which, however good, begin to decrease in value
immediately they are completed . In like manner
a technical work on electricity, or ship- building,
has a very short life . In time it may become
too great a curiosity to be ignored, and so rank
with the Marquess of Worcester's "A Century
of the Names and Scantlings of such Inventions
as I can Call to Mind, " which was published so
long ago as 1663 , or the older book which
Solomon de Caus published in 1615 , under the
title of Les Raisons des Forces Mouvantes avec
diverses Machines tant utiles que puissantes,
and which probably enlightened the Marquess of
Worcester not a little, though the author was
confined as a madman for writing it.
In 200
years many things may happen, but not for us.
76 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
My advice to the reader is to avoid all books
of this class, i.e., theological and technical, unless
they can be regarded as curiosities ; or, in
the case of theological works, happen to be
written by some notorious champion of his faith
who lived, and perhaps died, for the principles
he laid down.
For
14. In searching among large quantities of
old books the reader may sometimes come across
little pieces, frequently of doubtful merit, written.
by men who subsequently became famous.
instance, Charles Lamb once wrote a fairy tale,
called " Prince Dorus ; or, Flattery Put Out of
Countenance," which was published by Godwin
in 1811. A copy of this little pamphlet—for it is
nothing else sold not long ago for £30. The same
author, in conjunction with his sister, also wrote
"Poetry for Children" in 1809, and "Mrs.
Leicester's School " in the same year. A good
copy of the former is worth £40 or thereabouts,
and of the latter about £20. There is nothing
in these productions which would commend either
of them to a critic, but nevertheless they are
very hard to procure. I once saw a fair copy
of "Mrs. Leicester's School " in a second-hand
furniture shop : the price was 4d. , and I passed
it by. Many years have elapsed since then, but
I have never seen another, at any price.
In adjudicating on little pieces by famous
TEN YEARS HENCE OR LESS. 77
authors, the only plan is to consider the subsequent reputation of the writer, and to judge
the value of the work from that standpoint. This
is more often than not a very difficult matter,
for it is seldom that any author's name is mentioned on the title-pages of the crude and
ill -digested works submitted to the public in
youthful days. I know of no other plan, however ;
and if knowledge is wanting there is no way
of acquiring it but by reading, and experiencing
an occasional disappointment similar to the one
related in connection with " Mrs. Leicester's
School. "
15. Accidental books are those which are
brought into prominence for the time being by
reason of public attention being specially drawn
to the subject to which they relate. It would
be difficult to find a more apt or appropriate
illustration of what is meant than that afforded
by the well-known Bradshaw's Railway Guide,
which some few years ago was not looked upon
as being worth the notice of the collector. When,
however, the fiftieth year of publication came
round, and attention was drawn to the fact in
the press, the earlier issues immediately began
to be sought after. In June last year a copy of
the first edition of Bradshaw's Time Tables, dated
" 10th mo. , 19th, 1839, " sold for no less than £11 .
Again, during the Jubilee year much interest
78 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
was manifested in the Coronation number of the
Sun, which was printed in gilt letters in 1838.
Two or three shillings would have purchased a
copy of this five years ago, but directly the
Jubilee celebrations were announced the price
rose to IOS. or I2S. At the present time it
stands at about 5s. , but when another coronation
takes place it will probably reach £1 , or near it.
These two examples afford cogent evidence of
the liability of the public to be swayed even in
their choice of books by the events of the day.
So sure as a subject, no matter what, takes a
firm hold of the popular mind, so certainly will
books which treat of it rise both in importance
and value. It is obvious that great results may
be achieved by looking ahead, and so ascertaining what event is likely to become prominent
in the near future.
16. Works on ancient and modern philosophy,
jurisprudence and medicine, philology and criticism ,
parliamentary procedure and practice, including
reports of debates and journals of both houses, may
be classed under one heading. They are works
which do not often change hands, and vary but
little in price. Books of this class to be of
value must be the best of their kind. Old law
and medical works are, as a rule, worse than
useless ; they are misleading, and the pecuniary
value attaching to them is consequently trivial
TEN YEARS HENCE OR LESS. 79
in the extreme. Reports of proceedings in the
courts, statutes, medical treatises tinged with
astrology, and old surgical works written by
practitioners who effected a radical change in
professional opinion are, however, exceptions.
These, as a rule, sell well, and are likely to
maintain their value in the future.
17. Geographical works, strictly so called, are
worthless unless quite new or exceedingly old.
In the former case they are useful ; in the latter
they take a high position as curiosities, in which
event they are, and have been for some time,
rising in value. We must remember that old
books of voyages and travels are distinctly
geographical in their nature, and many of these
are excessively rare and valuable. Books relating to the American Continent have already
been referred to as being well- nigh impossible
to obtain, and it may be taken as an axiom that
any book of travels, dated during the 17th
century or at any time previous, are certain to
be worth far more in the near future than they are
now. Thus, the voyages of Sir Francis Drake,
Esquemeling's " Bucaniers of America, " and all
Eden's and Hakluyt's works are becoming scarcer
every day. Good copies of Cook's voyagesan 18th century book of course are in the
same position. Nearly all these old books of
discovery have, however, been reprinted or pub-
80 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
lished in an abridged or " improved " form, and
of these later editions the reader must beware.
They are mostly found in small octavo and
dated between 1750 and 1820, and illustrated
with old and worn-out plates . Their value, from
any point of view, is simply nil. Atlases, if old
(dated say before 1700) , are rising in value ; all
others are distinctly deteriorating. On the whole,
the only kind of geographical works worth collecting for future purposes are 15th, 16th, and
17th century voyages, travels, and maps.
18. Historical and biographical works are somewhat in the same position as geographical treatises .
They must be quite new or else very old, and
they must also be of the best quality. Hundreds
and thousands of trivial books of this class litter
the stalls, and are to be bought for a few pence
each. They consist for the most part of inferior
editions of the works of famous authors, bad
translations , or abridgments got up for sale at
a cheap rate. These worthless books are mostly
dated during the 18th century, though some
were published at the beginning of this. Historical and biographical works do not afford
much scope for the collector, though some, such
as the old chronicles, are valuable, and may
reasonably be expected to become more so in
course of time .
19. Of recent years great curiosity has been
TEN YEARS HENCE OR LESS. 81
evinced by almost every class of society in books
on astrology, geomancy, white or black magic,
witchcraft, mesmerism, and other occult or
mystical sciences. By far the greater number
are in Latin, but in whatever language they may
be, there can be no doubt of their great importance. It is said that large quantities are
collected for export to America, where the value
is, if anything, greater than it is here. Whatever
the facts in this respect, it seems to be beyond
question that the past five years has witnessed
a rapid rise in works of this class. Even the
new books continually being published by one
or two firms who have made this particular
branch of literature a speciality, sell rapidly and
well. In my opinion, all works of this class,
old or new, will continue to rise in the market,
and at present offer one of the best investments
it is possible for the collector to secure.
G
CHAPTER V.
UNCONSIDERED TRIFLES.
CHE greatest of Shakespearian scholars, the
late Mr. Halliwell- Phillipps, narrates that
when he first began hunting for old books
at the various stalls , black-letter volumes were as
plentiful as blackberries. These for the most part
he found in very unlikely places-often indeed
among masses of rubbish exposed for sale in boxes
outside the booksellers' windows. About the year
1840, he began to turn his attention to the more
special work of collecting Shakespeare quartos,
and steadily accumulated a considerable number,
which included no less than three examples of the
very rare " Romeo and Juliet " of 1609. In fact,
more early quarto Shakespeares were at one time
or another in that gentleman's possession than
are ever likely to fall to the lot of a single individual again, while his collection of black-letter
tracts, many of the highest degree of rarity, was
UNCONSIDERED TRIFLES. 83
extraordinarily large and important. All these
books, so dear to the heart of the modern collector, Mr. Halliwell-Phillipps, had picked up here
and there for trifling sums. When we, perchance
fired by the recital of his successes, seek to follow
his example, little but disappointment rewards our
exertions. Sometimes a rare volume is met with,
generally when least expected; but more often
than not a protracted search round and about the
book-stalls reveals nothing-absolutely nothing—
worth carrying away. There are ready reckoners ,
volumes of sermons and exhortations in plenty,
a spelling-book or two, and a varied assortment of
school-books, multitudes of pamphlets on subjects
of limited interest, and bad and imperfect editions.
of standard works without end. Among all this
chaff a single ear of wheat is sometimes discovered, and that is all there is to remind us of
the days when the threshing- floor was piled high
with golden grain.
As matters stand, it is perfectly obvious that
the book-hunter must make up his mind to almost
ignore the fashion as it exists to-day, and to peer
into the future, to collect for the future, to talk
chiefly of the future. This is no new thing for
Mr. Halliwell- Phillipps, and many others possessed
of tastes like his did the same.
Quite likely enough, people will some day sigh
for the time when Sir Walter Scott's originals
G 2
84 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
could be bought for half-a-crown each, and may
call these the halcyon days of book- collecting. If
so, they will think no more highly of our discretion
than we do of that of the Manchester bookseller,
who, thirty years ago or so, sold a second folio to
Mr. James Crossley for a shilling.
The fact is that no days are golden until they
are beyond recall, and in our journeyings to and fro
we must not now expect to discover vast treasures
at the price of an old song, like the first perfect
Aldine Virgil which the Duke of Hamilton and
Mr. Beckford pursued fruitlessly all their lives.
None of the old collectors did that habitually, they
bought what no one else would buy at the time,
and when their forecast of the future state of the
market turned out to be correct, and their purchases began to be envied, they posed as famous
book-hunters. We must do the same, even though
nothing but time can justify our choice. We, or
at any rate most of us, cannot afford to give £300,
or even half that number of shillings, for some
fashionable tract, and it is folly to go specially in
search of what we know can only be discovered
very occasionally.
The longer the subject of book- collecting is
considered, the plainer it will appear that we have
little to hope from following the fashion , unless,
indeed, money is of no account. Not that we
should close our eyes to what is going on around
UNCONSIDERED TRIFLES. 85
us. On the contrary, quickness of perception , and
an aptitude for taking any opportunity which
Providence may see fit to throw in our way, is
part of the book- hunter's training, and he would
be a
sorry hunter indeed without these essentials to success. Accept any rarity which presents
itself, but do not search specially for it ; leave the
popular taste of the hour to be gratified by the
exertions of others, and do not contribute to what
is at its best an expensive luxury. This advice
points away from the beaten track in the direction
of new paths, some of which, if well chosen, may
eventually become thoroughfares.
Although books which are excessively rare and
valuable may be out of the reach of most people,
there are doubtless hundreds and thousands of
desirable works awaiting purchasers at this
moment in the City of London alone . Some, as
the reader will have gathered, are of no particular
value to-day, though they may be eagerly sought
after a year or two hence. Others are even now
worth more than the price put upon them, and will
speedily be bought up. A third class consists of
books which in themselves are nearly or perhaps
absolutely worthless, but are yet of great importance by reason of special circumstances which
surround them.
Some few months ago a well-known collector
of old Bibles came across a fragment of
86 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
Coverdale's version of the Bible in 16mo. (3in.
by 2 in. ) , hitherto entirely unknown. The discovery constituted one of the most interesting
events which had occurred for a long time in
the bibliographical world, and was made quite
accidentally. The fragment in question consisted
of thirty-two pages, containing a portion of the
Book of Proverbs (from chapter xii. to chapter
xv. ) , and had been used to pack or line the covers
of a 4to copy of "An Abstract of the Penal
Statutes, Collected by Fardinando Palton , of
Lincolnes Inne, Gentleman," printed by Christopher Barker early in the reign of Elizabeth. Of
course until this comparatively worthless book was
stripped of its covers the fragment would be
entirely hidden from the public gaze, and so it
had come to pass that for two or three hundred
years generation after generation of book-hunters
had passed the law book by, or perhaps retained
it for a brief space on their shelves, without a
thought.
Not so long ago, I bought for a few pence
a battered old volume, printed at Lyons in
1546. It was nothing but an exposition of the
Roman Law of Contracts by Andreas Alciatus,
of Milan, and from a pecuniary point of view of
no importance. What struck me was the quaint
vellum binding, and the strange appearance of
the "bands " ; those pieces of leather, card-
UNCONSIDERED TRIFLES. 87
board, or other suitable substance glued to the
back of a book previous to covering. In this
instance the bands proved to consist of strips
of parchment, part of an old illuminated manuscript, which had thus been sacrificed in days
when manuscripts were more common, and of
less importance than printed books.
Incredible damage seems to have been done
in old times by ignorant or careless binders, who
frequently packed or bound their books with
anything that came first to hand. Hence some
of these fragments, as in the case of Coverdale's
Bible above mentioned, turn out to be of exceptional interest, and sometimes of very great
importance in the literary world, and care should
consequently be taken to thoroughly search every
old book which for any reason may be supposed
to be padded or made up of fragments in the
binding.
The presence of an autograph in any part of
an old or indeed modern work will also sometimes invest it with a degree of importance it
could never have acquired under other circumstances. Many signatures are difficult to read,
and so are frequently passed by persons who
might be expected to know better ; some, on the
other hand, though clear enough, are scribbled
not on the title page, which may perhaps be
considered the most suitable place, but in out of
88 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
the way portions of the volume, and so escape
notice altogether. At one time I found an inscription and autograph of Ben Jonson on a
blank leaf of a mutilated copy of Florus, at
another I bought for a shilling an old book of
Statutes with the signature of Bradshaw the
Regicide written clearly enough on the title.
Such instances are by no means rare, though,
as a matter of fact, the signatures of Ben Jonson
and Bradshaw are not often met with. When,
however, we consider that a book may pass
through a hundred hands during the course of
its existence, and that some famous men have
had large libraries and were remarkably fond of
writing their names in, or perhaps even of annotating their books, it is obvious that there must
be a large number which are distinctly worth
searching for.
Hence it follows that the experienced bookhunter has acquired the habit of opening every
book he sees ; he does so somewhat abstractedly
in many cases, but the early training which
prompts the act is apparent in every gesture.
Some of the books which have belonged to
famous men are curious as well as important,
but most, unless authenticated with a signature ,
can never hope to be identified . Charles Lamb,
for example, was a voracious reader, and handled
his books without the slightest regard to their
UNCONSIDERED TRIFLES. 89
preservation. Writing to Coleridge, he says, " A
book reads the better which is our own and has
been so long known to us that we know the
topography of its blots and dog's-ears, and can
trace the dirt in it to having read it at tea with
buttered muffins, or over a pipe, which I think
is the maximum." Personally, I should think
that the climax of untidiness which Lamb thus
modestly charges to his account is about the
minimum of what he was capable, for I once
had one of his books, which was a sight to behold.
Dog's-ears and blots and " dirt " of every description defaced its pages, and whole lines of
text had been scored out, sometimes in ink, at
others in pencil. In an ordinary case, of course,
the book would not have been improved, but the
peculiar circumstances invested it with an interest
and importance it would be hard to exaggerate.
Montaigne, it appears, was in the habit of
writing a sort of criticism on the merits of every
book he read ; this he wrote in the book itself.
Voltaire did the same, and in his case it made
no difference whether the volume belonged to
himself or anyone else. Young, the poet, dogeared every leaf on which appeared any passage
which struck his fancy, and his library was choked
with half- closed books. John Selden, the antiquary, used his spectacles as book- markers, and
these were found by dozens after his death.
90 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
Wordsworth was as bad as Lamb in his treatment of books—perhaps worse ; for Coleridge,
who ought to know, expressed the opinion that
"You might just as well turn a bear into a tulip
garden as let Wordsworth loose in your library."
" There are men whose handling of your books
makes you tremble. It is told even of the great
Professor Wilson that he would stalk into Blackwood's shop and, disdainful of implements, would
rip open the leaves of uncut books with his great
fingers . "
A book-collector of the graver sort-that is to
say one who knows more than the mere outsides
of the volumes which line his walls-has need of
all the knowledge he can acquire, for many books
which look so uninviting may nevertheless be invested with a halo of romance. To many persons
they will seem worthless, but this is far from being
the case if only the link of identity can be forged
to the personality of some famous owner of a
bygone day. As a rule only an autograph can
accomplish this satisfactorily. There is here a
field of enterprise in which not a few collectors
of the present day have been extraordinarily
successful.
Volumes of tracts which, in the vast majority
of cases, are found to consist of sermons or
theological pamphlets, sometimes contain other
pieces of a more valuable description , which, on
UNCONSIDERED TRIFLES. 91
being detached from the body of the work and
cleaned and rebound, may fairly be said to have
been rescued from oblivion .
An experienced book-hunter never permits a
volume of tracts to pass through his hands without
examination. In most cases it will be found that
some attempt has been made at classification ,
but this is not always the case. Occasionally an
unimportant sermon will be found bound up with
other pieces of quite a different description . In
this way many rare tracts have been discovered ,
some of them even unique, while of others only
a few copies have been known to be in existence .
At one time it was the usual practice to bind up
a sufficient number of pamphlets to make the
volume even in bulk with others which already
stood upon the shelf. Those which were not
then of importance were gathered up and bound
together, and perhaps for many years might be
regarded merely as useful for filling up spaces
which would otherwise be left vacant.
Time works wonders in the book- world as elsewhere, and so it occasionally happens that the
despised volume of two hundred years ago may
be found to be now worth more than its weight
in gold.
The subject of mutilated and imperfect books
has already been referred to, though very incidentally. Some collectors like to buy their books
92 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
by instalments, so to speak, and find more genuine
pleasure in "making up " an edition than in
buying one entire . Let us assume for a moment
that a set of Pope's works, 1754 or 1757, in ten
volumes, can be bought second-hand for as many
shillings. It does not follow from this that two
or three volumes out of the set would be worth
a proportionate sum, viz. , 2s. or 3s. On the contrary, the value would be much less . Again, a
volume which is deficient either as regards its
leaves or its plates is not worth anything like
what it would have been if complete. The law of
proportion does not hold good in these instances,
because the trouble which would be involved in
completing the imperfect set or book, as the case
may be, would be out of all proportion to the
advantage to be ultimately gained. Nevertheless,
many collectors think that in their case the contrary rule prevails, and are prepared to buy any
incomplete set or book at a small price , on the
chance of being able sooner or later to add the
remaining volumes, or the missing leaves or plates.
So far as I can see, the only advantage to be
gained by following this system is that the cost
is very materially reduced.
If time were of no object, and room could be
found for the very extensive collection which
would have to be made as a ground work for
future operations, then the plan would be advan-
UNCONSIDERED TRIFLES. 93
tageous rather than otherwise ; but when we consider that a missing volume may not be found for
years, and a missing plate, which must necessarily
be procured from some other work, itself imperfect
in other respects, perhaps not at all, it is difficult
to see in what the advantage really and in
the long run consists . I have known several
book-hunters who adopted this plan for a time,
but one only who persistently followed it through
a long life. When his books came to be sold, it
was found that time had curbed his hand, and had
been much too short to enable him to complete
even a section of his library, truly described by a
hunter after unconsidered trifles as a thing of
shreds and patches.
In some cases, and particularly when operations
are conducted on a limited scale, it may be advantageous, or even desirable to " make up " a book,
rather than to spend a large sum of money on the
purchase of an entire copy. This is a question
of individual taste, of time, and of depth of purse,
which each can answer for himself. Under all
circumstances and in every instance , however, it
is better to have an imperfect book than one which
has been cut down by the binder. The former
may be completed, the latter can never be anything better than it is an object incapable of
reparation from the very nature of the case, and
altogether discredited .
CHAPTER VI.
ROUGH DIAMONDS.
O close and searching is the hunt for old
books of a certain kind, that every outof-the-way stall and shop in the metropolis is regularly and systematically visited by
the dealers or their agents.
Mr. G. A. Sala states that most of his interesting, curious, or valuable books have been
picked up from the costermongers' barrows
which line the New Cut on a Sunday morning ;
and certainly the presence of the crowd which
perambulates that and other thoroughfares of the
metropolis where the peripatetic dealers are in
the habit of congregating, would seem to argue
that not only must there must be something of
interest to detain them, but also that the chance
of acquiring a bargain must be remote in the
extreme after a certain hour of the day.
The first hypothesis is more or less justified,
ROUGH DIAMONDS. 95
the second only partially so, for the majority
of those who are found turning over books on
the stalls are either actuated by idle curiosity
or in search of some work, generally of an
educational kind, which they may happen to
want at the time. From such bookworms as
these there is little to fear, for in all probability they would not be able to identify an
uncommon work, even though they should take
it up and examine its pages from cover to
cover. They would see nothing of importance ,
for example, in the " Scholemaster " of Roger
Ascham, the tutor of Queen Elizabeth, valuable
not so much from the nature of its contentswhich, as a matter of fact, are now but seldom
read-as on account of its being the first important work on education in the English
language.
•
So far as regards the " jackals," however,
the case is different. The men indicated by this
predatory title make a business of thoroughly
searching all the stalls, either on their own
account or as agents for the booksellers, with
whom they are occasionally connected. They
are, as a rule, good judges not only of old
books, but of china, prints, and all articles which
may conveniently be classed under the head of
bric- à- brac ; and everything of this nature which
comes within their ken is carefully scrutinised
96 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STAlls.
and bought up, should it disclose the slightest
margin of profit.
I once knew a " jackal " who kept an old
curiosity shop in one of the slums off Drury
Lane. He was ill- conditioned , dirty, and, as a
rule, taciturn and surly, but withal one of the
best judges of antiquities, including old books,
if they can be so classed, in all London . His
shop was a mere storehouse for the numerous
articles he picked up during the rounds which
occupied half his time, the other half being
spent in reporting his purchases to likely
customers , whom he called on personally with a
list of his gleanings. At his death his shop was
found to be stocked with the accumulations of
years a miscellaneous assortment of the most
curious and out- of- the- way articles, procured for
the most part from street stalls and the shops
of the marine store dealers .
Into the nets of such men as these is swept
nearly every unconsidered trifle which awaits a
purchaser, and the amateur requires all his wits
and needs to be up very early in the morning,
and that in its two - fold sense, if he would hold
even a semblance of his own against such professional competition.
It has already been pointed out that a large
proportion of the books which may be styled
" valuable ❞ —that is to say of some value beyond
ROUGH DIAMONDS. 97
a nominal sum -are easily judged from their
appearance ; but there are many which, although
they look mean and worthless, are, nevertheless ,
of the greatest possible interest to the collector,
being scarce, and, for various reasons, the majority
of which it would perhaps be impossible to
analyse, of considerable importance from a
pecuniary point of view.
I am not aware that a list of what may be
called " rough diamonds " has as yet been compiled, nor could even a tolerably complete one
be attempted within the compass of a small
book. The advantage of some such list would,
however, be exceedingly great to the collector,
for he would then be able to draw his own conclusions with regard to other works of a similar
description. Books which are old, perhaps battered, but yet complete, and frequently " uncut,"
mean in appearance, and seemingly worthless,
are just the kind that are likely to be met with
for a small sum. Inferior-looking themselves,
they are often found in inferior localities-in
dirty shops among masses of rags and bones,
scrap iron, and other abominations. The reader
will not find them in the main thoroughfares,
except at a price.
It is no use haunting the shops of the recognised dealers, after the manner of the American
gentleman, who, not so long ago, " rushed," as
H
98 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK-STALLS.
he graphically described it, out of Holywell Street
into the Strand with a book for which he had
just paid double its value, under the erroneous
impression that he had at last acquired a genuine
bargain. Not that rare books are unknown in
such localities, or that dealers are infalliblefar from it ; but as a rule they know their
business, and very rarely allow anything of value
to slip through their fingers. An ignorant or
careless apprentice may certainly fill the fourpenny box with the first lot of books that
comes to hand, the proprietor may be ill and
unable to attend to his business himself-he
may even make a gross mistake. The amateur's
chances are, however, in exact proportion to
the infrequence of such occurrences, and are
the result of the purest accident. Money is
picked up in the road sometimes, but always
when unsought for ; so it is with valuable books
in the shop of a dealer of repute.
The rough diamonds which it is even yet worth
while to search for cannot very well be referred
to separately, for their number is far too great
for detailed notice in any book but one specially
devoted to cataloguing them. Nor indeed would
that be the proper way of imparting the required
information, for the best catalogue could not be
otherwise than deficient, while its enormous bulk
would render it unwieldly, and in the last degree
ROUGH DIAMONDS. 99
difficult of access. The only satisfactory method
of distinguishing one book from another, and
judging at a glance, of its value and importance,
is to assign it to some particular class.
A bookseller who seems to fix the value of a
work so easily may never have seen it before,
or even heard of it , but he knows by intuition
whether it is likely to be scarce, and consequently
worth buying. The mental process which leads
up to the opinion he forms is based on a system
of classification which becomes more and more
complicated as his experience matures.
So must it be with the judgment of the
amateur, and the best way of exercising it is
to take a good bookseller's catalogue and go
through each item, carefully noting the prices
affixed , and endeavouring to assign a reason for
their being high or the reverse. It will be found
that nothing is valued at random, and that the
books are not tumbled together without any
attempt at arrangement, as so many persons
seem to suppose.
The following classification covers nearly the
whole ground the amateur will have to tread in
his search for books which have little to indicate
their value, so far as appearance is concerned.
They are for the most part scarce, though not
hopelessly so, in fact they are just the kind
likely to reward a patient search.
H 2
100 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
Any old books of facetiæ of the 17th or
early part of the 18th centuries-such, for example, as the " Wit Interpreter," 1671 ; "Witt's
Recreations Augmented with Ingenious Conceits, "
1667 ; " The Wit's Academy," 1704 ; "Joe Miller's
Jests, or The Wit's Vade Mecum," 1738, or
the second edition of 1739, " Polly Peachum's
Jests," 1728 ; or any old works recounting the
adventures and sayings of Till Owleglasse, Will
Summers, Archie Armstrong, and other famous
jesters.
Any volumes of poetry of the 17th century, no
matter what the edition may be, or of the 18th
or 19th centuries if first or sometimes early
editions. Attention should be directed not so
much to the quality of the text as to the reputation acquired by the author ; and as that is
high or low, so as a rule will be the value of
the early editions of his works. Sometimes, as
already explained, an author's name is so famous
that it will carry value to several editions beyond
the first, though this is not often the case.
In this catagory are the first edition of Burns'
works, Kilmarnock, 1786, and the first Edinburgh
and London editions of 1787 ; the poems of
Byron and Scott (though these sell for small
ROUGH DIAMONDS. ΙΟΙ
sums at present, even by the booksellers) ;
the poems of Ada Isaacs Menken, entitled
"Infelicia, " 1868 ; first or even early editions of
any living poets of the first rank, such as
Tennyson, Swinburne, Arnold, Lewis or William
Morris, and George Meredith ; or of modern
poets, such as Browning, Tom Moore, Tom Hood,
Wordsworth, or Longfellow. All verse printed
during the 17th century is valuable, and to this
rule there are but few exceptions. Modern
poetry by unknown authors is valueless, and not
worth collecting on the chance of its becoming
popular, even though written by a vain-glorious
poet like the one who boasted that his works would
be read when Dryden and Pope were forgotten :
"But not till then," added his candid friend.
All modern reprints should be avoided, unless
published by one of the learned societies, such
as the Roxburghe Club and a few others, or at
the private presses of Strawberry Hill, Middle
Hill, Darlington , or Lee Priory.
Any book of the 16th century, printed in any
part of Great Britain, no matter who by or on
what subject. This is in accordance with a rule
which never fails when rambling round and about
the book-stalls , where the prices may be expected
102 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
to be low. Scotch-printed books of this era.
are very rare, though by no means hopelessly
So. Any works relating to the American continent and printed in any language during the
16th and 17th centuries are of the highest degree
of importance.
Any old plays of the 17th century, nearly all
of which are in small quarto, or any works whatever of that era which contain a woodcut in
any part of them. Any original editions of the
Elizabethan dramatists, whether they consist of
stage plays or not, are, always worth collecting.
The works of Shirley, Dekker, Ford, Massinger,
Greene, Beaumont and Fletcher, and many other
writers of this age, are of considerable importance.
Another book of this era, though of an entirely
different nature, is Burton's "Anatomy of
Melancholy, " which supplied Milton with the
material for two of his finest poems and innumerable authors of lesser note with most of their
learning. Inseparably associated with this work
is Timothy Bright's " A Treatise of Melancholy, "
1586, rendered doubly important, inasmuch as
the author was a noted man in his day, being
the inventor of the modern system of shorthand.
ROUGH DIAMONDS. 103
Any tracts or pamphlets relating to theological
controversy, provided they are dated at any
time during the 16th century and by such wellknown characters as Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester, Latimer, any of the Marian Martyrs, Bullinger,
Martin Luther, or John Knox. It will be remembered that volumes of sermons, which litter
the bookstalls in such vast quantities, are never
of any value, unless they can be brought within
the rule and so ascribed to some great religious
reformer. All theological books are practically
governed by the same rule, viz., in estimating
the value of works of this class look first to
the man who wrote them, and afterwards at
the book itself. No matter how learned the
latter may be, it will have no value if the author
is unknown.
Any old books on angling, and most modern
ones too for the matter of that. The great prize
here is the first edition , or failing that, one
of the earlier editions of Walton's " Angler, "
first published in 1653, and of whose author
Byron wrote :
Angling, too, that solitary vice,
Whatever Isaac Walton sings and says,
The quaint, old, cruel coxcomb in his gullet
Should have a hook, and a small trout to pull it.
104 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
Just now great interest is manifested in all
works of a sporting nature, and no little book
or pamphlet should be allowed to pass which
relates to angling, archery, cock-fighting, bearor bull-baiting, badger-drawing, boxing, hawking,
or hunting. Most of these are perhaps somewhat
pretentious in appearance, and consequently
seldom to be met with casually ; others , however, are just the reverse.
Greek and Latin classics, though at a very
low ebb just at present, may confidently be
expected to improve. Should they do so, the
rise will be rapid. Only the best editions can
safely be speculated in ; the rest are mere
rubbish which can never be of any greater
value than they are now. School-books should
be avoided, as they are of no pecuniary value.
To this rule there are but few exceptions
which cannot be brought within the provisions
of the following paragraph. The most noticeable
of them consists of very old books like the
early editions of " Cocker's Arithmetic," most
of which are extraordinarily rare.
Any children's books of the earlier part of the
century, particularly those published by M. J.
ROUGH DIAMONDS. 105
"Poetry for
£40 ; " Mrs.
Godwin "at the Juvenile Library, No. 41,
Skinner Street," about the year 1810. Many of
these little books were written by Charles
Lamb and his sister, and these are now very
rare and valuable. Such are
Children," 1809, worth £30 or
Leicester's School, 1809," worth £20 or £25,
and " Prince Dorus," 1811 , of at least an equal
value. All children's books of about these dates
are rare, especially when in good condition, as
vast quantities must have been dog-eared and
thumbed, or perhaps torn to pieces by their
juvenile owners.
Any theatrical publications of the earlier
portion of the present century, such as " Actors
by Daylight ; or, Pencillings in the Pit, " 1838 ;
"Actors by Gaslight, " 1838 ; " The Call Boy,"
1838 ; " The Critic, a Journal of Theatricals,"
&c. , 1843-44. Any of the numerous pamphlets
relating to Miss Farren, afterwards Countess of
Derby, Madame Vestris, Bickerstaff, David
Garrick, and other famous actors, particularly if
scandalous or libellous, like the " Secret Memoirs
of Harriott Pumpkin (Harriet Mellon) , from her
Infancy to her Seduction of, and subsequent
Marriage with, a Banker, " &c. , 1825, 8vo, a book
106 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
which was rigidly suppressed on its appearance,
and is now worth some £8 or £10.
Original editions of famous novels of a bygone
day, such as any of those by Samuel Richardson,
or more particularly the better-known works of
De Foe, Smollett, and Fielding, and in a minor
degree those of Mrs. Radcliffe, Maturin, and
" Monk' Lewis. Books in this class are not
numerous, but they must be good uncut copies
to realise their full value or to excite any amount
of competition. Most of the copies offered for
sale have, unfortunately, been rebound and cut
down in the process.
Any works which treat of astrology, magic,
witchcraft, mysticism or religious fanaticism, no
matter in what language or when dated. Many,
or more correctly most, of the older works on
these subjects are in Latin, and not a few in
8vo or small 4to, like the Malleus Malificarum
of Sprenger and Institor ; the works of Agrippa ;
Artemidorus, who wrote of dreams and their
interpretation ; Artephius the alchemist ; Behmen
the mystic ; Gadbury and Lilly the astrologers ;
ROUGH DIAMONDS. 107
Grillandus, who classed heretics and sorcerers
together and gave a damning history of both
in the year 1536 ; some of the editions of the
blasphemous Black Grimoire, which renders
murder necessary to the performance of its rites,
and of the " De Prestigiis Dæmonum " of Wierus
the physician, who, together with Reginald Scot,
braved the wrath of King James, though at a
safe distance. All these, and many other books
of the same kind, are occasionally met with
in their battered sheepskin bindings, and all,
without exception, are worthy of the earnest
attention of the collector.
Such are some of the works which may
occasionally be met with by those who are
sufficiently persevering to search for them.
CHAPTER VII.
RULES TO FOLLOW.
ERY few of the books offered for sale, unless
it be in the better-class shops, are in all
respects perfect. Very often a plate will
be missing, and the deficiency is perhaps not
detected until the work comes to be compared
with another copy known to be in the condition
in which it left the publisher's hands. The want
of a frontispiece, or even a title-page, is also a
very usual blemish, for a number of people, at
whose head was a certain depredating bookseller
named John Bagford, used at one time to collect
these, to the detriment of every volume they
came across. Bagford's collection of title-pages,
now in the British Museum, fills a large number
of folios, constituting a monument to misguided
energy which it would perhaps be impossible to
match elsewhere. Another defect, and the commonest of all, must be placed to the debit of a long
RULES TO FOLLOW. 109
generation of ignorant or careless binders, who
were accustomed to shave the edges of every book
entrusted to them them for for rere--binding binding.. Any book
thus treated falls in value on the instant, and
the extent of the depreciation will depend upon
the quantum of injury inflicted upon it. Occasionally we find that the binder's shears have
cropped the very headlines, at other times the
damage is not so great .
Some books are so excessively rare that copies
are eagerly competed for regardless of the fact
that they are badly " cropped," but such instances as these are the exceptions which prove
the first of the rules it is necessary to learn,
viz. , that it is better on the whole to purchase
an imperfect book than one which has been cut
down by the binder. The reason of this is
obvious. A missing plate, frontispiece, title - page,
or leaf may be replaced, and often at a small
cost, from another book, itself perhaps imperfect
in other respects ; but no power on earth can
add a single millimètre to the edge of a sheet
of paper which has been cut.
Of course, when books are offered for sale at
a very low price, defects, whether of mutilation
or imperfection, cannot be complained of, but
when anything like the full value is asked, the
greatest care should be exercised in order to
see that no imperfections exist . In the vast
110 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK-STALLS.
majority of cases it is better to reject an imperfect book altogether than to take it at a
slight reduction. As to a cropped work, it is
well to remember that the normal value will
have fallen from 15 per cent. to 75 per cent. , or
perhaps more, according to the extent of the
injury.
Where compelled to guess at an edition or value,
it must be remembered that where a work is
reprinted away from its country of origin, it is
seldom of importance. In cases where this rule
does not hold good, it will generally be found
that any value the work may have depends for
its existence on the illustrations ; or in very rare
instances, on the excellent quality or rarity of
the printing ; or in rarer cases still, on the
extraordinary reputation of the author, which
carries its impress with it even abroad. A copy
of any of Byron's works, for example, to be of
value, must have been printed in England. No
Scotch or Irish edition can be of any importance
for itself alone . Also, French books reprinted
in England, or vice versa, can hardly be of any
value ; and the principle extends to every kind
of book which, in common parlance, is a stranger
to the country in which it sees the light. Some
of the classical authors have been translated in
this country, as Dryden translated Virgil, and
Chapman, Homer ; but in these cases the import-
RULES TO FOLLOW. III
ance of the translation , combined with the fact
that there were no original editions of the authors
in question except in manuscript, is instrumental
in creating an interest of a dual nature, one part
of which centres in the classic, the other in the
translation. In other words, the books must be
regarded as entirely distinct, and each judged
on its merits.
A third rule, and one which can be traced to a
very recent origin, though the grounds upon which
it is based, are perhaps not quite so apparent
as they might be, has reference to the binding
up of parts. It is well known that many of the
works of Dickens, Thackeray, Lever, and other
modern novelists, were originally issued in parts,
and the rule in these cases is that to bind is to
spoil. The parts should be preserved in a dropcase, and intact as they were issued ; for if bound
up, the value will fall considerably.
As an
instance, perhaps no better example could be
given than Dickins's " Pickwick Papers, " first
published, it will be remembered, in 1837. A
good set of the original parts cannot be got,
even by auction , for much less than £9 or £ 10 ;
whereas a bound uncut copy must be a very good
one indeed to realise half the smaller sum. At
the Mackenzie Sale held in March, 1889, a bound
copy of the Pickwick Papers sold for no less.
than £22. The circumstances were highly excep-
I 12 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
tional, and yet must be present to a greater or
less extent in every case where it is desired that
nothing shall be lost by the act of binding. The
book contained the two Buss plates, with the
original wrappers and all the advertisements,
specimens, &c. , bound up separately in morocco
extra by Rivière, one of the best binders of
the age, and was, of course, absolutely uncut .
In this, as in every other case, the binder's
shears would have reduced the value to almost
nothing.
As a corollary to this rule, the question of
rebinding under any circumstances is one that fre-.
quently assumes considerable prominence. There
is no doubt that it is advisable to retain the
original covers as long as they will hold together ;
but if the work is of any value and must be
rebound, only the best workmen should be
employed for the purpose. This, though expensive, is essential. If expense is an object, it will
be better to have the binding repaired, which in
the vast majority of cases can easily be done.
In judging the value of any book, remember
that intrinsic quality is the real basis of value,
and that a bad or unknown author cannot have
produced other than an unimportant book. The
author may be known quá author, or in any
other capacity, just as the Earl of Rochester,
whose poems in the original are SO scarce and
RULES TO FOLLOW. 113
valuable, was known as an historical personage
and an intimate friend of King Charles II.
We may be quite sure that modern collectors do
not choose their books but upon some well - known
and authoritative system of selection ; and therefore, in judging of the importance of any book,
it is necessary to ask in the first place, Who was
the author ? This may require extensive knowledge to answer, or it may not ; but it must be
replied to satisfactorily, notwithstanding.
Next comes the question, Is the edition a good
one? Is it contemporary with the author, or,
better still in most cases, original ? Is it a mere
translation of some foreign work, and, if so, who
translated it ? To what class does it belong, and
is that class of importance ? These and other
necessary questions have already been enlarged
on, and must be answered in every case where it
is not known as a fact whether any particular
book is of importance or not.
The contents of every bookstall of the common
order will be found to consist chiefly of technical
works, such as scientific books, educational works ,
and the like . The rule here is that none of these
are of any value unless quite new (which is
seldom, if ever, the case) or very old. In the
former instance they may be worth half of the
published price for purposes of reference ; in the
latter they may be very valuable as curiosities .
I
114 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
Thus " The Art of Cookery made Plain and
Easy, " 1747, folio, is valuable, for it is the first
edition of Mrs. Glasse's well-known work, and as
such, a curiosity. In like manner any of the earlier
editions of Cocker's "Arithmetic," or the Marquess
of Worcester's " A Century of the Names and
Scantlings of such Inventions as I can Call to
Mind, " 1663, 8vo, are also curiosities, and consequently of value. In all these cases the author
must be known, and this, of course, brings his
book into prominence-a reversal possibly in
many cases of the process by which he acquired
his reputation, though the result, so far as we are
concerned, is the same.
Another rule to be observed is that where a
work consists of more than one volume, any one
or more volumes out of the complete set is or are
not of the same value pro rata. Thus we know
that Grote's " History of Greece, " 1884, is complete in twelve volumes, and worth, when well
bound, £2 to £3 by auction, or, roughly speaking,
about 5s. per volume. Six volumes out of the set
would not, however, be worth 30s. , nor three
volumes, 15s.; for the trouble of collecting those
which are missing would militate against the value
very considerably. For this reason some collectors
delight, as already explained, in " making up "
their sets. They rank the trouble as a pleasure
and an occupation of time which would otherwise
RULES TO FOLLOW. 115
hang heavily on their hands. From this point of
view the practice may be justified, though the
result is hardly ever satisfactory.
A collection of anything, no matter what, is
rendered of greater relative importance, and
consequently of greater value, as it approaches
completion. This rule is well known and often
followed by book- collectors, who not infrequently
turn their attention to the accumulation of works
by a certain author, or of a certain class, thus
stamping the collection as a whole with an importance which perhaps cannot be claimed for the
majority of the books which compose it. The late
Mr. James Crossley, President of the Cheetham
Society, though an enthusiastic all-round buyer,
got together during the course of his long life a
fine assortment of the works of De Foe. These
were worth far more in the mass than if the value
of each book had been taken singly and added
up to form the total. In collecting the " De
Imitatione Christi " of Thomas à Kempis, Edmund
Waterton had, up to the time of his death, succeeded in bringing together between 1100 and
1200 different editions in various languages, and
for some years before his death he had been
engaged on a history of the book.
From this point of view a collection of the most
worthless books may become an object of interest,
assuming only that it approaches completion. In
116 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
this, however, as in every other case, it will be
found that there will be some editions which will
baffle for a time the most active search, and it is
these which impress a value on the whole.
The final rule to which it will be necessary to
call attention is of great importance, as affording
a reason of the prevailing mania for collecting
first editions of popular authors. All conditions
being equal, a first edition is always of more value
than the ones which follow, because in the vast
majority of cases it has been revised bythe author.
So says the collector ; and as he is master of the
situation-the "verie two eyes, " so to speak, of
the whole system which regulates the traffic in
books-his word is law and must be obeyed. On
this rule depends the whole future of the book
market, so far as original editions are concerned,
and on this will depend the future reputation of
many a work now hardly noticed at all . The original
editions of Sir Walter Scott's poems and novels
have already been instanced, and when the collector is true to the reason which at present he
only partially obeys, these and many other works
which are at present tossed lightly aside will
assume the position to which they are justly
entitled . A reason once demonstrated must form
part and for ever remain of the spirit of truth.
CHAPTER VIII.
ΤΟ THE READER.
HE bookworm who values his treasures for
themselves alone, and thinks less of their
pecuniary value than of their words ; who
loves to conjure up the spirits of those who yet
speak in the printed pages, and shall perhaps
live for all time in the lesson they have taught
mankind, to trace their career, and to moralise
on their end-such as he, and they are many,
will not find their privacy intruded upon in this
short essay. It would be an impertinence to
seek to regulate their lives or to pry into their
secrets.
Between them and the book- hunter there is
a wide difference, so great that it might be impossible to bridge the gulf that divides them
even if it were desirable to do so. The one
lives in the past, the other is a man of action,
and the two have little in common.
118 ROUND AND ABOUT THE BOOK- STALLS.
Ruskin says that " Bread of flour is good, but
there is bread sweet as honey, if we would eat,
in a good book ; nor is it serviceable until it has
been read and re-read, and loved and loved
again "-a sentiment that would certainly have
been echoed by Southey, who, when his mind
gave way, sat for hours at a time in his study
handling and staring vacantly at his favourite
books.
Nevertheless, the wayfarer who haunts the
bookstalls, though he may be considered too
much of the earth, earthy, by his more exclusive
brother, has his pleasures also, and is by no
manner of means a hunter and nothing more.
His pride is none the less genuine because it
is of the baser sort-or rather let us say, because
it is not so punctilious. His pedigree also reaches
back to the magician who earned his sinister
title through the invention of an art which has
revolutionised the world ; his hopes are truly
eternal.
It is to him, and many like him, that the foregoing pages will appeal with greatest force ; and
so I dismiss myself paraphrasing the words of
a writer who, though more of a sportsman than
a bookworm, was deeply tinged with the same.
spirit of anticipation that moves them both :
"Farewell, dear brothers of the chase, and
when you go forth to take your pleasure either
TO THE READER. 119
in the streets which roar with the traffic of the
hurrying crowd or in the less noisy byways
and alleys of the town, may your sport be ample
and your hearts light. But should others prove
more sagacious than yourselves-a circumstance,
excuse me, that is by no means impossible ;
should they, alas ! —but Fate avert it—reject your
proffered overtures, the course of your steps will
always lead you to pleasant places . In these we
leave you to the quiet contemplation of the works
of those who have gone before, whether it may
be your pleasure to sally out when the spring
lightens your task or in the more advanced
season, when the flickering gas - jets preside
over the scene."
FINIS.
GIOV
PF
3
Catalogue of Practical Handbooks
Published by L. Upcott Gill,
170, Strand, London, W.C.
ANGLER, BOOK OF THE ALL-ROUND. A Comprehensive Treatise on Angling in both Fresh and Salt Water. In
Four Divisions, as named below. By JOHN BICKERDYKE. With
over 220 Engravings. In cloth, price 5s. 6d. (A few copies of a
LARGE PAPER EDITION, bound in Roxburghe, price 25s.; the
price will shortly be raised to 30s. ).
Angling for Coarse Fish. A very Complete and Practical Work on Bottom Fishing, according to the Methods in use on the
Thames, Trent, Norfolk Broads, and elsewhere. Illustrated. Price Is., cloth 2s. (uncut).
Angling for Pike. A Practical and Comprehensive Work on
the most Approved Methods of Fishing for Pike or Jack ; including an Account of Some New Tackles for Spinning, Live- baiting, and
Trolling. Profusely Illustrated. Price is. , cloth 2s. (uncut).
Angling for Game Fish. A Practical Treatise on the Various Methods of Fishing for Salmon ; Moorland, Chalk-stream, and Thames Trout ; Grayling, and Char. Well Illustrated. Price
IS. 6d., cloth 2s. 6d. (uncut).
Angling in Salt Water. A Practical Work on Sea Fishing with Rod and Line, from the Shore, Piers, Jetties, Rocks, and from
Boats ; together with Some Account of Hand- Lining.
Over 50
Engravings. Price Is. , cloth 2s. (uncut).
AQUARIA, BOOK OF. A Practical Guide to the Construction, Arrangement, and Management of Fresh-water and Marine
Aquaria ; containing Full Information as to the Plants, Weeds,
Fish, Molluscs, Insects, &c. , How and Where to Obtain Them,
and How to Keep Them in Health. Illustrated. By REV.
GREGORY C. BATEMAN, A.K.C., and REGINALD A. R. BENNETT,
B.A. In cloth gilt, price 5s. 6d.
AQUARIA, FRESHWATER. By REV. G. C. BATEMAN,
A.K.C. Fully Illustrated. In cloth gilt, price 3s. 6d.
AQUARIA, MARINE : Their Construction, Arrangement,
and Management. Fully Illustrated. By R. A. R. BENNETT, B.A.
In cloth gilt, price 2s. 6d.
BEE-KEEPING, BOOK OF. A very practical and Complete
Manual on the Proper Management of Bees especially written
for Beginners and Amateurs who have but a few Hives. Fully Illustrated. By W. B. WEBSTER, First- class Expert, B.B.K.A.
Price 1s.; cloth, 1s. 6d.
BEES AND BEE-KEEPING: Scientific and Practical. By
F. R. CHESHIRE, F.L.S., F.R.M.S., Lecturer on Apiculture at
South Kensington. In two vols. , price 16s.
** All Books Post Free.
C. 1. - 1/91
2 Published by L. UPCOTT GILL,
Vol. I., Scientific. A complete Treatise on the Anatomy and
Physiology of the Hive Bee. In cloth gilt, price 7s. 6d.
Vol. II. , Practical Management of Bees. An Exhaustive Treatise on Advanced Bee- Culture . In cloth gilt, price 8s. 6d.
BOAT BUILDING AND SAILING, PRACTICAL.
Containing Full Instructions for Designing and Building Punts, Skiffs,
Canoes, Sailing Boats, &c. Particulars of the most Suitable Sailing
Boats and Yachts for Amateurs, and Instructions for their Proper
Handling. Fully Illustrated with Designs and Working Diagrams.
By ADRIAN NEISON, C.E., DIXON KEMP, A.I.N.A., and G. CHRISTOPHER DAVIES. In one vol., cloth gilt, price 7s. 6d.
BOAT BUILDING FOR AMATEURS, PRACTICAL.
Containing Full Instructions for Designing and Building Punts, Skiffs,
Canoes, Sailing Boats, &c. Fully Illustrated with Working Diagrams.
By ADRIAN NEISON, C.E. Second Edition, Revised and Enlarged by DIXON KEMP, Author of " Yacht Designing," "A Manual of
Yacht and Boat Sailing," &c. In cloth gilt, price 2s. 6d.
BOAT SAILING FOR AMATEURS. Containing Particulars of the most Suitable Sailing Boats and Yachts for Amateurs,
and Instructions for their Proper Handling, &c. Illustrated with
numerous Diagrams. By G. CHRISTOPHER DAVIES. Second Edition,
Revised and Enlarged, and with several New Plans of Yachts. In cloth gilt, price 5s.
BOOKBINDING FOR AMATEURS: Being Descriptions
of the various Tools and Appliances Required, and Minute Instructions for their Effective Use. By W. J. E. CRANE. Illustrated with 156
Engravings. In cloth gilt, price 2s. 6d.
BROADS, THE LAND OF THE. By E. R. SUFFLING.
ILLUSTRATED EDITION. -The most Complete Guide to
the whole of the District-embracing the Broads and their Waterways of Norfolk and Suffolk-that has yet been published. With a
good Map, printed in four colours. Price 2s. 6d.
CHEAP EDITION. -An abridged Edition, with Plates of
Characteristic Sketches by J. TEMPLE. A good and clear Map,
in black and white, is also given. In coloured cover, price Is.
BUTTERFLIES AND MOTHS, COLLECTING: Being
Directions for Capturing, Killing, and Preserving Lepidoptera and
their Larvæ. Illustrated. Reprinted, with Additions, from " Practical Taxidermy." By MONTAGU BROWNE. In paper, price Is.
CACTUS CULTURE FOR AMATEURS : Being
Descriptions of the various Cactuses grown in this country ; with Full and Practical Instructions for their Successful Cultivation .
By W. WATSON, Assistant Curator of the Royal Botanic Gardens,
Kew. Profusely Illustrated. In cloth gilt, price 5s.
CAGE BIRDS, BRITISH. Containing Full Directions for
Successfully Breeding, Rearing, and Managing the various British Birds that can be kept in Confinement. Illustrated with
COLOURED PLATES and numerous finely- cut Wood Engravings.
By R. L. Wallace. In cloth gilt, price 10s. 6d.
** All Books Post Free.
170, Strand, London, W.C. 3
CAGE BIRDS, DISEASES OF: Their Causes, Symptoms,
A Handbook for everyone who keeps a Bird. By and Treatment.
DR. W. T. GREENE, F.Z.S. In paper, price Is.
CANARY BOOK. Containing Full Directions for the Breeding,
Rearing, and Management of all Varieties of Canaries and Canary
Mules, the Promotion and Management of Canary Societies and
Exhibitions, and all other matters connected with this Fancy. By ROBERT L. WALLACE. Second Edition, Enlarged and Revised,
with many new Illustrations of Prize Birds, Cages, &c. In clothgilt,
price 5s. with Coloured Plates, 6s. 6d. ; and in Sections as follows :
Canaries, General Management of. Including Cages and
Cage- making, Breeding, Managing, Mule Breeding, Diseases and their
Treatment, Moulting, Rats, Mice, &c. Illustrated. Cloth, price 2s. 6d.
Canaries, Exhibition. Containing Full Particulars of all the different Varieties, their Points of Excellence, Preparing Birds for
Exhibition, Formation and Management of Canary Societies and Exhibitions. Illustrated. In cloth, price 2s. 6d.
CARD TRICKS, BOOK OF, for Drawing-room and Stage
Entertainments by Amateurs ; with an Exposure ofTricks as practised
by Card Sharpers and Swindlers. Numerous Illustrations. By Prof.
R. KUNARD. Illustrated wrapper, price 2s. 6d.
CHURCH EMBROIDERY: Its Early History and Manner
of Working ; Materials Used and Stitches Employed ; Raised and Flat Couching, Appliqué, &c., &c. , including Church Work over
Cardboard. A practical handbook for Church Workers. Illustrated.
In paper, price is.
CHURCH FESTIVAL DECORATIONS. Comprising
Directions and Designs for the Suitable Decoration of Churches for Christmas, Easter, Whitsuntide, and Harvest. Illustrated. Auseful
book for the Clergy and their Lay Assistants. In paper, price Is.
COINS, A GUIDE TO ENGLISH PATTERN, in Gold,
Silver, Copper, and Pewter, from Edward I. to Victoria, with their Value. By the REV. G. F. CROWTHER, M.A. Illustrated. In
silver cloth, with gilt facsimiles of Coins, price 5s.
COINS OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND, A
GUIDE TO THE, in Gold, Silver, and Copper, from the Earliest Period to the Present Time, with their Value. By the late Colonel W. STEWART THORBURN. Of immense value to collectors and dealers.
27 Plates in Gold, Silver, and Copper, and 8 Plates of Gold and
Silver Coins in RAISED FACSIMILE. In cloth, with silver facsimiles of Coins, price 7s. 6d.
COLLIE, THE. Its History, Points, and Breeding. By
HUGH DALZIEL. Illustrated. Demy 8vo, price is.; cloth, 25.
COLLIE STUD BOOK. Edited by HUGH DALZIEL.
[In the press.
CONJURING, BOOK OF MODERN. A Practical Guide
to Drawing- room and Stage Magic for Amateurs. By PROFESSOR
R. KUNARD. Illustrated. Illustrated wrapper, price 2s. 6d.
COOKERY FOR AMATEURS ; or, French Dishes for
English Homes of all Classes. Includes Simple Cookery, Middle-
** All Books Post Free.
4 Published by L. UPCOTT GILL,
class Cookery, Superior Cookery, Cookery for Invalids, and Breakfast and Luncheon Cookery. By MADAME VALÉRIE. Second Edition.
In paper, price is.
CUCUMBER CULTURE FOR AMATEURS. Including also Melons, Vegetable Marrows, and Gourds. Illustrated. By
W. J. MAY. In paper, price is.
DEGREES, A GUIDE TO, in Arts, Science, Literature,
Law, Music, and Divinity, in the United Kingdom, the Colonies, the
Continent, and the United States. By E. WOOTON, Author of “ A
Guide to the Medical Profession," &c. In cloth, price . 15s.
DOGS, BREAKING AND TRAINING : Being Concise
Directions for the proper Education of Dogs, both for the Field and
for Companions. Second Edition. By " PATHFINDER. " With Chapters
by HUGH DALZIEL on Work of Special Breeds ; Trail or Drag
Hounds ; Training Bloodhounds ; Defenders and Watch Dogs ;
Sheep Dogs-Stock Tenders ; Life Savers-Water Dogs ; Vermin
Destroyers ; House Manners ; Behaviour Out of Doors. Illustrated.
In cloth gilt, price 6s. 6d.
DOGS, BRITISH : Their Varieties, History, and Characteristics.
By HUGH DALZIEL, assisted by Eminent Fanciers. NEW
EDITION, Revised and Enlarged. Illustrated with First- class
COLOURED PLATES and full-page Engravings of Dogs of the
Day. This is the fullest and most recent work on the various breeds of dogs kept in England. In two Volumes, Demy 8vo,
cloth gilt, price 10s. 6d. each, as follows :
Dogs Used in Field Sports. Containing Particulars of the following, among other Breeds : Greyhound, Irish Wolfhound,
Bloodhound, Foxhound, Harrier, Basset, Dachshund, Pointer,
Setters, Spaniels, and Retrievers. SEVEN COLOURED PLATES and
21 full- page Engravings.
Dogs Useful to Man in other Work than Field Sports ;
House and Toy Dogs. Containing Particulars of the following,
among other Breeds : Collie, Bulldog, Mastiff, St. Bernard, Newfoundland, Great Dane, Fox and all other Terriers, King Charles
and Blenheim Spaniels, Pug, Pomeranian, Poodle, Italian Greyhound,
Toy Dogs, &c. , &c. COLOURED PLATES and full-page Engravings.
DOGS, DISEASES OF : Their Causes, Symptoms, and
Treatment ; Modes of Administering Medicines ; Treatment in cases of Poisoning, &c. For the use of Amateurs. By HUGH DALZIEL. Second Edition. Inpaper, price is.; in cloth gilt, 2s.
DUCKS AND GEESE : Their Characteristics, Points, and
Management. Splendidly Illustrated. In paper, price 1s. 6d.
ENGRAVINGS AND THEIR VALUE. Containing_a
Dictionary of all the Greatest Engravers and their Works.
J. H. SLATER, Author of " The Library Manual,” " Book Prices
Current," &c. In cloth gilt, price 7s. 6d.
EXHIBITION ACCOUNT BOOKS. For use at all Dog,
Poultry, Rabbit, and Cage Bird Shows. In Four Books, comprising :
I. Minute Book ; II. Cash Book ; III . Entries Book ; IV. Ledger.
With Full Directions, and Illustrative Examples for Working them.
N.B.-The Set of Four Books is kept in Three Series : No. 1 ,
** All Books Post Free.
By
170, Strand, London, W.C. 5
for Show of 500 Entries, 5s. the Set ; No. 2, for 1000 Entries, 7s. 6d.
the Set ; and No. 3, for 1500 Entries, 12s. 6d. the Set. Larger sizes in proportion. The books can be had separate. MINUTE
BOOK-No. I , IS.; No. 2, Is. 3d.; No. 3, 25. CASH BOOKNo. 1 , 25.; No. 2, 2s. 6d. ; No. 3, 4s. ENTRIES BOOK-No. 1 , 25.;
No. 2, 2s. 6d. ; No. 3, 4s. Ledger-No. 1 , 2s. ; No. 2, 2s. 6d. ; No. 3, 4s,
FANCY WORK SERIES, ARTISTIC. A Series of Illus
trated Manuals on Artistic and Popular Fancy Work of various
kinds. Each number is complete in itself, and issued at the uniform
price of 6d. Now ready-( 1) MACRAMÉ LACE ( Second Edition) ;
(2) PATCHWORK ; ( 3 ) TATTING ; (4) Crewel Work ; ( 5 ) ApplIQUÉ ;
(6) FANCY NETTING.
FERNS, CHOICE BRITISH. Descriptive of the most
beautiful Variations from the common forms, and their Culture. By
C. T. DRUERY, F.L.S. Very accurate PLATES, and other Illus- trations. In cloth gilt, price 2s. 6d.
FERRETS AND FERRETING. Containing Instructions for
the Breeding, Management, and Working of Ferrets. Second Edition,
Re-written and greatly Enlarged. Illustrated . In paper, price 6d.
FERTILITY OF EGGS CERTIFICATE. These are
Forms of Guarantee given by the Sellers to the Buyers of Eggs for
Hatching, undertaking to refund value of any unfertile eggs, or to
replace them with good ones. Very valuable to sellers of eggs, as
they induce purchases. In books, with counterfoils, price 6d.
FIREWORK- MAKING FOR AMATEURS. A complete, accurate, and easily- understood work on Making Simple and
High- class Fireworks. By Dr. W. H. BROWNE, M.A. Price 2s. 6d.
FOX TERRIER STUD BOOK. Vol. I. , containing the
Pedigree of every Fox Terrier that Won a Prize at any of the
Principal Shows in 1888. Over 1400 Entries of Leading Dogs.
Edited by HUGH DALZIEL. In cloth, price 2s. 6d.
Vol. II., containing Pedigrees of 1544 dogs, including the
principal Prize Winners in 1889 and up to Feb. 28, 1890, with Notes,
Corrections, Extensions of Pedigrees, in Vol. I. , Show Record ;
Entries for the Fox Terrier Club's Challenge Cups, the Fox Terrier Derby and Open Produce Stakes, and the Isle of Wight and New
Forest Fox Terrier Club's Stakes, 1890 ; and List of Fox Terrier
Clubs. In cloth, price 3s. 6d.
FOX TERRIER, THE. Its History, Points, Breeding,
Rearing, Preparing for Exhibition, and Coursing. By HUGH
DALZIEL. Illustrated. Price Is.; cloth, 2s.
GAME AND GAME SHOOTING, NOTES ON. Miscellaneous Observations on Birds and Animals, and on the Sport
they afford for the Gun in Great Britain, including Grouse, Partridges,
Pheasants, Hares, Rabbits, Quails, Woodcocks, Snipe, and Rooks.
By J. J. MANLEY, M.A. Illustrated. In cloth gilt, 400pp. , price 7s. 6d.
GAME PRESERVING, PRACTICAL. Containing the
fullest Directions for Rearing and Preserving both Winged and Ground Game, and Destroying Vermin ; with other Information of
Value to the Game Preserver. Illustrated. By WILLIAM CARNEGIE.
In cloth gilt, demy 8vo, price 21s.
** All Books Post Free.
6 Published by L. Upcott Gill,
GARDENING, DICTIONARY OF. A Practical Encyclo- pædia of Horticulture, for Amateurs and Professionals. Illustrated
with 2440 Engravings. Edited by G. NICHOLSON, Curator
of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew ; assisted by Prof. Trail,
M.D., Rev. P. W. Myles, B.A., F.L.S., W. Watson, J. Garrett,
and other Specialists. In 4 vols., large post 4to. Vol. I. ,
A to E, 552pp, 743 Illustrations ; Vol. II. , F to O, 544pp. ,
811 Illustrations ; Vol. III. , P to S, 537pp. , 564 Illustrations ;
Vol. IV. , T to Z, and Supplement of Pronouncing Dictionary,
Indices to Plants for Special Purposes, Recent Introductions,
&c., 608 pp. , 322 Illustrations. Price 15s. each. In Monthly Parts,
price 2s. 6d.
GARDEN PESTS AND THEIR ERADICATION.
Containing Practical Instructions for the Amateur to overcome the
Enemies of the Garden. Illustrated. In paper, price IS.
GOAT, BOOK OF THE. Containing Full Particulars of the
various Breeds of Goats, and their Profitable Management. With many Plates. By H. STEPHEN HOLMES PEGLER. Third Edition,
with Engravings and Coloured Frontispiece. Cloth gilt, price 4s. 6d.
GOAT-KEEPING
FOR AMATEURS
: Being the Practical Management
of Goats for Milking Purposes. Abridged from "The Book of the Goat. " Illustrated. In paper, price is.
GRAPE
GROWING
FOR AMATEURS. By E. MOLYNEUX. [In the press.
GREENHOUSE MANAGEMENT FOR AMATEURS.
Descriptions of the best Greenhouses and Frames, with Instructions
for Building them, particulars of the various methods of Heating, Illustrated Descriptions of the most suitable Plants, with general and
special Cultural Directions, and all necessary information for the
Guidance of the Amateur. Second Edition, Revised and Enlarged.
Magnificently Illustrated. By W. J. MAY. In cloth gilt,
price 5s.
GREYHOUND, THE : Its History, Points, Breeding,
Rearing, Training, and Running. By HUGH DALZIEL. With
Coloured Frontispiece. In cloth gilt, demy 8vo, price 2s. 6d.
GUINEA PIG, THE, for Food, Fur, and Fancy. Illustrated
with Coloured Frontispiece and Engravings. An exhaustive book on the Varieties of the Guinea Pig, and its Management. By
C. CUMBERLAND, F.Z.S. In cloth gilt, price 2s. 6d.
HANDWRITING, CHARACTER INDICATED BY.
With Illustrations in Support of the Theories advanced taken from
Autograph Letters of Statesmen, Lawyers, Soldiers, Ecclesiastics ,
Authors, Poets, Musicians, Actors, and other persons. Second
Edition. By R. BAUGHAN. In cloth gilt, price 2s. 6d.
HARDY PERENNIALS and Old-fashioned Garden Flowers.
Descriptions, alphabetically arranged, of the most desirable Plants for Borders, Rockeries and Shrubberies, including
Foliage as well as Flowering Plants. Profusely Illustrated.
By J. WOOD. In cloth price 5s.
** All Books Post Free.
170, Strand, London, W.C. 7
HOLIDAY HOMES, INEXPENSIVE. Giving particulars
of how to live in our leisure periods almost where we please, in a
cheap, comfortable, quick erected, and withal comfortable house,
which can be removed if necessary without much expense. In stiff
paper cover, price is.
HOME MEDICINE AND SURGERY : A Dictionary
of Diseases and Accidents, and their proper Home Treatment.
For Family Use. By W. J. MACKENZIE, M.D., Medical Officer
for Lower Holloway, Medical Referee for North London of the Scottish Provincial Assurance Company, late Lecturer to the St. John's Ambulance Association, Author of " The Medical Management of Children," &c. Illustrated. In cloth, price 2s. 6d.
HORSE- KEEPER, THE PRACTICAL. By GEORGE
FLEMING, LL.D., F.R.C.V.S., Principal Veterinary Surgeon of the Army. Price 3s. 6d.
HORSE-KEEPING FOR AMATEURS. A Practical
Manual on the Management of Horses, for the guidance of those who keep them for their personal use. By Fox RUSSELL.
Price Is.; cloth, 2s.
HORSES, DISEASES OF : Their Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment. For the use of Amateurs. By HUGH DALZIEL. In
paper, price is.; cloth, 2s.
INLAND WATERING PLACES. A Description of the
Spas of Great Britain and Ireland, their Mineral Waters, and their
Medicinal Value, and the attractions which they offer to Invalids
and other Visitors. Illustrated. In cloth, price 2s. 6d.
JOURNALISM, PRACTICAL : How to Enter Thereon and
Succeed. A book for all who think of " writing for the Press." By
JOHN DAWSON. In cloth gilt, price 2s. 6d.
LEGAL PROFESSION, A GUIDE TO THE. A Practical Treatise on the various Methods of Entering either Branch of
the Legal Profession ; also a Course of Study for each of the
Examinations, and selected Papers of Questions ; forming a Complete Guide to every Department of Legal Preparation. By J. H.
SLATER, Barrister-at- Law, of the Middle Temple. Price 7s. 6d.
LIBRARY MANUAL, THE. A Guide to the Formation
of a Library and the Valuation of Rare and Standard Books.
By J. H. SLATER, Barrister- at- Law. Third Edition. Revised
and Greatly Enlarged. [In the press.
LILY OF THE VALLEY : All About It, and How to Grow
It ; Forced Indoors and Out of Doors, in Various Ways. By WILLIAM ROBERTS. In paper covers, price 6d.
MEDITERRANEAN WINTER RESORTS. A Practical Handbook to the Principal Health and Pleasure Resorts on the Shores of the Mediterranean. By E. A. R. BALL. With a Map and
27 Illustrations. Fcap. 8vo, price 3s. 6d.
MICE, FANCY: Their Varieties, Management, and Breeding.
Re- issue, with Criticisms and Notes by DR. CARTER BLAKE.
Illustrated. In paper, price 6d.
** All Books Post Free.
8 Published by L. UPCOTT GILL,
MODEL YACHTS AND BOATS : Their Designing, Making,
and Sailing. Illustrated with 118 Designs and Working Diagrams.
A splendid book for boys and others interested in making and rigging
toy boats for sailing. It is the best book on the subject now published. By J. DU V. GROSVENOR. In leatherette, price 5s.
MONKEYS, NOTES ON PET, and How to Manage Them.
Profusely Illustrated. By ARTHUR PATTERSON. Cloth gilt, price 2s. 6d.
MUSHROOM CULTURE FOR AMATEURS. With
Full Directions for Successful Growth in Houses, Sheds, Cellars,
and Pots, on Shelves, and Out of Doors. Illustrated. By W. J.
MAY. In paper, price Is.
NATURAL HISTORY SKETCHES among the Car- nivora - Wild and Domesticated ; with Observations on their
Habits and Mental Faculties. By ARTHUR NICOLS, F.G.S.,
F.R.G.S. Illustrated. In cloth gilt, price 5s.
NEEDLEWORK, DICTIONARY OF. An Encyclopædia
of Artistic, Plain, and Fancy Needlework ; Plain, practical,
complete, and magnificently Illustrated. By S. F. A. CAULFEILD
and B. C. SAWARD. Accepted by H.M. the Queen, H.R.H. the
Princess of Wales, H.R.H. the Duchess of Edinburgh, H.R.H. the
Duchess ofConnaught, and H.R.H. the Duchess ofAlbany Dedicated
byspecial permission to H.R.H. Princess Louise, Marchioness of Lorne.
In demy 4to, 528pp. , 829 Illustrations, extra cloth gilt, plain edges,
cushioned bevelled boards, price 21s.; with COLOURED PLATES
elegantsatin brocade cloth binding, and coloured edges, 31s. 6d.
ORCHIDS : THEIR CULTURE AND MANAGEMENT, with Descriptions of all the Kinds in General Cultivation.
Illustrated by Coloured Plates and Engravings. By W. WATSON,
Assistant- Curator, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew ; Assisted by
W. BEAN, Foreman, Royal Gardens, Kew. In handsome binding,
gilt edges, price 15s. 6d.
PAINTING, DECORATIVE. A Practical Handbook on
Painting and Etching upon Textiles, Pottery, Porcelain, Paper,
Vellum, Leather, Glass, Wood, Stone, Metals, and Plaster, for the
Decoration of our Homes. By B. C. SAWARD. Cheap Edition, price 5s.
PARROTS, THE SPEAKING. The Art of Keeping and
Breeding the principal Talking Parrots in Confinement. By Dr. KARL RUSS. Illustrated with COLOURED PLATES and
Engravings. In cloth gilt, price 5s.
PATIENCE, GAMES OF, for one or more Players. A
very clearly-written and well-illustrated Book of Instructions on How
to Play all the different Games of Patience. By Miss WHITMORE JONES. Illustrated. Series I., thirty-nine games, Is. ; Series II.,
thirty-four games, Is. The two bound together in cloth, price 2s. 6d.
PHEASANT- KEEPING FOR AMATEURS. A Practical Handbook on the Breeding, Rearing, and General Management
of Fancy Pheasants in Confinement. By GEO. HORNE. Illustrated
with Diagrams of the necessary Pens, Aviaries, &c. , and a
** All Books Post Free.
170, Strand, London, W.C. 9
COLOURED FRONTISPIECE and many full- page Engravings of
the chief Varieties of Pheasants, drawn from life by A. F. LYDON.
In cloth gilt, price 3s. 6d.
PIANOFORTES, TUNING AND REPAIRING. The
Amateur's Guide to the Practical Management of a Piano without the intervention of a Professional. By CHARLES BABBINGTON.
In paper, price 6d.
PHOTOGRAPHY (MODERN) FOR AMATEURS.
By J. EATON FEARN. In paper, price Is.
PICTURE- FRAME MAKING FOR AMATEURS.
Being Practical Instructions in the Making of various kinds of Frames for Paintings, Drawings, Photographs, and Engravings.
Illustrated. By the REV. J. LUKIN. Cheap Edition, in paper, price Is.
PIG, BOOK OF THE. Containing the Selection, Breeding,
Feeding, and Management of the Pig ; the Treatment of its Diseases ; the Curing and Preserving of Hams, Bacon, and other Pork Foods ; and other information appertaining to Pork Farming.
By Professor JAMES LONG. Fully Illustrated with Portraits of Prize Pigs by HARRISON WEIR and other Artists, Plans of Model Piggeries, &c. In cloth gilt, price 10s. 6d.
PIGEONS, FANCY. Containing Full Directions for the
Breeding and Management of Fancy Pigeons, and Descriptions of every known Variety, together with all other information of interest
or use to Pigeon Fanciers. Third Edition , bringing the subject down to the present time. 18 COLOURED PLATES, and 22 other
full-page Illustrations. By J. C. LYELL. In cloth gilt, price 10s. 6d.
POKER BOOK, THE. A Practical Book on Playing the
Fascinating American Game of Poker with Success. By R. GUERN- DALE. In paper, price Is.
POOL, GAMES OF. Describing Various English and American Pool Games, and giving the Rules in full . Illustrated. In paper,
price Is.
POULTRY AND PIGEON DISEASES : Their Causes,
Symptoms, and Treatment. A Practical Manual for all Fanciers.
By QUINTIN CRAIG and JAMES LYELL. In paper, price 1s.
POULTRY FOR PRIZES AND PROFIT. Contains :
Breeding Poultry for Prizes, Exhibition Poultry, and Management
ofthe Poultry Yard. Handsomely Illustrated. New Edition, Revised
and Enlarged. By Professor JAMES LONG. Cheap Edition, in cloth gilt, price 2s. 6d.
RABBIT, BOOK OF THE. A Complete Work on Breeding and Rearing all Varieties of Fancy Rabbits, giving their History,
Variations, Uses, Points, Selection, Mating, Management, &c. , &c.
NEW EDITION, Revised and Enlarged. Edited by KEMPSTER W. KNIGHT, With an additional chapter on "Hutch Rabbit
Farming in the Open," by MAJOR MORANT. Illustrated with Coloured and other Plates. One handsome vol. , price 10s. 6d.
** All Books Post Free.
10 Published by L. UPCOTT GILL,
RABBITS, DISEASES OF: Their Causes, Symptoms, and
Cure. With a Chapter on THE DISEASES OF CAVIES. Reprinted from " The Book of the Rabbit " and " The Guinea Pig for Food, Fur,
and Fancy." In paper, price Is.
RABBIT- FARMING, PROFITABLE. A Practical Manual,
showing how Hutch Rabbit-farming in the Open can be made to
Pay Well. By Major G. F. MORANT. In paper, price Is.
RABBITS FOR PRIZES AND PROFIT. Containing
Full Directions for the Proper Management of Fancy Rabbits in
Health and Disease, for Pets or the Market, and Descriptions of every known Variety, with Instructions for Breeding Good Specimens Illustrated. By CHARLES RAYSON. In cloth gilt, price 2s. 6d.
Also in Sections, as follows : —
Rabbits, General Management of. Including Hutches,
Breeding, Feeding, Diseases and their Treatment, Rabbit Coverts, &c.
Fully Illustrated. Inpaper, price is.
Rabbits, Exhibition. Being descriptions of all Varieties of
Fancy Rabbits, their Points of Excellence, and how to obtain them.
Illustrated. In paper, price Is.
REPOUSSÉ WORK FOR AMATEURS: Being the Art
of Ornamenting Thin Metal with Raised Figures. By L. L. HASLOPE.
Illustrated. In cloth gilt, price 2s. 6d.
ROSES FOR AMATEURS.
Practical Instructions
A Practical Guide to the
Selection and Cultivation of the best Roses, both for Exhibition or
mere Pleasure, by that large section of the Gardening World, the Amateur Lover of Roses. Illustrated. By the REV. J. HONYWOOD
D'OMBRAIN, Hon. Sec. of the National Rose Society. Price Is.
ST. BERNARD, THE. Its History, Points, Breeding, and Rearing. By HUGH DALZIEL. Illustrated. In cloth, price 2s. 6d.
SANITARY AIDS FOR HOUSE-HUNTERS : What
to Look For and What to Avoid. By H. W. Crosse, Associate
of the Sanitary Institute, &c. In paper, price 6d.
SEA- FISHING FOR AMATEURS.
to Visitors at Seaside Places for Catching Sea- Fish from Pier- heads,
Shore, or Boats, principally by means of Hand Lines, with a very useful List of Fishing Stations, the Fish to be caught there, and the
Best Seasons. By FRANK HUDSON. Illustrated. In paper, price Is.
SEASIDE WATERING PLACES. A Description of
nearly 200 Holiday Resorts on the Coasts of England and Wales,
the Channel Islands, and the Isle of Man, including the gayest and most quiet places, giving full particulars of them and their attractions,
and all other information likely to assist persons in selecting places in which to spend their Holidays according to their individual tastes ;
with BUSINESS DIRECTORY of Tradesmen, arranged in order of the Towns. Sixth Edition. Illustrated. In cloth, price 2s. 6d.
SHEET METAL, WORKING IN : Being Practical In- structions for Making and Mending Small Articles in Tin, Copper,
Iron, Zinc, and Brass. Illustrated. Third Edition. By the Rev.
J. LUKIN, B.A. In paper, price 6d.
** All Books Post Free.
170, Strand, London, W.C. 11
SHORTHAND, ON GURNEY'S SYSTEM (IMPROVED), LESSONS IN : Being Instructions in the Art of
Shorthand Writing as used in the Service of the two Houses
of Parliament. By R. E. MILLER. In paper, price 1s.
SHORTHAND, EXERCISES IN, for Daily Half Hours,
on a Newly-devised and Simple Method, free from the Labour of
Learning. Illustrated step by step. Being Part II. of " Lessons in
Shorthand on Gurney's System (Improved)." By R. E. MILLER.
Price 9d.
SHORTHAND SYSTEMS; WHICH IS THE BEST?
Being a Discussion, by various Experts, on the Merits and Demerits of all the principal Systems, with Illustrative Examples. Edited by THOMAS ANDERSON. In paper, price Is.
SICK NURSING AT HOME: Being Plain Directions and
Hints for the Proper Nursing of Sick Persons, and the Home Treatment of Diseases and Accidents in case of Sudden Emergencies. By S. F. A. CAULFEILD. In paper, price Is.; in cloth,
price 1s. 6d.
SLEIGHT OF HAND. A Practical Manual of Legerdemain for Amateurs and Others. New Edition, Revised and Enlarged.
Profusely Illustrated. By E. SACHS. Cloth gilt, price 6s. 6d.
SNAKES, MARSUPIALS, AND BIRDS. A Charming
Book of Anecdotes, Adventures, and Zoological Notes relating to Snakes, Marsupials, and Birds. A capital Book for Boys, and all interested in Popular Natural History. By ARTHUR NICOLS, F.G.S.,
F.R.G.S., &c. Illustrated. Price 5s.
TAXIDERMY, PRACTICAL. A Manual of Instruction to
the Amateur in Collecting, Preserving, and Setting-up Natural
History Specimens of all kinds. Fully Illustrated with Examples and Working Diagrams. By MONTAGU BROWNE, F.Z.S.,
Curator of Leicester Museum. Second Edition. In cloth gilt,
price 7s. 6d.
THAMES GUIDE BOOK. From Lechlade to Richmond.
For Boating Men, Anglers, Picnic Parties, and all Pleasure- seekers
on the River. Arranged on an entirely new plan. Second Edition,
profusely illustrated. In paper, price is. ; in cloth, price 2s.
TOMATO CULTURE FOR AMATEURS. By B. C.
RAVENSCROFT. Illustrated . In paper, price is.
TOURIST'S ROUTE MAP of England and Wales. The
Third Edition ; thoroughly Revised. Shows clearly all the
Main, and most of the Cross, Roads, and the Distances between
the Chief Towns, as well as the Mileage from London. In addition
to this, Routes of Thirty of the most Interesting Tours are printed in
red. The Map is mounted on linen, and is the fullest, handiest, and
best tourist's map in the market. In cloth, price Is.
** All Books Post Free.
12 Published by L. UPCOTT GILL, 170, Strand, London, W.C.
TRAPPING, PRACTICAL: Being some Papers on Traps.
and Trapping for Vermin, with a Chapter on General Bird Trapping and Snaring. By W. CARNEGIE. In paper, price Is
TURNING FOR AMATEURS: Being Descriptions of the
Lathe and its Attachments and Tools, with Minute Instructions
for their Effective Use on Wood, Metal, Ivory, and other Materials.
New Edition, Revised and Enlarged. By JAMES LUKIN, B.A.
Illustrated with 144 Engravings. In cloth gilt, price 2s. 6d.
TURNING LATHES. A Manual for Technical Schools and
Apprentices. A Guide to Turning, Screw- cutting, Metal- Spinning,
&c. Edited by JAMES LUKIN, B.A. Third Edition. With 194
Illustrations. In cloth gilt, price 3s.
VEGETABLE CULTURE FOR AMATEURS.
taining Concise Directions for the Cultivation of Vegetables in Small Gardens so as to insure Good Crops. With Lists of the Best
Varieties of each Sort. By W. J. MAY. Illustrated. Illustrated
wrapper, price Is.
VIOLINS (OLD) AND THEIR MAKERS: Including
some References to those of Modern Times. By JAMES M. FLEMING. Illustrated with Facsimiles of Tickets, Sound Holes, &c.
Reprinted by Subscription. In cloth, price 7s. 6d.
VIOLIN SCHOOL, PRACTICAL, for Home Students. A
Practical Book of Instructions and Exercises in Violin Playing,
for the use of Amateurs, Self- learners, Teachers, and others With
a Supplement on " Easy Legato Studies for the Violin." By
J. M. FLEMING. I handsome vol. , demy 4to, half Persian, price
9s. 6d. Without Supplement, price 7s. 6d.
WAR MEDALS AND DECORATIONS. A Manual
for Collectors and for all who are interested in the Achievements of the British Army and Navy, and the Rewards issued
in public recognition of them ; with some account of Civil Rewards
for Valour. Beautifully Illustrated. Price 7s. 6d.
WATERING PLACES OF FRANCE, NORTHERN.
A Guide for English People to the Holiday Resorts on the Coasts
of the French Netherlands, Picardy, Normandy, and Brittany. By
ROSA BAUGHAN. In paper, price 2s.
WOOD CARVING FOR AMATEURS. Containing Descriptions of all the requisite Tools, and Full Instructions for their
Use in producing different varieties of Carvings. Illustrated. In
paper, price IS.
London : L. UPCOTT GILL, 170, Strand, W.C.
BOOKS PUBLISHED BY HORACE COX
AT THE " FIELD " OFFICE, 346, STRAND, LONDON, W.C.
FOURTH EDITION. In post 8vo, limp cloth, gilt, price 2s. 6d. , by post 2s. 8d.
THE ART OF SKATING; With Illustrations, Diagrams, and Plain Directions for the Acquirement of the Most Difficult and Graceful Movements. By GEORGE ANDERSON ( " Cyclos "), Vice- President of the Crystal Palace Skating Club, and for many years President of the Glasgow Skating Club.
THIRD EDITION. Price 78. 6d. , by post 78. 10d.
FIGURE SKATING; Being the Theory and Practice of the Art as Developed in England, with a Glance at its Origin and History. By H. C. VANDERVELL and T. MAXWELL WITHAM (Members of the London Skating Club). There are thousands of skaters who attain a small amount of skill in Figure Skating, and there stop, because they neither know what to do, or how to do it. A reference to this, the acknowledged Text Book of Figure Skating, will solve any difficulty that may have stopped progress for years. It now includes all the new Figures, with the new nomenclature which has been authorised by the Skating Club.
Price 8d. , by post 9d.
THE “ FIELD ” LAWN TENNIS UMPIRES' SCORE- SHEET BOOK (Sixty Sets), with Instructions for the Use of Umpires. Adapted for the Use of Umpires, as used at the Championship Meetings.
FOURTH EDITION. In demy 4to, on toned paper, and in fancy cover, price 2s. , by post 2s. 2d.
THE BOOK OF DINNER SERVIETTES contains a New Intro- duction on the Decoration of Dinner Tables, and General Directions for Folding the Serviettes. There are Twenty- one different kinds given, with Ninety-two Woodcuts illustrative of the various Folds required and the Serviettes complete.
Demy 8vo, price 5s. 6d. , by post 58. 10d.
HE ROTHAMSTED EXPERIMENTS ON THE GROWTH OF WHEAT BARLEY, AND THE MIXED HERBAGE OF GRASS LAND.
WILLIAM FREAM, B.Sc. Lond. , F.L.S. , F.G.S. , F.S.S
In demy 8vo, price 38. 6d. , by post 3s. 9d.
HINTS AuthorONof " THE A Handbook MANAGEMENT of British Birds, " "OFEssays HAWKS on Sport. andByNatural J. E. History HARTING. " ,
Price 1s., by post 1s. 2d. With Full- Page Coloured Illustration and Woodcuts.
PALLAS'S SAND GROUSE: Its Natural History, and a Plea for its Preservation. By W. B. TEGETMEIER.
THE RULES OF PIGEON SHOOTING. Published by Special Per- mission ; the Hurlingham Club and the Gun Club Rules of Pigeon Shooting. SECOND EDITION. Bound together in cloth, gilt edges, price 6d. , by post 7d.
THE LAWS OF LAWN TENNIS, as adopted by the Marylebone Cricket Club and the All England Croquet and Lawn Tennis Club. Entered at Stationers' Hall. Price 6d. , by post 64d.
66
FIELD" OFFICE,
346, STRAND, LONDON, W.C.
SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON & CO.'S
PUBLICATIONS.
HENRY M. STANLEY'S GREAT BOok.
IN DARKEST AFRICA,
Being the Official Publication recording the QUEST, RESCUE, and RETREAT of EMIN, Governor of Equatoria.
The Illustrations, numbering over 150, have all been made from Mr. Stanley's own Notes, Sketches, and Photographs, and are in the hands of the best English or French Draughtsmen, amongst whom are Mr. Sydney P. Hall, M. Montbard, M. Riou, Mr. Forrestier, and others. The Engraving is in the competent hands of Mr. J. D. Cooper and M. Barbant (of Paris). There will be three large Maps and fourteen smaller ones.
CONDITIONS OF PUBLICATION :
ORDINARY EDITION, 2 vols. demy 8vo, of over 500 pp, each, in handsome cloth binding, price TWO GUINEAS.
EDITION DE LUXE, of 250 copies for Great Britain, ALL SOLD.
ORDERS SHOULD BE GIVEN AT ONCE.
NEW AND CHEAPER EDITIONS OF MR. STANLEY'S BOOKS.
The Congo, and the Founding of its Free State : A Story of Work and Explora- tion. 2 vols. , demy 8vo. With over 100 full- page and smaller Illustrations, 2 large Maps, and several smaller ones. Cloth extra, 21s.
" Mr. Stanley may fairly boast of having given to the world two of the most remarkable books of travel and adventure. and this second work is in every respect by far the more interesting. "-Athenæum.
· .
How I Found Livingstone; including Four Months' Residence with Dr. Livingstone,
With Map and Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d.
* The Unabridged Edition, superior in paper and binding, and with the Original Maps, price 7s. 6d. , can still be obtained.
"It is incomparably more lively than most books of African travel. "-Saturday Review.
Through the Dark Continent; from the Indian to the Atlantic Ocean. With Map and Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d.
** The Unabridged Edition, superior in paper and binding, and with the Original Maps,
price 12s. 6d. , can still be obtained.
MyKalulu: Prince, King, and Slave. Crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d. ; gilt edges, 3s. 6d.
"The book is extraordinarily fascinating, and will be read by everyone, man or boy, with breathless interest, from cover to cover."-Penny Illustrated Paper.
LOW'S STANDARD NOVELS.
NEW AND CHEAPER ISSUE.
CROWN 8VO, FANCY BOARDS, 28.; CLOTH, UNIFORM, 2s. 6d.
Adela Cathcart. By GEORGE MAC- DONALD.
Cripps the Carrier. By R. D. BLACK- MORE.
Dred. By HARRIET BEECHER STOWE.
Daisies and Buttercups. By Mrs. RIDDELL.
Guild Court. By GEORGE MACDONALD.
Mary Anerley. By R. D. BLACKMORE.
The Mayor of Casterbridge. By THOMAS HARDY.
The Trumpet-Major. By THOMAS HARDY.
The Vasty Deep. By STUART CUMBER- LAND.
Clara Vaughan. By R. D. BLACKMORE.
Far from the Madding Crowd. By THOMAS HARDY.
Her Great Idea, and other Stories. By Mrs. WALFORD.
Lorna Doone. By R. D. BLACKMORE.
Some One Else. By Mrs. CROKER.
Senior Partner. By Mrs. RIDDELL.
The Guardian Angel. By OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES.
The Casting Away of Mrs. Lecks and Mrs. Aleshine ; and The Du- santes. By FRANK R. STOCKTON (Author of "Rudder Grange.")
*** To be followed by others.
ROWLAND'STOILET ARTICLES
Have been known for nearly 100 years to be the best which can be obtained ; the best articles are, in the long run, always the cheapest.
ROWLANDS MACASSAR OIL
FOR THE CROWTH,RESTORATION &FORBEAUTIFYINGTHEHUMAN HAIR
Price 3/6 Per Bottle
ROWLANDS' MACASSAR OIL
Is the best and safest preserver and beautifier of the hair, and has a most delicate and fragrant bouquet. It contains no lead or mineral ingredients, and can also be had in
A GOLDEN COLOUR
for fair and golden-haired children, and people whose hair has become grey.
Sizes : 3/6, 7/- ; 10/6, equal to four small.
ROWLANDS' KALYDOR
Is a most soothing emollient and refreshing preparation for the face, hands,
and arms. It removes all freckles, tan, sunburn, sting of insects, prickly heat,
chaps, redness, irritation and roughness of the skin, &c. , produces a beautiful and delicate complexion, and renders the
SKIN SOFT, FAIR,
and delicate ; it is warranted free from any greasy or metallic ingredients. Sizes,
4/6 and 8/6. Half-sized bottles at 2/3.
ROWLANDS' ODONTO
Is the best, purest, and most fragrant Tooth Powder; it prevents and arrests decay, strengthens the gums, gives a pleasing fragrance to the breath, and renders the
TEETH WHITE AND SOUND.
ROWLANDS' EUKONIA
Is a pure and delicate toilet powder, free from any bismuth or metallic ingredients.
Sold in three tints, white, rose, and cream, 2/6 per box. Ask for
ROWLANDS' ARTICLES,
of 20, HATTON GARDEN, LONDON, and avoid cheap, spurious imitations, under the same or similar names.
BY SPECIAL APPOINTMENT.
Purveyors by Special Warrants to H.M. THE QUEEN
and
H.R.H. THE PRINCE OF WALES. BY SPECIAL APPOINTMENT.
SPRATTS PATENT
MeatFibrine " Vegetable
DOG CAKES
(WITH BEETROOT).
BEWARE OF WORTHLESS IMITATIONS!
SEE EACH CAKE IS STAMPED
SPRATTS PATENT and a “ X.”
COD LIVER OIL
DOG CAKES.
For Puppies after Distemper, and for Dainty Feeders and Sick or Pet Dogs.
DISTEMPER POWDERS, WORM POWDERS, MANGE, ECZEMA,
and EAR CANKER LOTIONS, TONIC CONDITION PILLS, &c.
PAMPHLET ON CANINE DISEASES,
And full List of Medicines, Post Free.
Dog, Poultry, and Game Houses Appliances.
то POULTRY REARERS.
SPRATTS PATENT
POULTRY MEAL.
The Most Nutritious and Digestible Food for Chicks and Laying Hens (being thoroughly cooked). Samples Post Free.
New Edition of " THE COMMON SENSE of POULTRY KEEPING," 3d. , Post Free
GRANULATED PRAIRIE MEAT, "CRISSEL."
Price 25s. per cwt. Takes the Place of Insect Life.
"CARDIAC : " A TONIC FOR POULTRY.
Price 1s, per Packet, or 3s. per 71b. Bag.
GAME MEAL.
SAMPLE AND FULL PARTICULARS POST FREE.
With Spratts Extract from " THE FIELD" : "Thanks to Spratts Pheasant Meal and Crissel, I
have reduced the cost a great deal, and reared a considerably greater average.
Food they require no custards, ants' eggs, or, in fact, anything from hatching till they are turned in coverts and eat corn. "-CAREFUL SPORTSMAN.
66 The Common Sense of Pheasant Rearing , " 3d. , Post Free.
Spratts Patent, Limited, London, S.E.


