

UNIFORM WITH THIS VOLUME.
Post Svo, with numerous Illustrations. HOW TO LOOK AT PICTURES. By R. C. WITT, M.A. Third
Edition. With 40 Illustrations. 5-r. net. "This book, which we have read with great pleasure, shows that the author has both wide sympathy and knowledge, and it cannot but be largely helpful to those who wish to increase their interest in pictures. A better gift for people who are dimly
' fond of pictures,' but who regret that ' they know nothing about
them,' could not be found." Spectator. " One of the best books we have read on the knowledge and criticism of pic- tures." British Architect. HOW TO IDENTIFY OLD CHINA. By MRS. WILLOUGHBY
HODGSON. Third Edition. With 40 plates and numerous reproductions of marks. 5*. net. " The authoress . . . has a very thorough grip of her subject, and has been at great pains to supply just the information most needed by the amateur collector." Studio. "The description of each kind of ware is lucid: the examples chosen for
illustration are admirably typical. We have tested the value of the book in the only practical manner, and nave found it exceedingly useful." Morning Post.
' rThe information given is precisely what is needed, and is particularly well arranged, with a preliminary chapter of practical advice." Westminster
Gazette. HOW TO COLLECT OLD FURNITURE. By FREDERICK LITCHFIELD, Author of " Illustrated History of Furniture," etc. Second
Edition. With 40 plates and numerous illustrations in the text. 6j.net. "The book is, without question, the most interesting and informing guide that the modern passion for antique furniture has produced." Pall Mall Gazette. "Histories of furniture exist in abundance, but we know of no other book which will be of such use to the ordinary collector. Mr. Litchfield has had a long
experience of the ways of dealers, and he gives his readers the full benefit of it. The two chapters on
' Faked Furniture ' and ' Hints and Cautions ' are alone worth the price of the volume." Daily Chronicle. HOW TO IDENTIFY PORTRAIT MINIATURES. By G. C. WILLIAMSON, Lirr.D. With Chapters on How to Paint Miniatures, by ALYN WILLIAMS, R.B.A., A.R.C.A. Second Edition. With 40
plates illustrating upwards of 70 miniatures. 6s. net. "Contains much valuable information for the collector of examples of this form of art. The book is finely illustrated, and is enriched with chapters explaining technicalities and describing the special qualifications of a miniature painter." Morning Post. " By its arrangement and contents this most useful book will be found of the greatest assistance to the collector. ... In view of the revival of this fas- cinating art, some extremely helpful chapters on the practical side have been added by that distinguished miniaturist, Mr. Alyn Williams, which, with the admirable reproduction of characteristic examples, cannot fail to make this volume
a very valuable contribution to the literature of thesubject." St. Jantes'sGazette, LONDON: GEORGE BELL AND SONS, YORK HOUSE,
PORTUGAL STREET, W.C.
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
LONDON: GEORGE BKLL AND SONS PORTUGAL ST. LINCOLN'S INN, W.C. CAMBRIDGE : DEIGHTON, BELL & CO. NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN CO. BOMBAY: A. H. WHEELER & co.

FROM A FLEMISH MS. " HORAK " OF THE LATTER PART
OF THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY
\h'Kttispiece
HOW TO COLLECTBOOKS
BY
J. HERBERT SLATER
EDITOR OF "BOOK PRICES CURRENT," AUTHOR OF "EARLY EDITIONS,"
"THE ROMANCE OF BOOK-COLLECTING," "ENGRAVINGS AND THEIR VALUE," ETC.
LONDON
GEORGE BELL AND SONS
1905
CHISW1CK PRESS: CHARLES WHITTINGHAM AND CO. TCOKS COURT, CHANCERY LANE, LONDON.
College
Library
PREFACE
AN attempt is made in the following pages to
anticipate some of the questions most likely
to be asked by the collector of books at the com- mencement of his career. The treatise is in effect a handbook designed, and it is to be hoped
destined, so far as its limits extend, to let a little light upon the simpler phases of a subject which
in its more ambitious aspects is exceedingly complicated and beyond the power of any one to master in its entirety. All that can be done within
the limits of a single volume, dealing as this does
with a variety of subjects, is to touch the fringe
of each and to quote authorities capable of leading
the reader some further distance along his road
when he has taken leave of me. These authorities,
which are quoted in italics in the Index, are all of
excellent standing. They are for the most part
readily accessible and that also is an additional
point in their favour.
J. H. S.
Croydon, Surrey.
1222307

CONTENTS
CHAP. PAGE PREFACE v
I. HINTS TO BEGINNERS i The modern collector Necessity for rules The
Roxburghe Library Fashion in book-collecting
The question of cost Scarcity " Uncut " books
Original bindings and variations Binding parts or numbers Large and small paper copies " Limited
editions " Editions de Luxe Pedigrees of books
Buying to sell again Imperfect copies and odd
volumes.
II. SOME PRACTICAL DETAILS 17
Sizes of books Table of measurements of whole
sheets Diagrams showing method of folding
" Signatures
" Books printed on half sheets Judging size by catchwords, watermarks, waterlines, and
measurements Table of approximate measurements
of books The method of collation The " Orlando
Furioso" of 1584 Restoring books Damp Book- worms Grease marks Surface stains Ink, iron,
lead, and pencil marks Restoration of leather,
vellum, and cloth bindings.
III. MANUSCRIPTS 34
Manuscripts necessarily unique Their importance
and rarity The earliest existing manuscripts The
fate of ancient libraries Some early classical manuscripts Lost classics Corrupt texts Two main
classes of manuscripts Monastic manuscripts Judging the age of a manuscript Books to consult
Characteristics of the earliest manuscripts Psalters, vii
CONTENTS
CHAP. PAGE
bibles, and devotional books Chronicles, romances, and other works The collation of manuscripts
Different classes of devotional books The public
libraries. IV. PAPER AND PAPER MARKS 50
"Water marks" defined Useful sometimes in detecting fabrications The Ireland forgeries Unauthorized issues of books Byron's
" English Bards
and Scotch Reviewers" The Papyrus Leaves of palm, olive, and poplar Parchment Introduction
of paper into Europe and England The first English paper mill India and Japan papers Laid and wove papers Water or paper marks The oldest form of the " water mark " Various examples
Books of reference. V. THE TITLE-PAGE AND THE COLOPHON . 62
The earliest books were modelled on manuscripts
The " Mazarin " Bible The rubricators Colo- phons The evolution of the title-page " Label "
title-pages Half-titles The first English title-pages
The merits of the old title-pages John Bagford's
collection The "Paradise Lost" titles List of
Latinized place-names Roman numerals.
VI. INCUNABULA AND THE EARLY PRINTERS 78
Incunabula Xylography Blockbooks Wooden
types Donatuses Catho Early progress of the
printers' art The claims of Gutenberg and Coster -The "Indulgence" of Nicholas V The "Mazarin"
Bible Pfister's Bible The Psalter of 1457 Gutenberg and Fust Fust and Schoeffer Early presses in Germany in the Netherlands in Italy in France
in England William Caxton The Oxford Press Lettou and Machlinia The "Schoolmaster" of St Albans Printing in Scotland, Ireland, and
America Characteristics of early printed books.
VII. ILLUSTRATED BOOKS 94
Printed initial letters The first illustrated books
"Thymage or Myrrour of the World" "Gameand
viii
CONTENTS
CHAP. PAGE
Playe of the Chesse " The " Hypnerotomachia
" of 1499 Book illustration in England Hans
Holbein Halle's Chronicle Illustrations from
copper The earliest English examples Aims of
the collector The Bewicks Blake's works
The Earl of Crewe's collection Muir's facsimiles Bartolozzi and other Illustrators Rogers's
"
Italy
" and " Poems " The Liber Studiorum
The Liber Veritatis Rowlandson, the Cruikshanks, and others Kinds of illustrated books
chiefly in demand The " Drawing-room books " " Grangerizing
" Nicolas Ferrar Examples of " Extra-Illustrated
" books Printers' marks. VIII. SOME CELEBRATED PRESSES .... no
Specialist collectors The Aldine Press The Elzevir Presses The Estiennes The Plantin Press ErhardRatdolt Jenson TheJunta Geoffrey
Tory Etienne Dolet and Bodoni English print- ers John Daye Baskerville The Strawberry
Hill and other Presses The Kelmscott, Vale,
Doves, Essex House, and Walpole Presses Pri- vately printed books The importance of a collec- tion considered apart from the individual books
contained in it. IX. ON BOOKBINDING 129
Binding a protection Rebinding books Cloth
bindings of the present day Buckram Vellum
Boards Half bound books Monastic bindings The Byzantine style Dagaeus the Monk
The Saracenic style Early binding in Germany
and the Netherlands Early binding in Italy and
France The Fanfare and Pointille styles Binding in England The Winchester School The
cottage and Etruscan styles The Harleian and
Roxburghe styles Eighteenth and nineteenth
century binders Roger Payne Embroidered
bindings Decorated edges Edwards of Halifax Armorial bindings. X. GREAT COLLECTORS 147
Associations with the past Binding as evidence
ix
CONTENTS
of former ownership La Bruyere's " Fool " Lorenzo the Magnificent "Tho Maioli et Ami- corum
" Other Italian collectors Antonio Magliabecchi Jean Grolier The Golden Age of French collectors Henri II and Diane de Poictiers De Thou Gabriel Naud Cardinals
Richelieu and Mazarin Moliere "
Graille,"
"Coche," and "Loque" Marguerite d'Angouleme
Nodier and the later French School L'Abb<
Deseuil The English collectors Richard de Bury
The Royal Libraries The Earls of Arundel
and Leicester Later and modern collectors. XL AUCTION SALES AND CATALOGUES 166
The first book auctions Prices of books
Knowledge of their value essential Books of
reference Auction statistics and catalogues
Alphabetical list of the principal book sales held from 1800 to date Fluctuation in prices The
extent of the demand rules the price Booksellers' catalogues The principles of valuation Books
as an investment.
XII. EARLY EDITIONS AND STRANGE BOOKS 180
Why early editions are preferred The quality of illustrations Author's personal supervision Classes of books Tiny volumes Examples
Books printed from engraved plates On coloured
papers Books cut from paper Books on lead and palm leaves Chained books Condemned
books Curiously written books Lord Dexter's masterpiece Macaronic poetry Books bound in human skin Twin bindings First books on
given subjects.
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
PAGE PAGE OF MANUSCRIPT,
" BOOK OF HOURS," BY A FLEMISH
ILLUMINATOR OF THE LATTER PART OF THE FIFTEENTH
CENTURY Frontispiece
DIAGRAMS SHOWING THE FOLDING OF PAPER in the text 20-21 PAGES OF A FRENCH MS. "HORAE," LATTER PART OF
FIFTEENTH CENTURY 45
A PAPER MILL OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY .... 54
VARIETIES OF PAPER MARKS in the text 57-60
PAGE FROM THE SO-CALLED " MAZARIN BIBLE " ... 62
COLOPHON TO HIGDEN'S " POLYCHRONICON " PRINTED BY CAXTON IN 1482 64
" DIVES ET PAUPER," EARLIEST ENGLISH ILLUSTRATED
TITLE-PAGE 66
PAGE FROM A BLOCK BOOK 80
PORTIONS OF A DONATUS SUPPOSED BY DR. KLOSS TO BE THE EDITIO PRIMA, PROBABLY FROM TYPES CAST PRIOR
TO 1450 82
THE 3i-LiNE
" INDULGENCE" OF NICHOLAS V, 1455 84
PAGE FROM FUST AND SCHOEFFER'S PSALTER OF 1457 . 86
PAGE FROM THE " NOVA RHETORICA " (ST. ALBANS), 1480 90
WOODCUTS FROM THE "COMPILATIO DE ASTRORUM
SCIENTIA," 1489 in the text 97
PAGE FROM THE " GAME AND PLAYE OF THE CHESSE" BY CAXTON, circa 1481 98
PRINTER'S MARK OF ANDRO MYLLAR . . in the text 107
THE COUPLED SHIELD OF FUST AND SCHOEFFER ,, 109
PAGE FROM THE VIRGIL OF 1501 (ALDUS), PROBABLY
THE FIRST BOOK PRINTED IN ITALICS 112 PAGE FROM THE FIRST BOOK PRINTED BY ALDUS, 1495 . 114
xi
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
PAGE MARKS OF THE ALDINE PRESS . . . . in the text 114-117 MARKS OF THE ELZEVIRS in the text 120
PAGE FROM BASKERVILLE'S GREEK TESTAMENT, 1763 . 124
SPECIMEN OF BYZANTINE BINDING 134
BINDING. THE "STRAP-WORK" DESIGN 136
SECTION OF BINDING TOOLED d la Fanfare 138
BINDING SHOWING THE Pointille STYLE 138
A "COTTAGE" BINDING 140
SECTION OF A BINDING BY ROGER PAYNE 142 BOOK FROM THE LIBRARY OF MAIOLI 148
BINDING FROM THE LIBRARY OF CANEVARI 150
A GROLIER BINDING 152 BOOK FROM THE LIBRARY OF MARIE DE MfiDICIS . . 154
BINDING OF HENRI II AND DIANE DE POITIERS . . . 156
BINDING OF THE OLD PRETENDER 162
PAGE FROM THE PRICED CATALOGUE OF THE ROXBURGHE
SALE, 1812 in the text 170
ACTUAL SIZE OF SOME OF THE SMALLEST BOOKS (DIAGRAM) in the text 187
A TWIN BINDING, OR BINDING dos d dos . . in the text 196
XII
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
CHAPTER I HINTS TO BEGINNERS
The modern collector Necessity for rules The Roxburghe
Library Fashion in book-collecting The question of cost Scarcity "Uncut" books Original bindings and variations Binding parts or numbers Large and small paper copies " Limited editions " Editions de Luxe Pedigrees of books
Buying to sell again Imperfect copies and odd volumes. A
BOOK intended primarily for the guidance
of the amateur may conveniently commence
with observations of a general character suitable
to its object, which is to compress into as small a compass as possible, having regard to the extensive
and complicated nature of the subject, the principles which should actuate the inexperienced collector of books. One might almost be excused for
supposing that collectors of literary works would
by this time have but little to learn ; that the ex- perience of many years, transmitted as it has been
from one generation to another, would supply all that is necessary to enable them to set about their
task in a thoroughly practical and confident manner, but this is in truth very far from being the
case, chiefly, no doubt, because the necessary information is contained in innumerable volumes,
I B
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
many of them of a highly technical nature, and
almost all written, not so much for amateurs as for
bibliographers, or for those who are, at any rate,
some way advanced along the long road that has
literally no end. These books are, for the most
part, contributions to some particular branch of
a great subject, and only guides, as it were, from one stage of the journey to another.
One of the first things to strike the amateur is the truism that as times change, so books have
their day also, some classes being in greater request
than others at different periods. There is also
much to be learned with regard to condition, binding, and other details which are very apt to be
overlooked, though they are in realityof the greatest
importance in these days of fine distinctions. Thebook-collector of the present age is fettered by
rule and confined by necessity. The rule he maybreak, though only at his own heavy cost; the
necessity he must submit to whether he will or no.
It is the intensely practical necessity of limiting
his requirements to a compass which is but narrow when compared with what it might be, for books
are so numerous, and many of them so difficult to
acquire that he must have something of the specialist about him if he would be a collector in the
modern acceptation of the term. These and
many other points require elucidation before they can be thoroughly grasped, and much needs to
be said regarding them, elementary though they
may appear to be.
We commence, then, by reminding the reader
that there are two main divisions of bibliography.
The first treats of books with reference to their
form, degrees of rarity, the history of particular
HINTS TO BEGINNERS
copies or editions, and the prices that can be got
for them their money value, in fact. The second
is concerned with their substance, their contents,
and a critical judgement of their merits. With
bibliography in the second of its aspects we have
nothing to do in this volume, except, of course,
incidentally, for it is true that merit is generally
the primary point to be considered in questions
affecting the importance of a book. Scarcity, ir- respective of merit or in spite of the want of it, sometimes works wonders, but not in the majority
of cases. Rather should we regard scarcity as an
auxiliary to recognized merit, and of little import- ance in itself. Some books are very scarce in the sense of being difficult to meet with when wanted,
but if nobody wants them they are not in an improved position on that account.
Collections of books are usually quite different
in their scope and character from what they were
but, let us say, a century ago. At that time a
library was regarded as being good only to the
extent of its capacity for answering the questions
that might be addressed to it. An ideal library of
that day would have been composed of standard
works of reference upon every imaginable subject, so that the owner would not need to go elsewhere
in search of information. An example of a library of
this miscellaneous and useful character, though it contained many books which were then very scarce,
and have since become excessively so, is furnished
by the great collection formed by John, Duke of
Roxburghe, which was sold by auction in 1 8 1 2. The
bulky catalogue comprises books in every department of literature, and most of these had evidently
been collected on a well-defined and settled plan,
3
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
with an eye to utility. From internal evidence it seems probable that the Duke followed the elaborate system disclosed by the catalogues of Gabriel
Martin, to which Brunet afterwards had recourse. Martin, who died in 1761, had assimilated the
systems of Gabriel Naude (1643), Christofle de
Savigny (1587), FlorianTrefler (1560), and Conrad
Gesner( 1 548), themselves followersofAldus Manutius, who, in 1 498, issuedapriced catalogue of Greekbooks, distributed in five classes, said to be the
first of its kind ever issued. This small catalogue,
printed on a single leaf, contains but fourteen entries, but it is nevertheless extremely important, for
it set an example that was afterwards followed bymany other printers whose lists will be found in the
second and third volumes of Maittaire's " Annales
Typographic}." The classification of books, whenextensively carried out, is really a classification of
learning, and was so recognized by Achard in his " Cours Elementaire de Bibliographic." Gesner,
above named, long dreamed of, and actually commenced, a
" Bibliotheca Universalis," or universal
catalogue of books, but his life was too short, as would be that of any man who essayed so arduous
a task, and his work is but a fragment. An ac- cessible classification is, however, elaborated in
the first volume of Home's " Introduction to the
Study of Bibliography," and Brunet presents us with a very detailed scheme in his " Manuel duLibraire."
Were the Duke of Roxburghe alive now hewould, in all probability, be a specialist; he wouldfollow the fashion, for there is a fashion in bookcollecting as in most other pursuits, and it is, moreover, continually changing. The great Dibdin was4
HINTS TO BEGINNERS
pained whenever he thought of the disrespect that
was slowly but surely dogging really good and
scholarly editions of the Classics. He has been
dead nearly sixty years, and matters have grown
much worse in this respect since his day. Cheap
foreign reprints, often on thoroughly bad paper,
and full of textual inaccuracies, are the supplanters
of his old companions. A study of catalogues and a comparison of the
prices paid for books of different classes at different
periods would show, as in a mirror, the frolics of
fashion and caprice. During the seventeenth century, works of a religious character are noticeable as having formed the staple of all important libraries;
the Greek and Latin Classics also contributing to
form a solid foundation. By degrees the ponderous
works of the Fathers become less and less noticeable, but the Classics remain, and, with them, a
sprinkling of other instructive books, lexicons,
grammars, and so forth. Then follow the libraries
of general utility, and all this time there was
apparently little thought of market values, which
were, in truth, small enough in most cases. The
English Classics came next, and in their train
the works of the minor dramatists and poets who
abounded in Elizabethan times and later. In our day we see all but the very early editions
of the Greek and Latin Classics almost entirely
ignored ; the polemical works of the Fathers are
of no account; the lexicons and grammars are not
wanted. There may be, and are, exceptional books
in each of these classes, but their existence serves no more useful purpose than to prove the rule. In
these and other cases fashion, very gradually, but none the less surely, discarded whole classes of
5
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
books in favour of others, which, for a time, took
their place till they too were ousted in their turn. The collectorwill now see the necessity of makinghis position as sure as possible, for, although hemay acquire a collection, he cannot form a library
unless he proceeds upon some definite and well
digested plan. His object should be to secure
copies of the best editions of the best writers an
enterprise demanding knowledge, judgement, andtaste, rather than wealth. He may perhaps think
that the change of fashion, hitherto spoken of, has
been universal rather than in detail. But fashion
moves with concentric sweeps ; not merely in a
single curve which perhaps would hardly be perceptible during a lifetime, and, therefore, is not of
great importance. Side by side with the slow
movement a succession of quick changes takes
place unceasingly, and it is with respect to these
that the modern collector must be on his guard.
As there is a fashion in books, so also there is something much akin to caprice in the prices fre- quently paid for them. This question of cost has,
unfortunately, to be reckoned with in the case of
nearly all of us, though some collectors, those of
the old school especially, think it derogatory to
speak of money in connection with books. Themajority of people are, however, compelled to
count the cost, since they have very little opportunity in these days of following the example of
the Antiquary so delightfully taken off by Sir
Walter Scott : " See this bundle of ballads, not one
of them laterthan 1 700, and some ofthem a hundred
years older. I wheedled an old woman out of these,
who loved them better than her psalm-book. Tobacco, sir, snuff, and the 'Complete Syren' were
6
HINTS TO BEGINNERS
the equivalent! For that mutilated copy of the
' Complaynt of Scotland
' I sat out the drinking of
two dozen bottles of strong ale with the late learned
proprietor, who, in gratitude, bequeathed it to me
by his last Will. These little Elzevirs are the
memoranda and trophies of many a walk by night
and morning through the Cowgate, the Canongate,
the Bow, St. Mary's Wynd wherever, in fine, there were to be found brokers and trokers; those miscellaneous dealers in things rare and curious. How
often have I stood haggling on a halfpenny, lest by
a too ready acquiescence in the dealer's first price
he should be led to suspect the value I set upon
the article! How have I trembled lest some passing stranger should crop in between me and the
prize!" and so on and so on. This quotation sums up the position as it actually
existed many years ago. Rather should we now
say that he who would collect books must be prepared to buy them at a price that will not shame his
judgement hereafter; that he should be prepared
to avoid the fashionable volumes of the hour, and
to join his faith absolutely to literature in its highest and purest form, seeking the best and not necessarily the scarcest and most expensive editions,
and accepting none but really good copies in their
original covers if possible. Should he do this his
day will assuredly come; his position is absolutely secure now and always. What he will not acquire
just yet, however, is the knowledge that he has
something which only a very few other persons can hope to possess themselves of, and this is just one
of the points, among many others, that may at first sight appear to be of little importance, though it is in reality of much.
7
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
David Clement, in his " Bibliotheque Curieuse,"
goes very minutely into the causes, as well as the
degrees, of rarity in books. According to this author
there are two sorts of scarcity; one absolute, the
other conditional or contingent. It is not necessary,
however, to analyze his propositions, especially as a summary of the whole position is given in the
second volume of Edwards's " Memoirs of Libraries," a work published in 1859. What the
French bibliographer says is undoubtedly true,
but curiously enough, he misses the crux of the
situation, for as we have already mentioned, no book
can be regarded as really
" scarce," from the bibliophile's point of view, if there is no demand for it. The collector will do well to treat fine distinctions,
like those drawn by M. Clement, with caution, and
when debating whether a given book is scarce or the reverse, ask himself the question whether it is likely to be in request.
Another point to be remembered is that a book
may be " uncut
" or the reverse, and if " cut
" may
be very much cropped or only slightly shaved. The
term " uncut
"
is of a technical character. It means
that the edges of the leaves have not been trimmed
or smoothed by the binder; that the book is, in
fact, in the same condition in this respect as when
it left the house of the publisher. It must be re- membered that the word " uncut" does not mean
"not cut open." The paper-knife is a legitimate
implement, and may be used with impunity, we had
nearly said, though we hesitate to be sure of this,
for a practice is now growing up of using in catalogues, whether of booksellers or of auction sales,
the words " not cut open," or
" several of the leaves
are unopened," as indicative of some presumed
8
HINTS TO BEGINNERS
special interest and value so far as the particular
copy is concerned. The book is not merely
" uncut,"
but not even cut open; no one has ever read it, therefore it is of exceptional interest. Theargument
is absurd, but it may prevail eventually, since distinctions and differences, already numerous enough,
are continually being reinforced by others, and it is impossible to say when, or at what stage, the
influx will end. To cut away any part of the
margins of a book is, however, a different matter.
It is a distinct mutilation. It is true that publishers
often issue books with cut edges, the whole edition
being treated in this way, and they do that to save
the use of the paper-knife which many readers re- gard as troublesome and irritating. But in whatever way a book may have been published, an
" uncut
" copy is to be preferred to any other. The
rule is inexorable and cannot be broken with impunity; it frequently affects the market value of a book by as much as seventy-five per cent., and
occasionally even in a still greater degree. So
universal is it, that should it be known, as a fact,
that a whole edition of some scarce work passed
under the guillotine, as the binder's shears are
familiarly called, even then it not only prevails, but
becomes more stringent than ever, for one or two
copies are practically certain to have escaped the
general mutilation, and it should be, and often is, the book-man's privilege and pleasure to hunt for
them.
It is almost unnecessary to observe that the collector will need to be very careful about the binding
of any book that may be offered to him. It should,
if possible, be in its original state in this respect,
for if it is not, and the work of rebinding has not
9
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
been done in a very special and costly manner, the
position of the book can hardly fail to be seriously
affected. Rebound books, especially those of anydegree of antiquity, are nearly always cut down,especially when in the usual inartistic and cheap
" half calf" covers. An old binding, whether of
leather, boards, paper, or cloth, should, wheneverpossible, be restored rather than removed al- together.
Should a whole edition have been bound in a
particular style, say in leather, it does not necessarily follow that one or more copies may not havebeen bound in some other style, as, for example, in
boards. It often happened in the days before the
introduction of the familiar cloth covers that a
publisher would have several copies of the workhe intended to issue bound up in different styles,
either to satisfy himself or to submit to the author.
These "
trial copies," so to speak, are invariably of
greater interest than the ordinary ones, especially
when they are
" uncut," as is often the case. Whether the parts or numbers in which manyworks were, and are, issued, should be bound up or
left as they are, depends upon circumstances. Whena work of pure utility is issued in that way, the parts
will need binding before they are capable of being
readily consulted, and should be bound accordingly,
the edges, as usual, being left " uncut." Novels,
including many of those by Dickens, Ainsworth,
Thackeray, Lever, and other celebrated authors
who wrote during the thirty-five or forty years
succeeding 1835, were frequently issued in monthlyparts with wrappers designed by Leech, Cruikshank,
and other artists of great repute in their profession.
These, and what may be called "
Belles Lettres,"
10
HINTS TO BEGINNERS
issued in parts or pamphlet form, should never be
bound under any circumstances whatever, but kept
in specially made Solander cases, lettered on the
face with the short title of the work within. To this
rule there would not appear to be any exception.
The difference between large and small-paper
copies will, of course, need to be thoroughly understood. Those on large paper are not as a rule in
the demand they were a few years ago, though they
are still frequently issued. Books on large paper
usually contain the identical text found in the ordinary copies, but are printed on paper of a larger size
and of better quality, and are bound in a better, or
at any rate, more distinctive style, and any plates
they may contain are generally in proof state. Large paper copies are always limited in number,
and sometimes bear the signature of the author
within the front cover. They are also published at a higher price, at least double that of the ordinary
copies. It must not be supposed from this that
every book is desirable merely because it is printed on large paper. Many of these volumes consist of
modern, or rather, almost contemporary essays and
poetry, and were published some years ago in large
numbers in the aggregate, but individually in small
editions, suggestive of "scarcity." These should be
approached with great caution.
As the term " limited edition
" suggests a small
issue, so that of Edition de luxe points to excellence
in production. Both terms, however, are, or may
be, convertible, the Edition de luxe being often
limited, while the " limited edition
" was almost of
necessity made as attractive in appearance as
possible. The amateur with a fondness for Editions
de luxe should strive to discriminate between books
ii
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
of this class, which are showy in their externals, but
have little to recommend them from a literary point
of view, and those reproducing the works of standard authors. The latter are frequently worthy
memorials of great writers, pleasurable to read,
and often finely illustrated.
Much has been said on occasion about the
" pedigree
" of books. The individual history of a book is called its " pedigree," though the word
is not of course strictly applicable. There are, as
is well known, many collectors who love to work
out the history of some important volume from the
present to the past, to follow it in its wanderings
from one library to another, to ascertain the cir- cumstances under which it was written and given
to the world, in fact, to discover as much about it, and the man who wrote it, as possible, and to trace
its ownership back, step by step, to the time whenit left the hands of the printer. It is not often
practicable to do this; the history of most books,
like that of most families, being obscure and in- volved. Still, the process is possible sometimes,
especially when a book contains autograph inscriptions or memoranda, or is bound in a peculiar
style, showing that at one time it must have
been in some celebrated library. Every scrap of
evidence has its value when a pedigree is in course
of construction; no incident is too trifling or insignificant to be safely ignored. The late HenryBradshaw, librarian of Cambridge University, had
a talent for tracing bookish pedigrees, and seemed
to be able to jump to conclusions with a minimumof risk. His, however, was an exceptional gift,
and though the individual history of a book is often of the greatest possible importance, most
12
HINTS TO BEGINNERS
collectors prefer to persuade themselves that it is impracticable to learn anything about it, rather
than spend an immense amount of time on what
may, after all, prove a fruitless quest. Every collector, on the other hand, likes to have books with
their " pedigree
" worked out for him, and in this
connection autograph inscriptions furnish, ofcourse,
the best proof of former ownership that can be got.
Quite recently, two books of the greatest possible
interest came to the hammer at Sotheby's. Both were Bibles of no importance in themselves, but one contained two autograph inscriptions, said to be in Shakespeare's handwriting, while the other
had belonged to Burns, the signatures in that in- stance being undoubtedly genuine. The former
realized but ^210, being evidently under suspicion.
The latter sold for ,1,560. Each of these books
had its " pedigree," that is to say, it could be traced
to the hands of several owners. There are many schools of collectors, and some
of them, without being booksellers, nevertheless
frequently buy to sell again. They seek, in fact,
to build up a library out of the profits of a little amateur dealing. The practice is extremely seductive, and there are many gentleman-dealers to be
met with who have fallen victims to its enchantment. John Hill Burton, of " Book Hunter " fame,
resisted it in his own person, and even objected to bartering.
" Where money is the object," says he,
"
let a man speculate or become a miser. . . . Let
him confine all his transactions in the market to
purchasing only." This is very well, and would
doubtless have received the congratulations of the
old Bishop of Durham, Richard de Bury, who, in
the twentieth chapter of the "Philobiblon," exhorts
13
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
scholars to requite him with pious prayers, in that
he sold no volume voluntarily. The Bishop's passion for collecting books was charitable in its nature; he is said to have bestowed at least some of
them on his old college at Oxford, the collection
being known for several generations as "d'Aungerville's Library." This is the generally acceptedbelief, though it has not been allowed to pass unchallenged. Adam de Murimuth notices the deathof the Bishop in his " Chronica sui Temporis" in
terms the reverse of flattering, and Mr. E. C.
Thomas handles him somewhat roughly in the first volume of " The Library" (pp. 335 et seq.). A few words with reference to imperfect copies
and odd volumes, or incomplete sets of books, will
not be out of place. There are some books whichare so extremely scarce and valuable when in perfect condition, that they are practically unattainable
in that state, and collectors are glad to possess incomplete copies, or even fragments of them. Asingle leaf from any book printed by Caxton is not an undesirable possession, and there are otherbooks of which the same may be said. Books ofthis importance and rarity form an exception to
the general rule. The amateur should not, ordinarily, have anything to do with imperfect books,
or even with one or more volumes belonging to aset. Sometimes a volume is manifestly imperfect;
it may, for example, want the title-page, or a numbered leaf, or a plate. Occasionally, however, it
is not so easy to say whether a book is perfect or the reverse. It has to be gone through leaf byleaf and "collated," either by reference to someother copy known to be in sound condition, or to a recognized text-book. A volume must be con-
HINTS TO BEGINNERS
sidered imperfect if anything, even a blank leaf, or a slip of "errata" be missing; it must be re- garded as defective if any of the leaves be patched
or otherwise mended, or if the title-page, frontispiece, or any of the plates be " laid down," i.e., re- backed with paper, to preserve them or render
them stronger. Sometimes an imperfect book is made perfect by the addition of the missing leaves
taken from some other copy. If these are not of
precisely the same size, some leaves of the volume
will be "
taller
" than others, and the copy is ac- cordingly defective. Books perfected in this manner are said to be "made up."
So also a book must be regarded as defective if any of the plates or leaves of text are fox marked,
i.e., stained with damp, or have been worm-eaten,
or if one title-page has been substituted for another,
or if the title-page is "washed,'V..,has been cleaned
with chemicals, or if one or more of the leaves are re- produced in facsimile, no matter howclosely, whether
by hand or by any mechanical process. In the
majority of cases it is inadvisable to buy an imperfect copy of a book. The trouble of obtaining
and supplying the missing leaf or leaves is sure to
be very great, and the cost nearly always prohibitive. So also is it extremely inadvisable, if possible even more so, to buy imperfect sets of
books, especially of old books. The difficulty of obtaining the missing volumes is not the only objection to this rather common practice, for, even should
they be obtained, it will be found that they seldom,
or never, match the volumes they are intended to
supplement. The binding will be different, or the
volumes, being more or less cut down, will prove
to be smaller or greater in size than the others, or
15
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
they may prove to belong to different editions. Alibrary formed upon such a system, assuming that
life were sufficiently long for the enterprise, wouldbe a mere thing of patches, in which no one couldtake any pride. We should say of such a collection
that it would do excellently well to lend by degrees,
and about the lending of books so much has alreadybeen written that it is not worth while adding to
the narrative.
16
CHAPTER II SOME PRACTICAL DETAILS
Sizes of books Table of measurements of whole sheets Diagrams showing method of folding "Signatures" Books
printed on half sheets Judging size by catchwords, watermarks,
waterlines, and measurements Table of approximate measure- ments of books The method of collation The "Orlando
Furioso" of 1584 Restoring books Damp Book-worms
Grease marks Surface stains Ink, iron, lead, and pencil marks
Restoration of leather, vellum, and cloth bindings.
r I "HE method usually adopted for determining
the technical size of a book, i.e., for ascer- taining with certainty whether any particular volume is a folio, quarto, octavo,1 ^/ infra, seems at first sight so complicated, and has at times given rise to so much discussion and controversy, that some li- brarians attached to public institutions followa scale
in which only seven sizes are recognized. They
measure, or at any rate did measure, the books by
height, as they stand on the shelves, and say that a volume over 18 inches is a large folio, while one
of 1 1 inches and below 1 8 inches is a folio or large
4to. Following the system, a book 9 inches in
height and below 1 1 inches would be a 410 or large
8vo, one 8 inches in height and below 9 inches, an 8vo, one above 6 inches and below 8 inches, a
small 4to or i2mo. One measuring 6 inches they
describe as i8mo, and any size below 6 inches is minimo or mo. Now this system, though ithasmuch
17 c
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
in its favour, simplicity being no small gain in thesematters, is not usually followed by collectors, bibliographers, publishers, or booksellers. It is, in fact,
only a rough and ready way of avoiding a difficulty ; it makes no attempt to solve it. A book above 6inches in height and below 8 inches, may certainlybe a small 4to, or it may be a 1 2mo, but no attemptis made to explain the difference between the two.Such a wide measurement would also include booksin i6mo, foolscap 8vo, crown 8vo, and post 8vo,and these sizes must accordingly be abolished if the system is to be anything more than theoretical.That, in fact, has been done, and perhaps wisely,under the circumstances, as it can make very little difference to the reader in a free library whetherthe book he holds in his hand is a 4to or an 8vo, norwould he be likely to take any interest in the distinction. So far as the book-collector is concerned,however, the matter is on quite a different footing.
He cannot glance over a bookseller's or auctioneer's catalogue without seeing such expressionsas "crown 8vo," "royal 8vo," or
" imperial 8vo."Moreover, some books, as, for example, the originaledition of Bewick's " History of British Birds,"1797-1804, have heen printed on paper of differentsizes. The ' ' Birds " in question is found in demy 8vo,royal 8vo, and imperial 8vo, and as any particularcopy would be described in one or other of theseterms, it is absolutely necessary to be in a positionto distinguish between the three, a copy on imperial paper being of infinitely greater importancethan one on demy, and of much more importancethan one on royal.
There are several ways of ascertaining the correct and technical size of a book, but we will, in the18
SOME PRACTICAL DETAILS
first instance, proceed by the familiar method of
measurements. It must be understood that paper
used in the manufacture of books is made in large
sheets of different dimensions, which are subsequently folded to the required size. Before the
introduction of machines for making paper, the
measurements of these whole sheets were substantially the same all over the kingdom, e.g., a sheet of royal would measure about 25 x 20 inches, no matter in what mill it had been manufactured.
The sizes of the papers in the whole sheet have,
however, altered since the consequent disuse of
moulds, and cannot now be regarded otherwise
than as approximate to the old measurements, and
since an alteration in the sizes of books has necessarily occurred as well, they, too, often vary from
the standard measurements. Still, the dimensions
are close enough to justify their being accepted as approximately correct, especially when it is remembered that the difference in the measurement of a whole sheet becomes less noticeable when it is folded. The following table, showing the measure- ment in inches of whole sheets of paper of various
sizes, should first of all be looked over.
Foolscap
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
follows that a foolscap 8vo book is made from
sheets of Foolscap paper (17 x 13^ inches), folded a certain number of times; a post 8vo book is made in the same way from sheets of Post (19^ x
15! inches), folded as before ; a demy 8vo is madefrom sheets of Demy; a royal 8vo from sheets of
Royal; an imperial 8vo from sheets of Imperial.
In the same way a demy 4to book is made from
sheets of Demy folded in a certain other way, an
imperial 4to from sheets of Imperial folded in the
same way, and so on. Speaking generally, Elephant, Atlas, Double Elephant, and Antiquarian
papers are only used for folios, but one often has
a columbier 8vo or 4to.
To turn this to practical account let us take a
sheet of Demy (22^ x 17^ inches). Thus:
Demy 4to
Demy Folio
Demy 161110
Demy 8vo D
Demy
Demy
641110
ii 32mo 128
A20
SOME PRACTICAL DETAILS
Fold the paper across at AA, and we have a demy
folio; then fold it again at BB, and a demy 4to
is obtained ; again at CC, and we have a demy 8vo ; and if again at DD, a sixteenmo, or i6mo as it is written; if again at EE, a 3
2 mo; and if, finally,
at HH, a 641110. Further than this it is not neces- sary to go, though tiny books in I28mo are not
unknown. The i2mos and iSmos, though common
enough, are really "out" sizes. If a sheet be tri- sected, and the remaining superficies bisected, and
then bisected again, as in the diagram, it gives
twenty-four pages, and is called a 12 mo, or duodecimo. The 1 8mo is formed on a similar principle,
and consists of thirty-six pages.
I2mo
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
8vo and an imperial 8vo, the latter being considerably larger, simply because it is made frompaper of larger size.
This system of folding, if practically carried outwith a sheet of paper cut to the required size, will
demonstrate thatthere must necessarily be betweeneach "signature" (a term nextexplained)twoleaves(or, if numbered, 4 pages) in every folio, while a4to will have between each " signature
" 4 leavesor 8 pages; an 8vo, 8 leaves or 16 pages; a duodecimo (i2mo), 12 leaves or 24 pages; a sixteenmo (i6mo), 1 6 leaves or 32 pages; an i8mo, 18
leaves or 36 pages; a thirty-twomo (321110), 32leaves or 64 pages; and a sixty-fourmo (641110),
64 leaves or 128 pages.
For a great number of years past, printers havebeen in the habit of placing a
" signature
" on eachwhole sheet of paper in such a position that, whenfolded, such signature will appear at the foot ofthe first and some other pages. Signatures, to
follow the definition given by Mr. Blades,
" are thesign or mark which Printers place beneath certain
pages for the convenience of the Binder, and to
distinguish the sequence of the sections (sometimesstyled quires or gatherings), which they print."
These signatures consist of capital letters, or perhaps numbers, and are said to have been first usedin printed books by Antonio Zorat of Milan, aboutthe year 1470, though others attribute the invention
to John Koelhoff of Cologne, who uses them in
Nider's " Expositio Decalogi," printed by him in
1472 (the date is, however, questioned). Theyare not, however, peculiar to printed books, norwere they invented by the early printers as so many writers have asserted. Many manuscripts22
SOME PRACTICAL DETAILS
written before the invention of printing possess
signatures at the extreme right edge of the sheet.
Even the early Hebrew manuscripts often have
them. Sometimes they were placed at the left,
and in that case became invisible when the sheets
were gathered together and bound, so that it must not be assumed that they do not exist merely
because they are not seen. The "signatures,"
whether they occur in printed books or in manuscripts, are only intended as guides to the binder,
though they may be made useful in another way,
as from them the size of a book may sometimes,
though not always, be determined. The signature
A, or perhaps the number i, will not need to be
used at all, but if used, it would, or might, be devoted to the title-page, preface, table of contents,
and other preliminary matter. As we turn over the
pages we shall presently come to a signature B or
2, and then to a third signature, c or 3, and so on
to the end of the volume. By counting the leaves
between signature and signature, the size of the
book may, in a large number of cases (some bibliographers say "always "), be determined. As there
are, as we have seen, eight leaves or sixteen pages
in every 8vo made from a whole sheet, the signatures (assuming that the alphabet were employed,
and A had been used for the preliminary matter),
might run as follows : Page i, B, page 3, B2; page
i7> c> P
age 19. C2 ; P
age 33> D> Page 35, D2 ; page
49, E, page 51, E2; page 65, F, page 67, F2; and so on to the end of the volume. We should know at once that this was an 8vo of some kind, because
there are eight leaves (i.e., sixteen pages) from
each chief signature to the next. Had there been
four leaves from signature to signature it would
23
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
have been a 410, and if twelve, a I2mo. This will
be apparent if the method of folding has beenthoroughly mastered.
A rather perplexing element often arises fromthe fact that many works are now printed on half
sheets of paper, so that if a book is judged as to its size by the number of leaves from one signature to
another, a demy 8vo printed on half sheets, wouldhave to be called a 4to, it having only four leaves.
A 1 2mo, half sheet, would have to be called a "sixmo," it only having six leaves. To put the matterin as succinct a form as possible, if an 8vo be madefrom a whole sheet, it will have a signature at the
foot of page 1 7 ; if from a half sheet, at the foot of
page 9. In the case of a 12 mo made from a half
sheet, a signature would be at the foot of page13. In the smaller sizes there are, as a rule, only
eight leaves from signature to signature, and that
although the printer's term for the size may be32mo, 641110, or I28mo. Strictly speaking, therefore, these small sizes might be correctly described
as 8vos, though they would not be so called in
practice.
Another method of ascertaining the size of anold book is as follows : Open it between pages 48and 49 ; if the catchword is at the foot of page48, and the signature at the bottom of page 49, it is 24mo size. If the catchword is on page 64, andthe signature at the bottom of page 65, it is 321110
size. As these two sizes are frequently confounded,
the distinction is useful. Sometimes the size of abook may be ascertained by reference to the watermark. In folios, the watermark is in the middle;
in 4tos it is folded in half in the back of the
book midway between top and bottom. In 8vos,
24
SOME PRACTICAL DETAILS
the watermark is in the back and at the top
of the page, and in i2mos and i6mos it is seen on
the fore-edges. Books of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries can often be accurately named by
observing the position of the watermarks. 1 1 is also
frequently helpful to note the position of the water
lines. If these are perpendicular, the book is either an 8vo of some kind, an i8mo, or a folio. If the
lines are horizontal, the book is a i2mo or a 4to.
Books in 241110 have the lines sometimes perpendicular, and sometimes horizontal.
It will be readily understood that the orthodox
methods of judging the size of a book have at times
given rise to much impatience. Small foolscap
8vos have been mistaken for I2mos and vice versa, and many arguments have arisen in particular cases
to prove that what passes for an imperial 8vo, is, in reality, a crown 410, or the reverse. These differences of opinion have not been advanced and
insisted upon for the mere love of disputation, as might perhaps be supposed. 1 1 is sometimes neces- sary to arrive at a definite conclusion in these
matters, as important errors have before now arisen
in creating editions that never existed, solely be- cause the size of some book of more than ordinary
importance has been mistaken.
For ordinary purposes, however, a table of approximate sizes will answer all requirements, and
the following has been drawn up with the object of
presenting, at a glance, the differences that exist in
sizebetween books thataremetwith in everyday life. Even here, however, some confusion may exist unless it is remembered that binders have even now a
habit of cutting down books intrusted to them, and
that in the past the practice was all but universal.
25
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
This, of course, reduces the height of any book
that is subjected to the process, and must be taken
into account when necessary. If, for example, we
should see a book, the leaves of which measure
7f x 5 inches, we may, with tolerable certainty,
arrive at the conclusion that it is a large post 8vo
cut down a quarter of an inch at the top or bottom, and a third of an inch at the side.
The measurements given below are those of the
page (not of the binding) in inches, and it must be
remembered that they are only approximate.
9^x6
9 x sf
8v7x Sie 1 X 5TT
7 x 4?
7x46 x 4
c
1 y -z 1 5-2 x 3T
3X2In the case of folios, it is sufficient to describe
them as being large and small. A medium folio measures about 12x8 inches, and like all 8vo
books, may roughly be described as upright-oblong
in shape, while 4tos approach nearer a square.
The collector should, of course, either carefully
examine a book before he buys it, or have it forwarded to him on approval, and for collation. Theart of collation consists in the critical examination
of a book, leaf by leaf, and a comparison of it with
another copy known to be perfect, or by reference
to the description given of it in one or more of the
text books. The first step in the practice of collation
is to count the leaves in order to make sure that
none are missing. If the pages are numbered, or 26
Columbier 410 18 X 12 Super imperial 4to 15^ X 13
Imperial 410 15 X 14^
Royal 410 i2\ x 10
Demy 410 1 1 X 9 Crown 410 n X 8
Small 410 7| X 5^
Columbier 8vo 1 1 x 7^
Imperial 8vo io\ x i\
Royal 8vo 10 x 6\
SOME PRACTICAL DETAILS
in the case of very old books, the folios, there will
be no difficulty about this. Some books, however,
are found without any distinguishing marks of
that character. It is said that the first book having numbered leaves was printed by Arnold ther
Hoernen at Cologne, in 1470, under the title " Sermo ad Populum predicabilis in festo presentacionis beatissime Marie" a small 4to, with 27
lines to the page. The same printer is also said to
have been the first to use headlines. In the case of
unpaged books the catchwords should be consulted
throughout, and also the " signatures," if any; and
in those rare instances where the leaves are un- numbered, and there are neither signatures nor
catchwords, the context must be followed from
the foot of one page to the commencement of the
next.
It is, of course, necessary to make sure that an
illustrated book contains all the plates it ought to
have, and that they are inserted in their proper
places, and that one plate is not substituted for
another nor duplicated to hide some mistake or
carelessness on the part of the printer or binder.
As an instance of what is meant in this latter re- spect, reference may conveniently be made to a work described by Brunet on p. 435 of the first volume of his " Manuel du Libraire." It is a copy
of Ariosto's " Orlando Furioso," printed at Venice
in 1584, large 4to. Brunet says that this is an
incorrect edition, sought for chiefly on account of
the plates that embellish it, and from the fact that
it is difficult to find complete; that is to say, with
the plate to the 34th canto (p. 382), which, not
having been ready in time, is usually represented
by the plate to the 33rd canto, which thus makes
27
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
its appearance twice. In the case of one of the
British Museum copies (79 K 12), plate 34 has
been pasted over the duplicate plate 33 at page
382, and this affords an instance of a copy which
has been " made up," or completed to a material
extent. Furthermore, any one who happens to see
this particular copy will notice that it is otherwise
defective, for the portrait facing the title-page has
been cut close and " laid down " or mounted.
Much has been written from time to time on
the custody and preservation of books, as also upon
the various methods of restoring imperfect, dirty, or defective copies that happen to come to hand as they are sure to do occasionally. Mr. Zaehnsdorf,
the well-known bookbinder, issued a tasteful little pamphlet, some years ago, in which he lays down a numberof useful rules for the preservation of books.
Damp is their great enemy, but so long as the
library is dry and well ventilated, the most costly
volumes are safe from this and most other ills, the
ravages of the bookworm excepted. This pest has
a pedigree, being mentioned by Lucian, by Evenusthe grammarian, and by many other old time
writers, but it is very rarely ever seen, and, for
some reason or other, seldom attacks modern
books. There is no real protection against bookworms if they once obtain what may be called a
"footing." But to prevent them doing so, snuff
may be sprinkled over the shelves with advantage.
If a room be slightly, or not very, damp, all the
ornaments in it should be filled with unslacked lime,
the object being to absorb the moisture in the air. Where, however, the walls of the room are themselves damp, practically nothing can be done but to
remove the books. The use of unslacked lime is, 28
SOME PRACTICAL DETAILS
when everything is said, more valuable as a test than a remedy.
The collector cannot expect to find all the
volumes he may buy in the pink of condition.
Some of them may stand in need of restoration,
and though it is always better to have this done
by an expert, this chapter would not be complete
without an explanation of some of the methods by
which a book out of condition may be restored to
something approaching its original state. When
a book has been " cut down " by the binder it is irretrievably damaged, for the paper cut away can never be replaced. Hence the saying that it is better to have a begrimed book with its margins
intact, than one that is clean but has been cropped.
The former may be materially improved if a few
simple recipes be carefully followed, and as there
are plenty of very dirty, and in themselves worthless, books to be got for a trifle, there is never any
lack of material on which to experiment.
Should a book, among its other imperfections,
show traces of grease marks, it will be necessary
to remove these before anything else is attempted.
The book may have to be taken to pieces, and
should this be necessary the covers must be detached, the stitching cut away, and the sheets
separated. Then examine each leaf by holding it up to the light, and having found one stained with
grease or fat of any kind, place it carefully beneath
a sheet of clean white blotting-paper, and pass a hot iron over the surface. The blotting-paper will
then absorb the grease either wholly or partially
according to the extent of its hold. The damaged
parts should finally be touched with turpentine that
has been gently heated, and should this discolour
29
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
the paper, as it may do, a slight wash of spirits ofwine, also gently heated, will be found beneficial.
The leaf should then be allowed to dry naturally
under pressure. Another and far safer method ofremoving grease spots is to cover them withpowdered chalk. A protecting sheet of papershould then be placed over the part affected, andpressed with a hot iron. This, which may be described as the " dry process
"
is very efficacious in
simple cases, and even should it fail, no harm will
be done to the leaf operated upon provided theiron is not too hot. When all the grease marksare removed from the volume, the following recipes
may be tried.
Should any of the leaves be stained with writingink, the marks should be touched with a strongsolution of oxalic acid, and then with a solution ofhydrochloric acid in the proportion of one part ofthe latter chemical to seven of water. The partshould then be washed with clear water and allowedto dry naturally. In all these experiments there
must be no artificial drying. Paper that has beendamped will turn yellow if dried in the sun orbefore a fire. Oxalic acid is, of course, a danger-ous chemical, and must be used with the utmostcaution. It is, however, almost indispensable in
certain operations, as, in common with citric andtartaric acid, it does not affect printer's ink. A pagemay therefore be cleaned by its aid, and that
without "wiping out" the printed matter.
When ink marks are found on the leaves ot abook they generally take the form of written signatures and annotations, and sometimes these are of the highest interest and value. Discriminationmust therefore be used in all cases, but assuming30
SOME PRACTICAL DETAILS
that it is advisable to obliterate any of these
memoranda, another and far less dangerous recipe
may be tried. Put into an 8 oz. bottle 5-3- oz. of
bicarbonate of soda, and fill up with water. This
solution, having been well shaken, should be
allowed to stand over night. Into a 2 oz. bottle
put a teaspoonful of chloride of lime, and fill with some of the liquid from the other bottle.
This, too, should be well shaken, and then allowed
to stand till the chloride of lime has sunk to the
bottom. The liquid, if prepared according to the
directions, will then be of a pale pink colour, and if the ink marks be painted over with it, they should
disappear in about two hours' time. All that then
remains to be done is to wash the part with cold
water, and when dry, to brush over it a solution
of isinglass to restore the gloss.
Chloride of lime is a useful agent in some re- spects, and is often recommended though it has
manifest disadvantages, the chief being that it is almost certain to rot the paper to which it is applied. This effect will not be noticed at the time,
but its ultimate action is certain to a greater or
lesser extent, according to the strength of the
solution or the quality of the paper operated upon,
or both. The best way of cleaning paper and
obliterating ordinary surface stains is by means
of a solution of chlorinated soda (liquor soda
chlorinatce] which can be got from any chemist.
The solution should consist of about one part of
the chemical to twenty of water. The leaves
should be damped with this solution, and when
the stains have partly disappeared, should be
washed with cold water, and dried between
sheets of blotting-paper under pressure.
3
1
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
Many useful recipes are given in John Hannett's"
Bibliopegia," a sixth edition of which was published in 1 865. The author says that spirits of salts,
diluted with five or six times its bulk of water, will
remove stains caused by writing ink. Iron mouldyields to a solution of sulphurateof potash, followedby a touch of oxalic acid, and grease or wax spotsmay be removed by washing the part with ether,
chloroform, or benzine, the leaf being then placedbetween white blotting-paper and ironed. Pencilmarks may, of course, be rubbed out with bread,or by a washing of thin paste. Lead stains yieldto peroxide of hydrogen. Some useful recipes will
also be found in Bonnardot's " Essai sur 1'art deRestaurer les Estampes et les Livres," a workpublished at Paris in 1 858. In "Notes and Queries"for December 19, 1863 (p. 495), a correspondentstates that the remedy for oil stains is sulphuricether. If the stains are very pronounced, he wasin the habit of rolling up each leaf and insertingit in a wide-mouthed bottle, half full of that chemical, shaking it gently up and down for a minute.A single washing in cold water is described as all that is afterwards necessary.
Old leather bindings may be very materiallyimproved by the application of caoutchouc varnish,which can be got from any colour shop. The leathermust be quite dry before it is applied, and it will
be advisable to fill up any cracks or holes withpaste. When the varnish is nearly dry it is polishedwith a ball, formed of fine white cotton filled withwool, on which has been rubbed a little olive oil. Vellum covers are cleaned with soap and water, or, in extreme cases, with a weak solution of salts oflemon. Modern cloth covers, when spotted or faded,32
SOME PRACTICAL DETAILS
may very often be improved if they are washed with
glaire. To make this, break a number of eggs,
carefully removing the yolks. The white is then
beaten up into a foam and placed aside for a time
till it subsides, when it should be poured into another vessel. This is glaire, and differs from the
ordinary white of egg in this, that it is as limpid as
water, and can be evenly spread on anything. The
glaire should not, however, be allowed to touch the
gilding, as its tendency is to dim still further whatever brightness may be left to it.
33
CHAPTER III
MANUSCRIPTS
Manuscripts necessarily unique Their importance and
rarity The earliest existing manuscripts The fate of ancient
libraries Some early classical manuscripts Lost classics Corrupt texts Two main classes of manuscripts Monastic
manuscripts Judging the age of a manuscript Books to consult Characteristics of the earliest manuscripts Psalters,
bibles, and devotional books Chronicles, romances, and other works The collation of manuscripts Different classes of devotional books The public libraries. COLLECTORS
have always manifested great
interest in manuscripts. There are manyreasons why a manuscript of any degree of antiquity or importance should be regarded as something altogether distinct and apart from a printed
book, no matter how scarce or valuable the latter
may be, and perhaps the chief of these reasons is that a manuscript is necessarily unique. Copies of
it may certainly have been made; it may havebeen reproduced in facsimile by mechanical process, and that so closely that it would be difficult
to distinguish the reproduction from the original ; it may even bear little resemblance from a textual
point of view to the more elaborate and finished
work which the author ultimately put forward to
the world. Nevertheless, it is unique ; there is nothing else exactly like it to be had. It is different with the printed book, which, though34
MANUSCRIPTS
perhaps scarce enough, is always in danger of
becoming less so. Other copies may be unearthed
at any moment; it is impossible to say with cer- tainty that any printed book is the only one of its kind. The recent discovery of a copy of the
original edition of " Titus Andronicus "
is a case
in point. The very existence of this quarto was
doubted at one time. It is impossible to say
definitely that none other exists. All we can
venture to affirm is that, so far as is known, no
other copy, or only a very few copies, are in
existence. The extrinsic quality of being unique
is therefore one cardinal point in favour of the
manuscript. But the intrinsic qualities possessed
by all manuscripts, according to their several
degrees of importance, are more noticeable than
any question of scarcity. These, if of modern date,
frequently indeed we might say invariably, disclose the changes of the author's mind, and show
by what process of reasoning the finished work
was gradually evolved. Verbal corrections show
the polishing process, for few authors write
like Shakespeare, whose "mind and hand went
together"; extensive alterations or additions are
the embodiments of important thoughts, and not
infrequently prove to be of the highest degree
of literary importance when read with critical
judgement side by side with the printed books
that are, after all, only their representatives. So
far as the older manuscripts are concerned we can,
in many cases, derive from their illustrations a very good idea of the art of the period, its social
conditions, manners, and costumes, and its style of
architecture. Sometimes the illuminator will have
been a portrait painter, and we may in that case be
35
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
indebted to him for the likeness of some celebratedperson, otherwise unobtainable. The portrait ofChaucer, often seen, and traditionally authentic, first appeared as a painted illustration in a manuscript,and may be the only contemporary portrait of thepoet extant. These old illuminated manuscripts areoften very curious. What some French writers style " L'art de Babouinet "
is frequently exemplified in
them to a remarkable degree. In manuscripts ofthis kind, the principalfigureis sometimes a baboon,^t others a strange beast, such, for example, as arat with the head of a crow, accompanied by grotesque animals, birds, freaks, and monstrosities.The late Rev. Walter Sneyd of Keele Hall, Staffordshire, had an exceedingly interesting andvaluable manuscript of this character, which realized no less than ,2,500 at his sale in December,1903. Though the importance of a manuscriptdoes not depend upon its size, it may be mentioned incidentally that this one measured but4f x 3 inches.
Unfortunately it is not now within any one'spower to obtain more than a representativeselection of important manuscripts. To form alibrary is out of the question, for the public institutions of the world have absorbed the vast majority,and those that remain in private collections areknown and ear-marked, rarely change hands, andwhen they do, bring prices that are almost prohibitive. Still it is necessary to know somethingabout the history of manuscripts in general, andtheir various kinds and degrees of importance, forsome are, naturally, of much greater interest thanothers, or being of less interest, are much morereadily acquired. The world is not yet swept clean36
MANUSCRIPTS
of even mediaeval manuscripts. It will be before
long, but as yet there is a little time left. From an historical aspect it is interesting to note
that the earliest Latin document known to exist
is a wax tablet inscribed with a stilus a document
of no importance, except from an archaeological
standpoint found some years ago (1875) among
the debris of Pompeii. It dates no further back than
the year A.D. 55. On the other hand the oldest
Greek document dates from about 300 B.C., and
was written at Vienna on a sheet of papyrus. That,
too, is of no literary interest. It is merely a curse
called down from heaven by one Artemisia on the
head of a man who had deserted her, and left her, as we should say, "penniless," to face the world.
It is a document of human interest, a curiosity, and
nothing more. We can hardly bring the clay
tablets of the Assyrians within the scope of these
remarks, and the same may be said of the papyrus
documents of the Egyptians, unquestionably the
oldest manuscripts now existing one of them,
known as the " Papyrus Prisse," now in the Louvre,
being assigned, though the date is uncertain, to the
year 2500 B.C. We are entitled, however, to ask
what has become of the countless classical manuscripts of Greek and Roman days, some of them
decorated with pictures, as Pliny relates. The
answer is that every one of them has vanished.
When Ochus, the Persian general, swept through
Phoenicia and Egypt, 350 years before our era, carrying fire and ruin in his train, he destroyed the
temples and colleges, burning everything. Caesar's
troops utterly destroyed the greatest library of all antiquity, that at Alexandria; the Pythagorean
Schools in Italy were destroyed in their turn,
37
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
and the Christians ravaged the heathen Templeseverywhere, as Gibbon asserts in the twentyeighth chapter of the " Decline and Fall." Lateron the Goths, Vandals, and other barbarians ofthe North ravaged Italy from end to end, andthe libraries of Cicero, Lucullus, Trajan, andGordian, perished utterly. The Alexandrian Library was destroyed a second time in A.D. 390, andyet a third time in the seventh century, and in later
days Christian monks " wiped out
" parchmentwritings of antiquity to make way for more important truths, as they thought. The damage doneby the Reformers is historical, though probablythe classical manuscripts had entirely disappearedby their day. Even Sir Thomas Browne, theauthor of the celebrated " Religio Medici," advocates a wholesale destruction of books. He wouldpreserve the best, and as to the " swarms andmillions of rhapsodies, begotten only to distract
and abuse the weaker judgment," the fire is ready.The barbarity and ignorance of every age of whichany remembrance remains, combined to efface theclassic manuscripts of antiquity, while even printedbooks have not infrequently shared the same fate. Andrew Maunsell, a London bookseller, issued aprice list so long ago as 1595, and many booksmentioned in it which he then had, and was readyto sell, are now entirely lost. What are termed "Illuminated Manuscripts"of Virgil and Terence are preserved in the Vatican,and there is also the illustrated "Iliad" in theAmbrosian Library at Milan. These date not later
than the fourth century A.D., and as the picturesare based on classical models, we may judge fromtheir appearance what the older manuscripts were38
MANUSCRIPTS
perhaps like. They have colour, but little shading. The faces are those seen on coins and monuments ; the carriage of the figures is also similar.
These are the only examples of early classical
manuscripts left to us. So thoroughly was the
work of destruction carried out, that in the ninth
century the Library belonging to the Cathedral
Church of S. Martino at Lucca contained but
nineteen volumes. The Library once preserved in
St. Paul's was catalogued in 1458, and Dugdale,
in his history of the Cathedral, fills nearly eight
folio pages with a list of the books contained in it. One, and one only, yet remains at St. Paul's, and
but two or three others can be traced. In 1212 the
Cathedral of Novara had what was at that time a
rich library, consisting of the works of Boethius and
Priscianus, the Institutes of Justinian, the Decretals, a Bible, the "Etymologia" of Isidorus, and
some devotional treatises, twelve or fifteen books
all told. In A.D. 690 the King of Northumbria gave
800 acres of land for one book containing a history
of the world. A countess of Anjou gave 200 sheep
and a large number of rich furs for a volume of
Homilies, 120 crowns were paid for a single book
of Livy, and 100 crowns of gold for a Concordance.
In 1420 a Latin Bible was valued at ^30, at a time
when two arches of London Bridge could havebeen
built for less.
It is no doubt true that more of the books of
the Ancients have perished than have reached us
in any form. Plutarch quotes 251 distinct works,
about a third of which are unknown to us, except
by the titles he gives, and he himself wrote fourteen biographies of which not a trace remains. We
know merely by name the " History of the Etrus39
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
cans," which the Emperor Claudius is said to have
written. The "Anti-Cato," written by Julius Caesar,
the published letters of Augustus and Tiberius, and
the " Memoirs," more or less complete, which some
of the twelve Caesars had written, have all vanished, as also have most of the plays of Menander,
most of the Odes of Sappho, and many of the works
of Ennius, Strabo, and Livy. The list of lost Classics
might be extended almost indefinitely, if it would
serve any useful purpose, but it is sufficient for us
to know that such of the treatises as survived in
the form of copies from older manuscripts were
often so corrupt that no reliance could be placed
on the text. Petrarch relates that in his day the
copyists were ignorant and incompetent, falling
naturally, it would seem, into all sorts of transcriptional errors, and Aldus Manutius was not
only a printer, but an editor, making it the business
of his life to correct the mistakes of generations of
transcribers. The classical manuscripts of the Middle Ages were corrected and re-written by a few
enthusiasticscholarswho obtained little or noassist- ance from the monks, wholly given over to Antiphonaries and Homilies, Breviaries, and the like. Their primary object was to restore the actual text as it was originally written, evolving order from
the chaos of faulty transcripts by means of a patient
comparison of available documents.
All this, though interesting enough, and indeed
necessary as an introduction to the subject, is of
no practical importance to the collector. What he
searches for are not relics altogether beyond reach;
shadows, in fact, that elude the grasp. He needs
to know something about those manuscripts which,
although for the most part scarce enough, are not
40
MANUSCRIPTS
altogether impossible of attainment, and these
naturally divide themselves into two classes. First
in point of date, come what we will call monastic
manuscripts on vellum, illuminated or otherwise,
and secondly, those productions consisting principally, though not entirely, of original manuscripts on paper of celebrated literary works well
known to the world. Of the latter class it is only
necessary to say that they are for the most part
comparatively modern, indeed often contemporary,
and that their importance is commensurate with
the estimation in which the writer is held. Original
manuscripts of the works of Dickens, of which
nine yet remain in private hands, of Thackeray,
Scott, and Burns, are representative of many
more of our own age which the collector is continually on the look-out for with some hope of
success. These serve to illustrate the modern
phase of the subject, but by no means exhaust it in its entirety. As we go further back we see immense possibilities, for the collection of Sir
Thomas Phillipps is now to a great extent available, and many of the Ashburnham manuscripts
have so far escaped the public libraries. Sir Thomas
Phillipps dominated the London market for nearlyhalf a century from 1823 onward, and accumulated
some 30,000 manuscripts, many of great interest
and value. This immense collection is being sold
by auction at Sotheby's, and some time yet will
elapse before it is entirely dispersed.
From a popular point of view, the highest type
of manuscript is that embraced by the first class
of which we have spoken, monastic manuscripts on vellum, especially if illuminated and embellished
with miniatures, being regarded as altogether
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
superior to any of those more modern productions
which derive their importance from considerations
of literary excellence or historic interest. Thetruth, however, is that it is not possible to comparetwo totally dissimilar classes, and that each has an equal share of merit, artistic or literary, as the
case may be, for few single volumes belonging
to either class will be found to possess a dual
excellence.
With respect to what we have agreed to call monastic manuscripts, it will be noticed by anyone who cares to examine the specimens in the
British Museum, the Bodleian Library, or elsewhere, that the earlier the writing the plainer
and neater it is. The oldest manuscripts of this
class are also the least decorated, and are invariably written in uncial or capital letters. Uncial
writing is formed of large round characters (not
capitals), though it is also described as a compoundbetween the capital and smaller characters, someof the letters resembling the former, and others
the latter. This particular style is supposed to
have been employed in Latin manuscripts as early as the fourth century, and was seldom used after
the tenth. The Benedictines of the eighth century
brought it to its greatest perfection. These uncial
letters denote antiquity, and so also do capitals,
the latter especially. Dibdin speaks in glowingterms of the " Iliad "
in the Ambrosian Library at
Milan as a
" Greek Capital-letter Classic," andsings its praises in the " Decameron " on that ac- count, observing en parenthese
" the earlier manuscripts (i.e., those from the fourth to the ninth
century inclusive) are usually written in uncial or
capital letters."
42
MANUSCRIPTS
The age of a manuscript of the class we are considering has everything to do with its importance
and consequent value, and unless the collector can tell this approximately from the general appearance of the example before him, he has much
to learn. He cannot by any means take the auctioneers' catalogues, excellentlyandlearnedlycompiled though they often are, as conclusive evidence
of the statements madeintheminthisrespect. They
say
" Saec XIII," or
" Saec XIV," or as the case may be, but the fact may be otherwise. The manuscript may be a century earlier or later in date, and
this may add very greatly to its importance on
the one hand, or materially detract from it on the
other. No amount of reading will enable any one
to judge the age of a manuscript within narrow
limits ; nothing but practice can do that, and the
only way to obtain a sound judgement is to compare one manuscript with another. To this end
the great public libraries are the only available
schools.
Nevertheless, a great deal of general information
may be obtained from books, and in this connection
we may refer to H. N. Humphrey's
" The Illuminated Books of the Middle Ages," 1844-9, folio, a work giving an account of the development and
progress of the art of illumination as a distinct
branch of pictorial ornamentation from the fourth
century to the seventeenth. It describes the various
styles in vogue at different periods from the first glimmering traces of illumination in its true meaning, observable in the early Byzantine manuscripts
onward. Thomas Astle's " Origin and Progress
of Writing," 1803, folio, is another excellent and
most useful treatise, containing the history of
43
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
writing in different ages and countries, proved from
ancient inscriptions, manuscripts, and other authentic documents, of which engraved specimens are
given. Rules are also laid down to enable readers
to judge of the age and authenticity of almost any
manuscript with which they may happen to be
confronted. The history of writing in England
from the time the Romans left it is, in this book,
very full and complete. Reference should also be
made to Mr. Falconer Madan's " Books in Manuscript," an easily accessible work, published in
1893, abounding in useful and interesting information. The first day of Dibdin's " Bibliographical
Decameron" is also devoted to the progress of
art as seen in some of the more celebrated manuscripts of our own country and elsewhere, but the
account there given assumes the existence of a knowledge which is not likely to be at the fingers'
ends of the majority of those who may chance to
read it. Other books there also are, but these will
suffice for the present.
Beyond saying that the earliest manuscripts of
the class we are considering are written in either
uncial or capital letters; that gold, red, and blue
colours are noticeable before green, purple, or yellow were generally employed; that red rubrics
with alternate red and blue capitals are commonin headlines in the fourteenth century, and that
the illuminations, whether consisting of floriated
letters, leaf and scroll-work in the margins, or
miniatures, became more numerous and elaborate
as time went on, it is hardly possible to enter into
detail. It is well to notice, however, that the
best later period of the illuminator's art extends
approximately from 1250 to 1550, and that it was
44


MANUSCRIPTS
at its zenith about the year 1480. From that time
it begins to decline. It is also noticeable that the t> style of decoration remains substantially the same
for long periods. A certain design of, say, scroll- work will be copied, with variations, over and
over again ; even the scene disclosed by some
miniature will at last become familiar in altered
forms. In order to appreciate this somewhat
curious fact, it is, however, necessary to compare
many manuscripts arranged chronologically, and
the opportunity of doing that is but seldom available. The annexed illustration is from a French
illuminated manuscript Hour Book, of the latter
part of the fifteenth century (dr. 1480). The execution is good and typical of the style of the
period.
Speaking broadly, any stray monastic manuscript the collector may come across in the course
of his wanderings is almost sure to be of a devotional or religious or semi-religious character,
though it may perhaps consist of moral allegories.
Furthermore, it is almost certain to be written in
Latin; English books of this class, though not un- known, being excessively rare. The earliest books
are generally Psalters (in effect, early
" Books
of Hours") of the thirteenth century, and after
them come the Bibles. These are very numerous,
and were followed by many Horae, Sermons
Homilies, and Breviaries. On the other hand
Chronicles and Romances, Poems and Herbals,
though not of the highest degree of rarity, are yet scarce enough, and when in English are very
scarce. On the whole it may be said with considerable confidence that a stray manuscript of
the twelfth to the fifteenth century will be found to
45
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
be either a Bible, a Psalter, or a Book of Hours.
In rare cases it proves to be a Missal. In all these
instances the material used is always parchment or
vellum, the latter being, in effect, parchment of a
finer variety, prepared with the greatest care, and
naturally very expensive. Paper does not seem to
have been used for books till the invention of
printing, at any rate not to any material extent;
but as few changes take place suddenly, so there
was a period, viz., the latter part of the fifteenth
century and nearly the whole of the sixteenth when
sometimes parchment or vellum was used, and
sometimes paper. This we may call the transition
period, and it is worthy of note that manuscripts on parchment of this era are, under similar conditions, more highly appreciated than those on
paper.
It will readily be conceded that it is necessary
to be as sure as possible that any manuscript
offered for sale is perfect. It is seldom possible to
be quite sure, and occasionally there is no certainty
about the matter at all. These old manuscripts
have not, of course, a title-page, and may apparently commence in set phrase, and to all appear- ance at the beginning. Nevertheless, they may
want one or more preliminary leaves. So also they
may terminate apparently in proper form and yet
be imperfect at the end. This brings us to the
intricate subject of the collation of manuscripts,
about which much has been written, though apparently with little result. Mr. Lang cites a number of rules in " The Library," and these
are perhaps the most clear and concise that the
reader is likely to meet with. Briefly it may
be said that if the manuscript is furnished with
46
MANUSCRIPTS
catchwords at the foot of the pages, it will be
necessary to see that they are duly repeated at the
top of the pages following. If there are any signatures they should be followed just as they would
be in the case of a printed book. If there are
neither catchwords nor signatures, then it becomes
necessary to know what the manuscript ought to
contain, and to judge accordingly. If that is un- known, then it is practically impossible to say
whether it is perfect or not. Should it appear to
be perfect, that must perforce suffice, and in practice
it is assumed to be so. It is worthy of note that should a manuscript
be genuine throughout so far as it exists, it is then considered to be in a better position even though incomplete, than it would have been had
it been restored, i.e., made perfect by the addition
of leaves in imitation. The closer and more
natural the imitation the worse the position of
the manuscript, for it casts suspicion on leaves
which may be perfectly genuine. A bad imitation is therefore to be preferred to a skilful one,
for the latter is regarded as nothing more nor less
than a forgery, casting discredit upon the entire
volume.
Breviaries, which are always very voluminous,
are not often illuminated, and are never textually
the same. They must therefore, like Chronicles,
Poems, Romances, and Herbals, be followed from
page to page. Missals are collated in the same way.
All contain the Canon of the Mass faced, when
illuminated, by a full-page figure of the Crucifixion.
Books of Hours begin, as a rule, with the Calendar,
and always contain the Horae, from which they
take their name. They generally, but not always,
47
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
contain the Litany. In fact, there is no certainty
about the " make up
" of books of this kind, and all that can be done is to carefully examine them leaf
by leaf, seeing that the text follows on, and that the
signatures, if any, are succeeded by the corresponding blank (as to the signature) leaf or leaves.
Before the introduction of the Book of CommonPrayer by Edward VI, a variety of service books
were used in the English Church, many of thempeculiar to certain Sees and localities, and it is these
that invariably give the greatest amount of trouble.
Breviaries, Missals, Antiphonaria, Horae, and other
special texts jostle one another in apparently in- extricable confusion, and, indeed, it requires considerable knowledge to distinguish one from the
other, or to say for what service any particular
book was intended. There has recently (August,
1904) been published a work by Messrs. C. Wordsworth and H. Littlehales on "The Old Service
Books of the English Church," which gives a clear
description of the plan, range, and contents of all such books before the Reformation, and to this the
reader can be referred with every confidence. It contains many reproductions of pages of manuscripts, some of them embellished with decorations
and miniatures.
Bibles are the easiest to collate of all old manuscripts. There is, of course, no title. The Epistle
of St. Jerome to the Reader invariably commenceson the first page, and, after that, the books of the
Old Testament follow each other, though not al- ways in the same order. The apocryphal books
are, however, invariably included. The New Testament follows the Old without a break, and is usually, but not always, followed by a colophon,
48
MANUSCRIPTS
after which comes an index of Hebrew names and
a statement of their significance in Latin. Such is Mr. Lang's collation of an ordinary Monkish Bible
in manuscript, and it is undoubtedly accurate so far as accuracy is at all possible in matters of the kind.
The truth is, that although a certain sameness is observable in all these old devotional and religious
books, the " use
" or community in which they were
read was responsible for many variations. The
Bible, being of one " use
" only, that is to say the
same in whatever Christian community it happened
to be met with, was naturally subject to the least
variation, though there are differences, technical
rather than substantial, and these are none the
less difficult to reduce to order.
In conclusion it may be stated that the number
of manuscripts of all kinds stored in the chief Libraries of the world are, according to Mr. Madan
(who, it will be remembered, wrote in 1893), about
as follows: (i) The British Museum, 52,000 and
1 6 2,000 charters; (2) The Bibliotheque Nationale,
80,000; (3) The Biblioteca Vaticana, 25,600; (4)
The Bodleian, 31,000; (5) The India Office, 13,700;
and (6) Cambridge University, 5,723.
49
CHAPTER IV
PAPER AND PAPER MARKS
"Water marks" defined Useful sometimes in detecting
fabrications The Ireland forgeries Unauthorized issues of books Byron's "^English Bards and Scotch Reviewers " The
Papyrus Leaves of palm, olive, and poplar Parchment In- troduction of paper into Europe and England The first English paper mill India and Japan papers Laid and wove papers Water or paper marks The oldest form of the " water mark " Various examples Books of reference. PAPER
marks or "water marks," as they are popularly called, have been described as
" Ornamental figures in wire or thin brass, sewnupon the wires of the mould which, like those
wires, leave an impression by rendering the paper,
when it lies on them, thinner and more translucent."
This definition is as accurate as any, and wouldhave been more so had a few words been addedto explain that in popular acceptation, at any rate, a paper mark or water mark is the figure or device
often seen on paper when it is held up to the light, as a result of the process mentioned. This, however, is merely explanatory of a definition whichis satisfactory enough so far as it goes, and in anycase need not be enlarged upon further.
The reason why paper and its various qualities
and kinds and the water marks upon it are regardedwith interest, is because it is possible in manycases to detect imitations by reference to the
50
PAPER AND PAPER MARKS
peculiarities observable in them. It has been said
that the water mark is a terror to the forger, though
this view is perhaps too sanguine, for only in some
cases can a limit of time be fixed by its use. Paper
made in one generation may be kept back till the
next, or for even longer periods still; in fact, old
paper, either in sheets or made up into book form,
and in each instance unwritten upon, is not infrequently met with. It is, however, an undoubted fact
that old papers cannot be imitated with sufficient
closeness to deceive the experienced eye, and
knowing that, forgers of literary relics have at all times obtained, wherever possible, genuine material
upon which to write or to print. It will be remembered that W. H. Ireland very clearly describes
his fabrication of the Shakespeare manuscripts in
his " Confessions," and that his great difficulty
was to obtain the paper. He selected half sheets
from books in which accounts had been kept in
the reign of Charles I, and, being ignorant of
water marks, took care to select half sheets
having no mark whatever. Old and genuine
paper was an absolute necessity, and pursuing his
operations further, he made friends with a bookseller in St. Martin's Lane, who, for five shillings,
allowed him to take the fly leaves from all the folios
and quartos in his shop. At first he used sheets
without marks, as before, but afterwards, finding
that a jug was a prevalent water mark in the reign
of Elizabeth, he selected paper from his stock ac- cordingly, using many blank leaves to allay suspicion. We may be quite sure that any unprincipled
person, anxious to fabricate a book or a document
for purposes of sale, would proceed in some such
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
way as this, and that to him, at any rate, neither
paper nor water mark would prove an obstacle,
though the appropriate and necessary sheets
would certainly be more or less difficult to obtain.
The utmost we can venture to say is that a study
of paper and the marks upon it is important, as it may afford information as to where and when a
book, without place or date, was printed, and mayalso prove useful in the detection of ignorant
forgeries or unauthorized issues.
In illustration of this last phase of the question,
reference may be made to Byron's
" English Bards
and Scotch Reviewers," originally published by
Cawthorne, without date (but 1809). There are
several spurious, that is to say, unauthorized editions of this work, and the best way of identifying
the genuine first issue is by referring to the
water mark on the paper, which consists of the
date "i 805." The "Athenaeum "of May 5th, iQth,
26th, and June 2nd, 1894, contains a series of
articles on these spurious issues, that of June 2nd
being a summary of the whole position. Fromthese it will be seen that the subject of water marks,
incidental though it may appear at first sight to be,
may be of primary importance on occasion.
As we have seen, the Papyrus, a reed with thick
triangular stem, apparently extinct, since the plant
known to modern botanists by that name is quite
dissimilar, furnished the first paper known to us.
It seems to be referred to in Isaiah (xix, v. 7),
who flourished seven hundred years before the
Christian Era, and was used by the Egyptians in
times much further remote still. Down to the
ninth century A.D., the Papyrus was exported
to Greece and Italy, and Papal documents were
52
PAPER AND PAPER MARKS
written upon it as late as the eleventh century.
Leaves of palm, olive, poplar, and other trees were also used, all alike being written upon with
a reed, split and cut like a quill pen. Parchments,
i.e., the skins of animals, properly prepared, were
also employed in very early days, though this
material seems to have been always very expensive. Diodorus Siculus says that the ancient
Persians used it, and, according to Herodotus, the
lonians did the same 440 B.C. In later days the
material became so scarce and expensive, that the
writing on old manuscripts of this character was
frequently erased, and the parchment used again.
Writings of this class are known as
" Palimpsests."
The scarcity of parchment in the twelfth century
is indicated by the fact that in 1 120, when Martin
Hugh, a monk, was commissioned by the Convent
of St. Edmund's Bury, to write and illuminate a grand copy of the Bible for the library there, he
was unable to proceed with the work, it being impossible to obtain the necessary parchment except
at a ruinous cost. In the library of Ptolemy Philadelphus, there was a copy of the works of Homer
written in golden letters on the skins of serpents.
Eustathius, who lived about A.D. 1180, states that
the Papyrus had fallen into disuse a little before
his time, having been probably superseded by
Arabic paper manufactured according to Chinese
methods from hemp and linen as early as the
eighth century.
The period when paper was introduced into
Europe is uncertain. All that is known is that
there were mills in Tuscany as early as the com- mencement of the fourteenth century, and that
Ulman Stromer started a mill at Nuremberg in
53
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
1390, afterwards writing the first book ever published on the art of paper making. So also the
period when paper was first introduced into England is equally uncertain. There isaletter addressed
to Henry III, prior to 1222, in the Record Office, on a strong paper of mixed materials, but it is the
general opinion that paper suitable for the purpose
of printing was only made shortly before the discovery of the art. It may be mentioned that the
first English paper mill was, at one time, identified
with that established by Sir John Spielman at
Dartford, in 1588, though this is an obvious error, as John Tate had a mill near Stevenage as early as 1490. It is referred to by Caxton in one of his
books printed in that year, and Caxton himself
used native paper for some of his works. Tate's
device or water mark was a star within a double
circle, and that of his son, who carried on the
business, and made paper for Wynkyn de Worde,
a wheel. The " De Proprietatibus Rerum" printed
by Wynkyn de Worde about the year 1495, is on
paper made near Hertford by John Tate. In Scotland a company was formed for making paper in
1695, but none of the native papers attained any
degree of perfection till James Whatman established a well-deserved reputation still surviving
at Maidstone in 1760-1765. An illustration of a paper mill of the sixteenth century, which wereproduce, appears in Jost Amman's " Panoplia," a book printed at Frankfort in 1 564. The history of
the invention of paper has yet to be written, though
there are several works which treat the subject,
as, for example, Dr. Joseph Karabacek's Essay,
and the books of M. Briquet.
Referring to quite modern paper, the terms
54
A PAPER MILL OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY
[To face p. 54

PAPER AND PAPER MARKS
" India paper" and "Japan paper" so frequently
met with, need a few words. India paper is used
for taking impressions from fine engravings on
steel or copper, its peculiar softness of texture
taking a mark upon the slightest pressure. It is made in different qualities from the inner fibre of
the bamboo, and is generally of a buff colour.
India proof engravings are taken off on paper of
this kind, and appear sometimes in books, at others
as independent prints. India paper is the thinnest
of opaque papers, specially adapted for very fine
and important work. Japan paper is made, when
genuine, at Opi in Japan, and is of many different
kinds, including the silkiest tissue paper, thick
parchment, Bristol board, and artists' papers. It is usually manufactured from the fibre of the paper
mulberry. Many books have recently been printed on Japan paper. Machine-made paper, which was
introduced into England in 1801, is more uniform
in thickness than the old papers, and quite smooth.
The rough coarse texture always observable in the
handmade papers is not noticeable except in the
"imitation handmade" variety. "Laid paper"
shows all the marks of the wire-frame mould, and
has the appearance of being ribbed. In the case
of " wove paper," these marks are not observable.
We now come to the rather more important
subject of water marks, popularly so called, though
the expression is not strictly accurate. The definition of a paper mark has already been given, but
the reason of its use needs some explanation. In
early days, when few people were able to read,
pictures or symbols ordinarily took the place of
words, and though paper marks were probably
used with the same object at first, there is no
55
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
doubt that they eventually became trade marks.
Just as printers employed devices which they put on the title-pages or the final leaves of the books
they printed, so paper makers used these devices,
to ear-mark as it were, the different kinds or sizes
of the material they manufactured, or to advertise
some individual business. The former was the
more usual object ; indeed, it was so general that
the names of the different sorts and sizes of paper
may frequently be explained by reference to the
various marks which were adopted at different
periods. Thus Foolscap paper takes its name from
the common device of the fool's cap, Post paper
from the post-horn, Pott paper from the pot or
jug, one of the commonest of all marks, and so on. Jansen, in his " Essai sur 1'origine de la gravure en Bois," says that the oldest mark known to exist
is to be found on the paper of an account book
dated 1301 a circle or globe surmounted by a double cross, of which an illustration is given in
the annexed plate. Fig. i shows this design, and
Fig. 2 a variation of it, found in an account book
at the Hague, dated 1356. Although the same
figures or designs are found at widely different
periods, they invariably show variations, and this
is so in the case of all old water marks without
exception. Another very old and widely diffused
mark is the jug or pot. This was used as early as 1352 in Holland, and is met with during the whole
of the fifteenth century. In England its chief period
is embraced by the years 1540-1560 (see fig. 3).
The open hand surmounted by a star (fig. 4) was
in use probably as early as 1530, but specimens of
the plain open hand are a century older at least,
being noticeable in the account books at the Hague,
56

HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
dated 1432 (fig. 5). The hand holding a key, or surmounted by a crescent instead of a star, or by a fleur-de-lis, or with a Maltese cross beneath,
are all variations of the same device. The open
hand is found on a copy of the " Speculum Christiani," printed by Machlinia at London, n.d., 410.
The authorship of this book is assigned to John
Watton or Wotton, who was living in 1490. Aboutthe same period the plain open hand was quite
common in the Netherlands, where much of the
paper of that period was manufactured. Caxton
bought most of his paper from the Low Countries,
and the late Mr. Blades, on going through a copy of
the first edition of the " Canterbury Tales," printed
about the year 1478, discovered fifteen distinct
water marks. As these comprise a very good collection of the marks of the period we give a list of
eight of them. They are as follows : (a] The Bull's
Head (fig. 6); (6) The Arms of John the Fearless, son of Philip the Hardy; (^r) The Letter P, also
used in Caxton's " Game and Playe of ye Chesse "
(fig. 7); (d) The Letter Y, the initial of Ysabel,
daughter of John, King of Portugal; (e) The Unicorn, often found in books printed by Wynkyn de
Worde (fig. 8); (f) The Arms of France; (g) TheArms of Champagne; (k] The Open Hand, over which is a fleur-de-lis.
The anchor is a very old mark found in some
of the very earliest block books. Many of the
works printed by Aldus Manutius are also water
marked with this device. The horn (fig. 9) dates
as far back as 1370, as evidenced by books of
account at the Hague bearing that date; it is also found on a letter dated from Dover in 1421
addressed to the Bishop of Durham, and was in
58
PAPER AND PAPER MARKS
constant use on paper made in Holland during
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. It is con- sequently not true that the horn was first used as a watermark on paper in 1670,
when the General Post Office was established in England, and the reference to
the post-horn,
61
usually blown
\ by the early let- ter carriers, has no connection
with the mark.
A variation of
the horn is giv- en in fig. 10. So also the story of the fool's cap being introduced by Cromwell in substitution for the crown
is certainly not correct, for the mark appears on
the "Golden Legende"
printed by Caxton in
1483 (fig. 1 1 ), though it is probable that after
the Restoration it was
supplanted by a figure
of Britannia, and al- so by that
of a lion
ram pant
supporting
the cap of
liberty on ^/ C L. a pole. The form of the fool's cap, as it was com- monly met with during the Commonwealth period,
is shown in fig. 1 2. A cap, very like a jockey's cap
59
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
erf the present day, was in frequent use during the
seventeenth century. It appears frequently in
the first Folio of Shakespeare's Plays, printed in
2*5 //
1623. The cardinal's hat (fig. 13) was also a very
common seventeenth century device, so common,
in fact, that there was a class of paper then called
"Cardinal."
It is probable that nearly all the marks named were used in
connection with paper of a certain class, to distinguish it from
otherkinds, ^^ ^ ^
and yet
there can be
93- /3
no reasonable doubt
that some
water marks
were used out
of compliment to patrons and others, or had refer- ence to some distinguishing feature belonging to the book itself. For instance, where the mark of a pelican is found on paper, the volume is sure 60
PAPER AND PAPER MARKS
to have some connection with Aeneas Silvius
(Piccolomini), who became Pope Pius II in 1458.
The pelican was his private device or crest before
he became Pontiff. In Eggesteyn's Latin Bible,
printed at Strasburg, in two vols., folio, 41 lines
to the page, no name of printer or place, nor date
being given, the paper on which the Book of the
Kings is printed bears the water mark of a crown. This mark appears nowhere else, the bull's head
and the letter P being invariably used in all other
parts of the book. This can hardly have been an
accidental circumstance.
At the present day the paper or water mark not
infrequently distinguishes the size of the sheet. A
shield surmounted by a crown shows that the paper
is Pott size, while the figure of Britannia is confined
to Foolscap ; the post-horn within an ornamental
shield, surmounted by a coronet, is assigned to
Post ; a large fleur-de-lis within an ornamental
shield, to Demy ; and a transverse bar within an ornamented shield, surmounted by a fleur-de-lis,
to Royal. Pot, or Pott, is a French paper, otherwise known as Papier Ecolier.
The subject of paper and paper marks, though
of importance for reasons already mentioned, is yet not sufficiently interesting to justify any ex- tended explanation. Further information can be
got, if required, from Samuel Leigh Sotheby's
" Typography of the Fifteenth Century," from the
same author's " Principia Typographical where
several hundred marks are reproduced, and also
in simpler form from Herring's
" Paper and Paper
Making," a new edition of which appeared in
1863.
'
61
CHAPTER V
THE TITLE-PAGE AND THE COLOPHON
The earliest books were modelled on manuscripts The
"Mazarin Bible" The rubricators Colophons The evolution of the title-page " Label " title-pages Half-titles The
first English title-pages The merits of the old title-pages
John Bagford's collection The "Paradise Lost" titles List of Latinized place-names Roman numerals. THE
earliest printers, taking manuscripts as
their models, cast their types in close imitation of the writing of their day. There seems to
be little doubt that printed books were at first mistaken for manuscripts, for just as the scribes supplied the text only, leaving the decorations to be
added by
" rubricators," so the first printers confined their attention to " type-work " only, any embellishments there might be being drawn on the
page by hand. The rubricator's occupation, though
practically ruined by the invention of printing, was
not killed outright. Thus the " Mazarin Bible," a page of which is here reproduced, is supposed to
be the first book printed from movable types. It
is ornamented by hand ; indeed the practice, as
that of leaving blank spaces to be afterwards filled up by the rubricator, was continued for many years
after the invention of printing. The second Aldine
edition of the work by lamblichus, entitled " De
Mysteriis Aegyptiorum," has spaces containing
62
!7
S\1 V\
Btminims&ium*W
mpttmu>
anitrrofme
ltuaniidjiraunuf(U>
laptrfarnB-Dctulit fimhfuauiunnaa
I lamas: qur a pirn* pioaniiariaE&tt
rprobatc Jam hoff rt ntttria aniitint
pftttbatu. Wrca tni ilia nraffmi&o f
rt rpt giunn o topulata : qua no un lu uo rn fannl iarie- non pfrttna rantu nupx-no fubinla *palpae aoulato:
ft& on tunoj-rr biumaru fmpturarii
| fhiDta mnnliam .Irgim" in uttrab
nouoa atwITr nrfoe-raanattautfc
ut toe quoa if hbn a nounactorant
q-. uiDrtnu. fxt pitagoraa mnupbt.
n ra s a atro-ft t pi a to rtjip turn- 1 arrtii tamtarmnnfi- taraqt ora nalit-qut quonDaraagno gttaa Dratef: 1 abcu
norifltrat pctaguttttt ut quiattiraie
mrft ttat-^potnio-tuiufqi Dodnnaa
artjaDrinif gignafta gfonabat-tatt pnxgnnua atq; Difnpuliio:raalnis a
litna uttttuntit Diftratq? fua trapu^
Btnttt ingtott . fccnnp turn Imttae
quaft toto mbtfiigunttopttftquttur- raptuaapiranectucnuDatuB-nran no ttuottiutmo panut nudue rapri uue mnd6
tt rrcuuartarara quia pnj=
lorofibusOTatmnnrnttftfiiit-att re-- tumlium ladra tloqutnnr fijntt raa^ nanttm-tt ulnraia bifpantt galliaru
q; &mbu8 qunGiam nttnu'inqbilro ^ ItgitnuKtt quoa ao totmtplaKjnmtA
fut roma non ttaaratroniue bonu^
nia fama prtount . liatiun ilia rtaa inauDitura ommbua fmilia- trttbra^ Duraq; nwatulura: ut urban ta
i ingttffi : aliuo tpra orbtra quttttntc UnftUoni'fiut tilt raag^ ut mriguB
loquitur- Diu pihia utphagonatta<
ount itrauit pTaa-gtrafrau taucatualbiiiios-fnrtj ao niaffanrw a op u ImntTima inoit rtgna ptntrtauit : tt ab retmmnn.l an dim o pbrfon a mnt twfniiQ"o n. urnit ao bragwanaa : ut brartaramrtinjnoftoatttauno-itt
rautalifautcporaiittiii-intttpauaja
OzfapS'o e-Q t ii atura- Dt monto at tit rurfu D irru i (to mi authttt botcntnn . |not 5 rtarauaB- babilonioo-rtiala
pbmtrre-arabta- paltflmoa-rtutt^
Cue ao altjanima ptrttnt ao trtno , piancut QitjnofopljtBae i CamofiiTu mam folio ramfara mttnet f fabul o. Inuttot lilt oir obtq; quots odaTttn mat yaSaam fcujnr ft ratuor fit nt.ttnptttuipnbi^pltniilimtDito
jujqnarDttmiUboranuljj:
, _m apofinlUB paulua-oao t* lonhj.itnta^fltemntunn-qmBr 1%
iroraaa tatm taft fto6;inB loqut* lbatur-oittna.|ln rrptriratmura qut*
stiB tins qut ra rat lotjtnrur triftije- _}oSoantafmmarabiaq) lufltatanv laumtmt ttpsfolitna ut matot ptml i
jet raafrat apuD turn Butua quinttn^
liot nnra raifttoo tbttDmaore tt r gooabta tfutur nmnun^ pnoiiam mBrumoua reat . fUufumq; pft an* nosquatuorOKun afluraptobarna battnto tiponnttumapoftoliant r annjrtiuni:nrforttinatuuninmmt
>'s am tutumurt . Jiabrtntfao quiD isa^
'' tmna rattgu otut uoae athw: tt in aurto mTnpult ot autJm\8 ort ttanf- &ifa:fom^fonat.tlnntttt&Jjinto tu rod tpilanr-ftlrgtafdla ttraoBnrio
A PAGE FROM THE SO-CALLED MAZARIN BIBLE
(Actual size, 15^ ins. by n ins.) [Toface p. 62

THE TITLE-PAGE AND COLOPHON
the small initial letters of each paragraph, and yet
this book was printed as late as 1516, more than
fifty years after the Mazarin Bible issued from the
press of Gutenberg and Fust. We may take it that all the earliest printed books had spaces purposely left for ornamentation, which was then re- garded as a distinct art, exactly as it had always
been in the case of manuscripts. The subject of
the decoration of books is referred to more minutely
elsewhere, and it is only necessary to say that from
about the year 1480 onward the help of the
rubricator was less and less relied upon, until at
last it ceased to be sought at all, though so great
is the force of precedent that spaces continued to be left as heretofore, even though it had become
practically certain that they would never be filled up. Sometimes, however, even this pretence was
abandoned, and the printers, no longer careful of
the powerful guilds which watched over the in- terests of the rubricators, boldly printed their own
ornaments, as may be seen by referring to the Latin
exposition of the " Lamentations of Jeremiah,"
printed at Oxford in 1482. The front page of this
book has an ornamental border, printed from a
block.
A colophon, from the Greek /coAo^wK, meaning
the finishing stroke, is an inscription on the last
page of a book, used before title-pages were introduced, and in many cases afterwards, containing
the place or year, or both, of its publication, the
printer's name, and other details necessary for its identification. The accompanying illustration, re- producing the final page of Higden's
" Polychronicon," printed by Caxton in 1482, shows the colophon commencing
" And here I make an Ende of
63
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
this lytel worke." Some colophons are more explicit than others, and it may be said that, generally speaking, the older the book the more detailed are the concluding words. In the earliest printed
Bibles there is no colophon, nor was its use universal at any time. Many of the oldest books have
colophons, but many have not, and the omission
is not surprising, for to say the very utmost in
favour of this old method of affording information,
the inconvenience of the colophon was very great. A book which plunges in medias res on its first page, without any introduction or preliminary matter whatever would not strike anyone as possessing
much of that severe and practical method to which
we have long been accustomed. The colophon,
though of the greatest interest to bibliographers,
would probably be entirely overlooked by the
majority of readers, and that it should frequently
have been omitted need occasion no surprise.
The first instance of the appearance of a colophon in a printed book occurs in the well-known
Psalter of 1457, printed at Mentz, now Mayence,
a work of supreme importance as it is, so far as is known, the earliest printed book having a date. Thecolophon gives the date and also the names of Fust
and Schoeffer, the printers. It commences " Pre- sens spalmorum [sic] codex venustate capitalium
decoratus Rubricationibusque sufficienter distinctus," etc. The colophon held its place at the end of the
book till about the year 1520, when title-pages, in
the form we now see them, began to become common and there was consequently less need of a
final word to the reader. It was perhaps directly
suggestive of the printer's marks so often seen 64
(JC
gonfc %fce/3$o fijaf fr mag wgne h) $cw> fc aEmgtg go&/frt% of 0ie foft>fc;<x>noutcan&?
c ttj tfto pccfenfc Cgf / ano? SBcfe n&? pwuffgfe of ac
fu63ifc0/antt (^at t^cw mag 6? a ftwg fgnoE pzce w\ aC ctp^
rRo^omce tQai i* ^nf^Oe^ aut> mgfacaunfte mag 6etSi$*
f^anoci) ano oefttogco/ ant) out fcgt$ m^aunoeo?/^ic8e ii) tfMfc ^eetefotc mgnugff6e&? 6p t pnjjffaunoe of % 3:utftcean?>
^e&eo mwlTkitoi <at afftr t^te pifnec ano? f5e Cgf c maw
come 6) <e cutaf<lgng fgf h> f
of t^i fgnsc aftc t t^c fbzmc of t^e Kctft 6> fbw ma? 6g (Kanu^$ monft
of Cfefuw/Tino tgfetx ao <^ te fnt6ec/3 6?fec^ t^cwj
tcoe it 6> coacrtc i(/^oz gf 21 couOe 6auc fountti) moo ^$5oBo 6aw f^* it) $it moo/6uf ec fufifZauno? t^at
Ce ono ftno^c 2J ^uc f5<^ fcto: fywj j t^ie foofi.fo t^at fuc f^gngce ae 6ttu fet) &mc fg^ fe oct^ at cn^c of
go 6b6c of potgaongcoij fl^oEo? fe 600? ) wmcm6iauno7 anb not
me of m^ fgmpfc
fccono &ag of 2(ug# t^: ^jofj ^cw of
e fbut^ ^ of (G 3nunaaot) of
oua fczo a $oufantt fbut ^n?:^ fouw fcwc ant> ^cgnc/
COLOPHON TO HIGDEN'S " POLYCHRONICON " PRINTED P,V CAXTON IN 1482
f Toface p. 64

THE TITLE-PAGE AND COLOPHON
at the end of old books, especially those of
French extraction. These will be referred to
again in their place. Practically everything to be
learned about colophons may be gathered from
Mr. A. W. Pollard's " Last Words on the TitlePage," an extensively illustrated and very useful
book, published in 1891. Mr. Pollard points out
that although colophons were, as a rule, printed in
the ordinary type used for the book itself, some
examples are much more elaborate. Peter Schoeffer
and others often used red ink, and printers' marks
are frequently found in conjunction with them.
Many colophons were also far more than mere
memoranda ; they were literary compositions, fre- quently in verse, John of Speyer, the first Venice
printer, and his brother Vindelinus, being celebrated for this class of ambitious work. The
" Epistolse Familiares " of Cicero, printed by the
first-named in 1469, has this colophon:
Primus in Adriaca formis impressit aenis Urbe libros Spira genitus de stirpe Johannes
In reliquis sit quanta vides spes lector habenda
Quom labor hie primus c superaverit artem We now come to the invention of the title-page,
adding a few words on the history of its evolution.
It may be thought that a preliminary page devoted to the title of the work in which it appears,
giving perhaps a short summary of its contents,
would have been recognized as useful from the
first, but it was not until 1470 that Arnold ther
Hoernen of Cologne, awoke to its many advantages. In that year he printed his " Sermo ad
populum predicabilis," which contains the first title-page known to exist, and no colophon. A
reproduction, though not in facsimile, is given in
65 F
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
Dibdin's "Bibliotheca Spenceriana," 1814, vol. iii, p. 507. It is lengthy, consisting of nine lines, and
descriptive, far more so than the so-called "label
"
title-pages that afterwards came into use. This,
however, was an experiment and nothing more. Not forjmany years afterwards did the title-page
come into ordinary use. Caxton followed the old
practice, or rather one of his own, for he gives the
titles of his books in any part of the text that suits
his convenience ; sometimes at the commencementof the prologue, sometimes at the end, or even in
the table of contents. After 1480 the " label
"
title- page is often seen. This consists usually of a few
words printed at the top of a preliminary blank
leaf. Full title-pages were not used to any extent
till the last years of the century, nor were they
commonly met with till 1520, as previously stated,
when they superseded the old "label" form, re- vived and made popular yet once again by the
Kelmscott books. The modern "half-title" is in
effect a "label" title, the only difference being
that it is invariably printed in the centre of the
page preceding the title proper instead of at the
top of it. It consists of a few words only, the fewer
the better, giving the short title of the work, which
the general title expands. Where a book contains
several distinct portions, a half-title may precede
some or all of them. Thus, Browning's
" LaSaisiaz," published in 1878, has a half-title not
only before the full title-page, but before each of
the two poems contained in the volume.
Other countries, Germany and Italy especially,
adopted the title-page earlier than we did. Indeed, an artistic title is found to a calendar printed byBernardus " pictor," Erhardus Ratdolt, and Petrus
66
west
" DIVES ET PAUPER " EARLIEST ENGLISH ILLUSTRATED TITLE-PAdE, 1496
(Sixe of original. ioi ins. by 7i ins.)
[ To face />. 66

THE TITLE-PAGE AND COLOPHON
Loslein at Venice in 1476. It is the first artistic
title-page known, and very suggestive of Italian
influence. In this instance a combination is observable, but speaking generally it may be said with
confidence that woodcut embellishments appeared
in books before the title-page was apparently
thought of. The first English printed book to boast of a
title-page is entitled " A passing gode lityll boke
necessarye and behoveful agenst the Pestilens."
This is not dated, but has been assigned to the
press of Machlinia, who is supposed to have printed
it about the year 1486. About the year 1491
Wynkyn de Worde printed a book with a title and
colophon. The former is nearly in the centre of an otherwise blank page and reads " The prouffytable boke for manes soule and right comfortable
to the body and specyally in adversitee and tribulacyon which boke is called the Chastysing of
goddes chyldern." A good copy of this scarce work
can be seen in the King's Library at the British
Museum. The title-page is without ornament, and
if we seek for one of the earliest, perhaps the earliest,
example of an English illustrated title-page it will
be necessary to turn to the " Dives et Pauper,"
printed by Wynkyn de Worde at Westminster in
1496, of which a reproduction is here given.
The merits of the old title-pages are often very
pronounced ; in fact many authorities consider that,
all things considered, they are superior in what
may be called their design to the vast majority
produced at the present day. Mr. Pollard sums
up the points in which they excel as follows: i. The quaintness and beauty of the printers' emblems.
2. The limited number of the types used, rarely
67
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
more than two. Many of our modern titles are crowded with five or six varieties of type, and
sometimes even more. 3. The graceful arrangement of the types in geometrical forms. 4. Thejudicious use of red ink.
The various forms of the title-page as it has
existed from the earliest period, could perhaps best
be shown by any one possessing the time and in- clination to do so, by analyzing the contents of the
large collection formed by John Bagford, now in
the British Museum Library. Bagford, who wasborn in 1650, managed to accumulate some 25,000
"items" extracted from books. These consist
mainly of title-pages which this prince of biblioclasts tore out and trimmed close to the edge
of the text. His methods were barbarous, the
damage he must have done almost incalculable,
and yet his collection has its merits, for it is possible to obtain from it a bird's-eye view, so to
speak, of the many varieties of title-pages in use
at different times, and to trace their distinctive
features from one period to another. Bagford's
collection, though a pitiable example of misplaced
energy, is as useful in its way as the Thomasoncollection of Civil War Tracts, also in the British
Museum Library, which consists of some 23,000
pamphlets bound up in very nearly 2,000 volumes.
The enterprise of the two men was unbounded,but the methods of Thomason were fortunately
more in accord with precedent.
The study of title-pages is, however, not wholly
of antiquarian interest. It is occasionally a neces- sary part of the knowledge which the book-lover
must possess himself of if he would keep himself
abreast of the times. It is not necessary to do68
THE TITLE-PAGE AND COLOPHON
more than merely refer to Milton's " Paradise
Lost" in support of this remark. The first edition
of this immortal poem is distinguished by no
fewer than eight different title-pages, according to
Lowndes, and even his list is not quite complete.
The publisher being unable to sell the whole
edition at once, proceeded to issue a small number
of copies at a time, during the years 1667-1669,
furnishing each batch with a distinct title-page
specially printed for the occasion. A knowledge
of the variations that exist in these titles is necessary, as a very great deal depends upon the form
they assume. Two are dated 1667, four 1668, and
two 1669. The commercial value of a copy of the
original edition of the " Paradise Lost
" depends
inter alia upon the issue to which it belongs, and
there are, as we have seen, eight issues at least,
each distinguishable by its title-page, and practically in no other way; the slight alterations
observable here and there in the text and the
peculiar "make up" of one or two of the issues
being adjuncts rather than distinguishing fea- tures. We now come to a part of the title-page of very
considerable importance, namely, the foot, in which
is usually given the place where the book was
printed or published and its date, these details
being at one time supplied by the colophon. In all instances in which a book is printed in Latin the
name of the place where it was printed or published
will be given in the Latin form, which is frequently
quite different from the name of the place as we
know it to-day. Some are the same, as, for ex- ample, Mantua, Verona, Parma, Murcia,andGouda,
and with them no difficulty will occur, but in other
69
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
instances the names as given in their Latin form
will not always be familiar. Dr. Cotton's " Typographical Gazetteer
" contains thousands of these
Latinized place-names. Some are frequently metwith, others very occasionally, and in making the
following selection from the book in question wehave confined ourselves to places of typographical
importance, most likely to be met with. The list,
though it might be greatly extended, will be found
useful so far as it goes. Dr. Cotton, in addition to a considerable amount of information relative to
the towns themselves, gives dates when printing
was first carried on in each instance. We havethought it better to omit these dates, as many of
them have been shown to be unreliable in the light
of more modern research.
Abbatis Villa. Abbeville.
Abredonia. Aberdeen.
Alba. Acqui.
Albani Villa. St. Albans.
Aldenarda. Oudenarde.
Alostum. Alost.
Alta Villa. Elfeld or Eltville.
Amstelcedamum. Amsterdam.
Andegavum. Angers.
Andreapolis. St. Andrews.
Aneda. Edinburgh.
Angolismum. Angouleme.
Antverpia. Antwerp.
Arelatum. Aries.
Argentina
Strasburg. Argentoratum. J Arnhemia. Arnheim.
Asculum. Ascoli.
70
THE TITLE-PAGE AND COLOPHON
Athense Rauracae.
Atrebatum.
Augusta Vindelicorum.
Augusta Trinobantum.
Auracum.
Aurelia.
Aurelia Allobrogum.
Aureliacum.
Austrise Civitatis.
Avenio.
Bamberga.
Barchino.
Barcum.
Basilea.
Bergomum.
Bisuntia.
Bononia.
Braclara.
Brixia.
Brugse.
Brunna.
Bruxellse.
Bucharestium.
Burgi.
Buscum-Ducis.
Cabelia.
Cadomum.
Caesar Augusta.
Caesarodunum Turonum.
Cantabrigia.
Carnutum.
Chamberium.
Cluniacum.
Coburgum.
Basle.
Arras.
Augsburg.
London.
Urach.
Orleans.
Geneva.
Orleans.
Cividad di Friuli.
Avignon.
Bamberg.
Barcelona.
Barco.
Basle.
Bergamo.
Besangon.
Bologna.
Braga.
Breschia.
Bruges.
Brunn.
Brussels.
Bucharest.
Burgos.
Bois-le-Duc.
Chablies.
Caen.
Saragossa.
Tours.
Cambridge.
Chartres.
Chambery.
Cluni.
Coburg.
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
Colonia.
Colonia Agrippina.
Colonia Claudia.
Colonia Ubiorum. . Colonia Allobrogum.
Colonia Munatiana.
Comum.
Corcagia.
Cracovia.
Culemburgum.
Cusentia.
Daventria.
Delphi.
Divio.
Dola.
Dresda.
Duacum.
Eblana.
Eboracum.
Edinburgum.
Elvetiorum Argentina.
Engolismum.
Erfordia.
Esslinga.
Eustadium.
Ferraria.
Firenze. (Italian form.)
Florentia.
Forum Livii.
Francofurtum ad Moenum.
Francofurtum ad Oderam.
Frisinga.
Fulgineum.
Cologne.
Geneva.
Basle.
Como.
Cork.
Cracow.
Culembourg.
Cosenza.
Deventer.
Delft.
Dijon.
Dol.
Dresden.
Douay.
Dublin.
York.
Edinburgh.
Strasburg.
Angouleme.
Erfurt.
Esslingen.
Eichstadt.
Ferrara.
Florence.
Florence.
Forli.
Frankfort on the Maine.
Frankfort on the Oder.
72
Freysingen.
Foligno.
THE TITLE-PAGE AND COLOPHON
Gaietta.
Ganabum.
Gand (avum).
Gauda.
Gehenna.
Genua.
Gerunda.
Glascua.
Granata.
Gratianopolis.
Hafuia.
Haga Comitum.
Hala Saxonum.
Hamburgum.
Hammona.
Harlemum.
Heidelberga.
Helenopolis.
Herbipolis.
Hispalis.
Holmia.
Ingolstadium.
Koburgum.
Lavinga.
Leida.
Lemovicense Castrum.
Leodium.
Leucorea.
Lignicium.
Lipsia.
Lisboa.
Londinum.
Lovanium.
Lubeca.
Luca.
Gaeta.
Orleans.
Ghent.
Gouda.
Geneva.
Genoa.
Gerona.
Glasgow.
Granada.
Grenoble.
Copenhagen.
The Hague.
Halle.
Hamburg.
Haarlem.
Heidelberg.
Frankfort on the Maine.
Wiirtzburg.
Seville.
Stockholm.
Ingolstadt.
Coburg.
Lauingen.
Leyden.
Limoges.
Liege.
Wittemburg.
Lignitz.
Leipzig.
Lisbon.
London.
Louvain.
Lubeck.
Lucca.
73
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
Lugdunum.
Lugd(unum) Bat(avorum).
Lutetia.
Madritum.
Magdeburgum.
Mancunium.
Marsipolis.
Matisco.
Mediolanum.
Memminga.
Messana.
Moguntia.
Monachium.
Monasterium.
Mons Regalis.
Moscua.
Mutina.
Nanceium.
Nannetes.
Neapolis.
Neocomum.
Nordovicum.
Norimberga.
Nova Pelsna.
Noviomagium.
Olomutium.
Oppenhemium.
Oxonia.
Panormum.
Papia.
Parisii.
Patavia.
Patavium.
Perpinianum.
Lyons.
Leyden.
Paris.
Madrid.
Magdeburg.
Manchester.
Mersburg.
Macron.
Milan.
Memmingen.
Messina.
Mayence or Mentz.
Munich.
Munster.
Mondovi (?).
Moscow.
Modena.
Nancy.
Nantes.
Naples.
Neuchatel.
Norwich.
Nuremberg.
Pilsen.
Nimeguen.
Olmutz.
Oppenheim.
Oxford.
Palermo.
Pavia.
Paris.
Passau.
Padua.
Perpignan.
74
THE TITLE-PAGE AND COLOPHONPerusia.
Pictavium.
Praga.
Ratiastum Lemovicum.
Ratisbona.
Regium.
Reutlinga.
Rhedones.
Ripa.
Roma.
Rostochium.
Roterodamum.
Rothomagum.
Ssena.
Salmantica.
Schedamum.
Sense.
Spira.
Sublacense Monasteri- um.
Sylva Ducis.
Taraco.
Tarvisium.
Taurinum.
Theatrum Sheldonianum.
Ticinum.
Tigurum.
Tholosa.
Toletum.
Trajectum ad Rhenum.
Trajectum ad Viadrum.
Trajectum Inferius.
Trebia.
Trecae.
Perugia.
Poitiers.
Prague.
Limoges.
Ratisbon.
Reggio.
Reutlingen.
Rennes.
Ripon.
Rome.
Rostock.
Rotterdam.
Rouen.
Siena.
Salamanca.
Schiedam.
Siena.
Spires.
Subiaco.
Bois-le-Duc.
Tarragona.
Treviso.
Turin.
Oxford. (The Sheldonian.)
Pavia.
Zurich.
Toulouse.
Toledo.
Utrecht.
Frankfort on the Oder.
Utrecht.
Trevi.
Troyes.
75
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
Treviri.
Tribboccorum.
Tricasses.
Tridentum.
Tubinga.
Turigum.
Turones.
Ulma.
Ultrajectum.
Ulyssipo.
Urbinum.
Utinum.
Vallisoletum.
Venetise.
Vercellae.
Vesontio.
Vicentia.
Vilna.
Vindobona.
Vitemberga.
Viterbium.
Vlma.
Vlyssipo.
Vratislavia.
Westmonasterium.
Wirceburgum.
Zwollae.
Treves.
Strasburg.
Troyes.
Trent.
Tubingen.
Zurich.
Tours.
Ulm.
Utrecht.
Lisbon.
Urbino.
Udina.
Valladolid.
Venice.
Vercelli.
Vicenza.
Wilna.
Vienna.
Wittemburg.
Viterbo.
Ulm.
Lisbon.
Breslau.
Westminster.
Wiirtzburg.
Zwoll.
The use of Roman numerals was widespread
before Arabic characters were introduced. Generally speaking, there is no difficulty in understanding the Roman method of printing dates on the
title-pages of books, though during the seventeenth century a peculiar form, known as the inverted " C," gives rise to some trouble on occa- 76
THE TITLE-PAGE AND COLOPHON
sion. As all know, D stands for 500, but so also
does 13; M stands for 1,000, and so also does
CI^. The following date, occurring on a book
printed by Daniel Elzevir CI^^CLVIII
affords a very good example of a variation commonly met with, but if the equivalent forms given
above are understood, it need occasion no diffi- culty. It is only necessary to remember that in
the example given CI^ = 1,000, and 13, 500; then
follows C, or 100, L, or 50, and the equally familiar
VIII, making the date 1658, in which year the
book in question was printed. The new year did
not, however, always commence on the same day
in all countries. In many it began on the 25th of
March, and it is quite possible, therefore, for a book described as being printed on, say the loth
of February, 1490, to be later in date than one
printed on the loth or any other day of December
in the same year. This is, of course, obvious.
Sometimes, though rarely, strange methods of
dating books were employed, as for instance in the case of the " Epigrammata
" of Ausonius, printed
at Venice in 1472, in which the date is computed
by reference to Olympiads (periods of four years
reckoning from 776 B.C.). Fanciful variations of
this kind are not, however, sufficiently numerous
to render an account of them necessary.
77
CHAPTER VI
INCUNABULA AND THE EARLY PRINTERS
Incunabula Xylography Block books Wooden types Donatuses Catho Early progress of the printers' art The
claims of Gutenberg and Coster The "Indulgence" of Ni- cholas V The " Mazarin " Bible Pfister's Bible The Psalter of 1457 Gutenberg and Fust Fust and Schoeffer Early
presses in Germany in the Netherlands in Italy in France
in England William Caxton The Oxford Press Lettou and Machlinia The " Schoolmaster " of St. Albans Printing
in Scotland, Ireland, and America Characteristics of early
printed books. INCUNABULA,
a word derived from the
Latin Cunaey a cradle, are books printed during
the early years of the art, a period fixed by common agreement as being prior to the year 1500.
Although by that time the art of typography, as we know it, had only been practised for about half a century, the number of books which had already
issued from the different presses established all over Europe was very considerable. It is not possible to estimate the output with any degree of
accuracy, but Brunet's opinion was, that the total
number of works printed prior to the year in
question cannot be far short of 20,000, an estimate
which covers several million individual books, or
as we should say,
" copies." In all probability this
calculation is approximately correct, for Hain gives a list of no fewer than 16,299 books printed during
the fifteenth century in his " Repertorium Biblio78
EARLY PRINTED BOOKS
graphicum," and Dr. Copinger has added considerably to the number. Many of these works are
in existence now, and some are so scarce as to be
practically beyond the reach of any private collector. Others, on the contrary, are comparatively
common, and often met with in the auction rooms
and elsewhere, notwithstanding the fact that editions of these old books rarely exceeded 300 copies, so that at present, at any rate, representative ex- amples from many of the early presses can be procured with little trouble and at small cost. Some
of them, indeed, are less costly now than they were when first printed, though, of course, this is by no means the rule, for rarity and price depend very
much on one another, where incunabula are concerned.
Hallam asserts that the cost of books decreased
about four-fifths with the invention of printing,
and we know from a letter of Andreas, Bishop of
Aleria, to the Pope, that although 100 crowns had
to be paid for a finely-written and illuminated
manuscript in his day, printed books could be got
for about four crowns the volume. No such proportionate value can be relied upon now. Every
old printed book and every old manuscript must
be judged on its merits, and the collector must
remember that there is little to be gained by the
possession of a miscellaneousassortment of fifteenth
century printed books. His object should be to
classify them, as, for example, in such a way as to
show the progress of the art of printing as carried on by some particular printer or in some particular
place. If that be done, his collection, even though
small in extent, will possess an educational value
that may be looked for in vain under other con- 79
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
ditions. If he would reap the fullest possible
benefit of his research and enterprise, he will
necessarily have to become a specialist, and confine his operations within narrow limits.
The taste for incunabula is by no means modern.It may be distinctly traced to the year 1740, whenthe third centenary of printing was celebrated, as many now think, without much justification. Sincethen the taste has become more and more refined
till the specialist has usurped the place formerlyheld by the general lover.
I Typography is generally regarded as the art ofprinting by means of a press from movable types,
whether of wood or metal. Xylography is the art
of printing by means of a press from engravedblocks. The early printing presses were, of course,
worked by hand, and it is curious to reflect that it is only in comparatively recent times that any improvement is noticeable in their construction. Anillustration of the sixteenth-century hand-press ofBadiusAscensius, the celebrated scholarand printer
of Lyons, is given in one of his books. It is almostexactly similar in appearance to that used byBenjamin Franklin when he worked in London in
1 724. The identical press used by Franklin is nowat Washington, but a facsimile of it may be seenin the Victoria and Albert Museum.
In the case of xylographic books, the matter to
appear on each page was engraved as a whole upona single block of wood, from which an impressionwas taken, just as a print is produced at the presentday. This process is undoubtedly very ancient, ex- amples of printing from engraved blocks of woodor soft metal, dating from the fourteenth century,
being well known. Playing-cards were common80
PAGE FROM A BLOCK BOOK, COLOURED IN BROWN AND RED
[ Toface p. 80

EARLY PRINTED BOOKS
during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, and
these were produced from blocks, as also were the
so-called " block-books," consisting at first of rude
woodcuts the size of the page, usually printed in
brown ink. These block-books deal with a variety
of subjects, such as the Apocalypse of St. John,
the " Biblia Pauperum" (so called by Heinecken)
used perhaps by poor friars, many of whom could
scarcely even read, the " Ars Moriendi," " Cantica
Canticorum," and "Liber Regum." A considerable
number of block-books arranged in order of their
presumed date are to be seen in the show cases of
the Grenville Library at the British Museum. We
see that the earlier specimens consist merely of rude
woodcuts without text, and that afterwards en- graved sentences or even half pages of explanation
are added.
Xylographydid not become extinct for more than /I
sixty years after the invention of printing from^
movable metal types, and in this connection it may
be mentioned that the latest book of this character
of any size was printed at Venice by Andrea
Vavassore in 1510 under the title "Figure del
Testamento Vecchio." It is not necessary to say
more on the subject of block-books, as few examples
have survived to us, and the whole subject would
be far beyond the scope of a treatise such as this.
Sotheby's
" Principia Typographica," an exhaustive work in three large volumes, treating of the
block-books of Holland, Flanders, and Germany,
produced during the fifteenth century, is the great
authority on the subject, and should be referred to
in case the necessity arises. We give a reproduction
of the first page of a block-book of S. Johannis
Apocalypsis, consisting of forty-eight engraved
81 G
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
pages, small folio, formerly in the possession
of Earl Spencer. It is coloured in brown and
red.
Many colleges and schools were founded during
the fifteenth century, and the demand for educational books became so great that some inexpensive
and quick method of producing them became a necessity. There are some who think that movable
types cut in wood were employed before metal types
came into general use, and Mr. Bradshaw points
(" Memoranda," No. 3, pp. 5-6) to an instance where
a block-book edition of the " Biblia Pauperum,"
printed at Zwolle, was cut up and the pieces of
wood used again in different combinations. Soalso it would seem that the blocks of a
" SpeculumHumanae Salvationis" were also cut up and the
pieces or types used again for an edition printed
at Utrecht in 1481. This is, however, a different
thing from separate wooden types being specially
cut and used systematically. The probability is that in the early days illustrations were frequently
cut out for use again, and that the letterpress, if any, was printed from movable metal types. Thereis no known instance of wooden types being used,
and it is significant that the first author to refer to
them was Bibliander, who wrote so late as 1548
(see his " In Commentatione de ratione communiomnium linguarum et literarum," p. 80). HadrianJunius, another old writer, whose " Nomenclator"was translated into English by John Higins andprinted at London in 1583, supports Bibliander,
pointing to the " Speculum
" which he ascribes
to Laurenz Coster. He says that wooden types
were used to print the four known editions of this
book (two in Latin and two in Dutch), whereas82
XXIV.
inpoffo Ouor inoitts uoia rnponti er buobue iniwjria c fiiburbanuefj buob
txs Dt rffirar wuimitps j|inKgrg j coimptp UlTttrp
tus wfulfu&rf ttntuptt mt0rotJtnijgigmiIusaJi onw:^pluii6u5winpnnignabilis unpiprrihta C&
fus nomtnfl qnot fuut ftf ijui nomitiflfa igcmtft Dts
anufofs vorat ablara ppt Ijos Tnira fAfus ommii
pOtrnsQuot niobio noia 0{jonfif qmo? qnibutt bnob? iniegrie t>t Cuburbanus cji buofius rojnip utfffirac raunirrp6T| Ittgto jcottuptoot frp
lu&tlftis eg; loimpto *'ttrgro ut. nnin0milus all fgqtplunb? wt. ittreyugnntilifi ungtfrntus <a
nomiufi rjuot fuut fee qui nominota mijire !)t& ab!at( jb'tf boe rtttut raiofi omniu
jB o vi tilip fnric gt mr
1 tttiptttn u^ ^ an C'dit|nro OflS TJta mrco mnirw
<; irrtuin ri FC twrco tituin^? Dipiuo
<S HCCO qutCui qticfctu rejjic fupjno
3 ffro ropofita ten ftttfi^ irirrt gj ufito fie fozmoC a &ro uigj fitu inf. ^sif frco fonnairifpus s ffnfil tuiplrtnuit:
fc> o Cm' fitfiis feujfi &b iont cpcfib a C turn fadfi Ct ntfo Cnp fcmffo ^ t n to jj piitu B tit 6mnnm t& r i (Tun t a 8 to c vcnicg tit n w inutan > in r u D flf 4' r ut pfttfl ptttt? g Cf ^ntan
NO. I SHOWS SEVEN LINES OF A DONATUS SUPPOSED BY
DR. KLOSS TO BE THE EDITIO PRIMA. PROBABLY
FROM TYPES CAST PRIOR TO 1450

EARLY PRINTED BOOKS
other authorities are of opinion that three of them
are wholly printed from movable metal types, and
the fourth partly so, the remaining portion being
xylographic. Whether it would be practically impossible to print from wooden types as some authors
have asserted, is extremely doubtful, to say the
least. Mr. T. E. Hodgkin, who recently wrote an article to Engineering upon the subject, has
tried the experiment with satisfactory results. We
may, however, dismiss the " wooden types
" theory
as being incapable of actual proof, though it is important as being a possible step in the progress of
the art of printing from metal types. The Donatuses, or school grammars of the fifteenth century,
may certainly have been printed from wooden types, as may also " Catho," a delectus in Latin, which
had an almost equally wide circulation, but the
probability is that they were prepared from xylographic blocks or even from metal types before
the period usually assigned to the invention of
printing. Some authorities hold to one opinion,
some to another, and it is quite impossible to say
which theory is correct. The accompanying illus- tration shows seven lines of a Donatus consisting
of eight pages, now in the Bodleian Library. Dr.
Kloss of Frankfort, in whose possession it once
was, considered it to be the EditioPrima, and was
of opinion that it was printed from cast types. The
particular copy sold at Sotheby's in 1835 for
2 i2s. 6d., an amount that would be greatly ex- ceeded at the present day. It is necessary to
observe that the Donatus derives its name from
Aelius Donatus, a Roman grammarian of the
fourth century, celebrated as being one of the in- structors of St. Jerome. The Donatuses were, in
83
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
fact, school books, and it is perhaps not surprising
that so few of them have survived.
The early progress of the art of printing is almost entirely clouded from observation, and
when we come to the parting of the ways, to the
period when metal types superseded the older forms,
the gloom deepens. Who invented the art of printing as we know it ? Since 1868 more than a dozen
books have been written upon this riddle, and no
entirely satisfactory answer has ever been given.
The man who invented typography is the samewho invented movable types, whether of wood or
metal. Ulric Zell, whose testimony is quoted in
the " Cologne Chronicle" of 1499, says that "the
first inventor of printing was a citizen of Mentz,
born in Strasburg, and called John Gutenberg."
He further states that the origin of the art was
derived from the Donatuses, of which we have
spoken. This is probable enough, but on the other
hand the credit of the invention of printing from
cast types has been ascribed to Laurenz Coster of
Haarlem, the respective claims of the two printers
having been urged at times with surprising bitter- ness. The accounts of the origin of printing are contradictory and cannot be reconciled (see
" TheHaarlem Legend," from the Dutch, by J. H.
Hessels, London, 1871, 8vo). The whole subject
involves an intimate knowledge of type founding
or casting, and opens up a profitless inquiry. Atpresent we must be prepared to accept the proposition that Gutenberg made the art of printing
perfect from the first ; that this was no gradual
development, but a sudden illumination. Manyrefuse to believe this. They say it is contrary to
84
'
-S g ri *.s S'3.5 "Mill
*' fill!
I|S:!I es,^ r.
ll-5^ 1 *
'SJS S c s.-. s jt5
iS'r'a Ift31.5* 3 ? f |

EARLY PRINTED BOOKS
everything that is known of the progress of all other arts and sciences. The merits of the case, Gutenberg v. Coster, are cleverly summed up by
Mr. Blades in the second part of his " Books in
Chains," pp. 125-200.
The earliest example of printing from movable
metal type is supposed to be the thirty-one line
"Indulgence" of Nicholas V, granted through
Paulinus Chappe, Proctor-General of the King of
Cyprus, a copy of which, preserved at the Hague,
bears date i5th November, 1454, though that in
the British Museum is dated the year following
(see Illustration). The rubricator of the copy of
the forty-two line Bible (the
" Mazarin Bible," so
called because it was found by De Bure in the
Library of Cardinal Mazarin), in the National
Library at Paris tells us that he finished his work
on 1 5th August, 1456, and as this Bible must
have been printed a year or two before, it is usually
stated to be the oldest book in existence printed
from movable metal types. It is generally attributed
to the press of Gutenberg, though it may have been
printed by Fust and Schoeffer. The probability of
its being the earliest printed book has, however,
been strenuously denied by certain authorities who
uphold the claims of the thirty-six line Bible, known
as Pfister's or the Bamberg Bible, so called because
the type is known to have been in the possession
of Albrecht Pfister, a printer, of Bamberg in
Bavaria. This Bamberg Bible is printed in the
larger of the two types used in the " Indulgence,"
previously mentioned, and with the exception of
the first few pages follows the text of the forty-two
line Bible, the errors in which are reproduced.
Neither of these Bibles bears any date, indeed the
85
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
first printed book having a printed date is, as al- ready stated, the Psalter of Fust and Schoeffer,
issued at Mentz or Mayence in 1457, and found
in 1665 in the Castle of Ambras, near Innsbruck,
where the Archduke Francis Sigismund had collected a quantity of manuscripts and printed books.
The Mazarin Bible, Pfister's Bible, and this
Psalter of Mentz, as also the later edition of 1459, a copy of which sold last year for ,4,000 (Sir John
Thorold's copy realized ,4,950 in 1884), are all so beautifully printed that the fact of their representing the first productions of the press has very
naturally been doubted. The Mazarin Bible contains 1,282 pages, necessitating an enormous fount
of letters, unless indeed Gutenberg printed a few
leaves at a time, and then distributed the type to use again in different combinations. This Bible
has about 2,700 types to the page. The annexed
illustration gives a page from Fust and Schoeffer's
Psalter of 1457, above referred to as being the
first printed book with a printed date. It is also
the first book having a colophon. It may be conveniently mentioned here that the first dated
edition of the Bible was printed by Fust and
Schoeffer in 1462. This work is also remarkable
in another way ; it affords the first instance of a book being formally divided into two volumes.
So much has been written at times about
Gutenberg and his press that we need only give one or two episodes in his early career. In 1450
he entered into a five years' partnership with John
Fust at Mentz. At the expiration of the partnership in 1455, Fust sued Gutenberg and became
possessed of all the printing plant, afterwards
taking into partnership his son-in-law, Schoeffer.
86
" MmDitto poft frftu mmratis Jmiimtmumt,
firgfmagnu OmnuBittr aD(cnnu6,p8 ISmirr
ffiiiido Ditto pft feflu cpfiitlmiiratmiuItmrm? tinrn quiftrit no8
nonabijtin CD on attonfilio irapionl rrm
iftmlrge nne mrDirabtfbit ar
nodr, 6(t frit tanrj Ii0nfl qfi platani ipr
from tmirfii o nql?:qfi fru du fuu Dfiiju in
tan^pulms quf^nrttnttio a fanr
ptnnra in rofilio juftoi| Q^m nouu Diis
uuinilton^irrrHHjjiofiirribir,
A PAGE FROM FUST AND SCHOEFFER'S PSALTER OK 1457

EARLY PRINTED BOOKS
These two were printing at Mentz in 1462. Gutenberg perhaps also continued to print there on his
own account, though his types were finally removed
to Eltville. Mentz was sacked, and its trade destroyed in 1462, and according to Ulric Zell the
art of Printing was then taken to Cologne, thence
to Strasburg, and thence to Venice. No doubt it became more general at that time. The earliest
presses known to us are therefore those of Gutenberg and Fust at Mentz, Laurenz Coster at
Haarlem, Fust and Schoeffer at Mentz, possibly
Gutenberg at Mentz, Pfister at Bamberg, and
Mentelin and Eggestein at Strasburg. All these
presses were existing before 1462.
Immediately after the sack of Mentz in that
year, Ulric Zell, who had been one of Schoeffer's
workmen, established a press at Cologne, and the
art gradually spread throughout Europe. His first dated book appears to have been printed in 1466,
but most of the works issued by him are not
dated, and it may be considered that he com- menced business in or about 1463. In or before
1468 Berthold Rodt of Hanau, one of Gutenberg's
workmen, established a press at Basle, and in the
same year Giinther Zainer commenced business at
Augsburg. In 1469, or the year following, Keffer
and Sensenschmidt joined in partnership at Nuremberg, though the best known fifteenth-century
printer of that city was Anthony Coburger. A
press was established at Spire in 1471.
Thierry Martens had a press at Alost in 1473,
and the same year saw Nicholas Ketelaer and
Gerard de Leempt at Utrecht and John Veldener
at Louvain. The last-named perhaps supplied our own printer Caxton with his types and material.
87
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
Colard Mansion was working at Bruges in 1473,
though his earliest dated book was issued two
years later. Caxton was virtually in partnership
with this printer in 1475-7, and the two printed
three books, viz., " The Recuyell of the Historyes
of Troye,"
" The Game and Playe of the Chesse,"
and " Les quatre derrenieres Choses." Other
towns in the Low Countries had presses at a very
early date; the "Brothers of the Common Life"
printed at Brussels between 1476 and 1487, and
Gerard Leeu at Gouda from 1477 onward. Antwerp had its first press in 1482, and Leyden and
Ghent had theirs in 1483.
Printing was introduced into Italy by Conrad Sweynheym and Arnold Pannartz in 1465.
They first worked at Subiaco, commencing with a Donatus which figures in their catalogue printed
some years afterwards, but is otherwise unknown.
Two years later these printers removed to Romewhere they appear to have been well employed,
though apparently at a loss to themselves. In
1471 they petitioned the Pope for assistance, in- forming him that the number of books they had
printed amounted to 12,475. Jean de Spire introduced the art into Venice in 1469, though his
position was soon eclipsed by two more celebrated
typographers, Nicholas Jenson and Christopher
Valdarfer.
In 1470 Martin Cranz, Ulrich Gering, and
Michael Friburger, all of Basle, set up the first press on French soil within the precincts of the
Sorbonne at Paris, printing in that year the "Gasparini Pergamensis Epistolae." Between 1470-2
they appear to have printed some thirty books,
all being now very scarce and valuable. The first 88
EARLY PRINTED BOOKS
work printed in France is consequently the
"Epistolae" referred to, but the first book printed
in the French language is " Le Recueil des Histoires de Troye," issued from the Bruges Press by
Colard Mansion about 1474. Lyons was the next
French City to have a press. Guillaume le Roy
commenced work there soon after 1470; his first dated book is the " Compendium
" of Pope Innocent III, printed in September, 1473.
Although no block book of English workmanship is known, a few single sheets called " Images
of Piety
" had been printed before Caxton took up
his residence at Westminster in 1477, and printed
his " Dictes and Sayengis of the Philosophres."
This is commonly supposed to be the first book
printed in England, though it is not the first in
the English language. That, as we have seen,
was the work of Colard Mansion of Bruges, about
the year 1475. As " Le Recueil des Histoires de
Troye" was the first book printed in the French
language, so the translation from it made by Caxton was the first book ever printed in the English
language. Very probably Caxton printed earlier
books at Westminster than the " Dictes or Sayengis," but nothing is known of them, and the date
1477 was accordingly fixed upon as justifying the
festival held in honour of the printer four centuries
later. It is worthy of note that the first illustrated
book printed in England was Caxton's " Myrrour
of the World," which saw the light in 1 480 or 1 48 1 . It might be thought that if one thing were more
certain than another in the history of typography
it would be that Caxton was the first of English
printers, and yet a doubt has been cast even upon
this seemingly elementary proposition. There is 89
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
a great question whether a press was not established at Oxford in 1468. In the colophon to the
"ExposiciosanctiJeronimi/'byTyranniusRufinus,
printed in that city, the date is given as i;th December, 1468. For various reasons this is supposed
to be a misprint for 1478, but the grounds for this
belief are not wholly satisfactory. Rood and Hunte
are stated to have been the first Oxford printers,
and if so they probably printed this book which
has been the subject of much bibliographical
controversy.
The first London printer was John Lettou, who
in 1480 printed an
" Indulgence." About 1482 he
was joined byWilliam de Machlinia, one of Caxton's
assistants. At St. Albans the unknown " Schoolmaster" (so styled by Wynkyn de Worde) established a press in 1479, and seven years later printed
that celebrated work by Dame Juliana Berners,
known as the " Bokys of Haukyng and Huntyng
and also of Cootarmuris." The first book printed
by the Schoolmaster seems to have been the
"Augustini Dathi Elegancie," issued in 1479, 4to;
though his first dated book, printed in St. Alban's
Abbey, is the " Nova Rhetorica" of Laurentius
de Saona, 1480. This is an important work, for,
apart altogether from its extreme rarity, the type
appears to be identical with Caxton's No, 2, used
in the earliest books he printed in England. Wereproduce a page from the " Nova Rhetorica,"
showing the quaint type of the period.
The next two places in England to become
centres of printing are York, 1 509, and Cambridge,
1521. In 1508 Andro Myllar printed nine poetical
pamphlets at Edinburgh, copies of which are in the
Advocates' Library. These are supposed to be
90
animu auftifcms mitS g mifcdco^ 9ficc
q
fi*aU9 9qfJiotte qmow pfjW ib lode
cfjficc optt&bii 5 q# fn&2 ut's t 000 g tpinj tn
kdtti^i^ o55>;
2 ; $twa o:oc b i^t gmiu^ g (Sofc
atieno wiato fuS tfumi&tc 9fi02mbtf ^JBffc au ^ mtc pm9 (oc$ g qu5 qb9 n) fom0 freni9:c
true qbj 1 matte (Jm9 oSjif *(9two uti
2 J;ietcmi
a^ c?o Um^comt fua^ ^tcc0 : $tuo fctct fbla
ccp^ 3P^cia
v fca c fub tbufo Ctj&crft^9 c
q
t
i a- g qucjb^ t mate (iwi9 frcn9 g fu
< (ecu foco qSt' wft&tt -^ ot^iui i nocfc * g lacuwic
ct9 1 m^itt ci9 iQlo 5 ^ 9(bU* ca ^o otb)*cati0 c
i9 1 ^20 amici ci9 fptewcttfr ca : g factt fj a mi
i ; qfies (pc ei qbp wltimafe cSjjd* ^5 3? no pf
ut tcfeaa <Jlf;tc!ta9 2 g
ffc^ttc fotj a
fpc^ fokiau e^ucucw g ft q n) fumti So ^
qwo woco 02 icomo^t0 g 9qucf(tonc *>t oj^mni
f (pc confcqwcwcct ytitiit ^tccne : U^W propte aprtionc
A PAGE FROM THE " NOVA RHETORICA " OF LAURENTIUS DE SAONA. PRINTED BY THE "SCHOOLMASTER" OF ST. ALBANS IN 1480
[Toface p. go

EARLY PRINTED BOOKS
the earliest productions of the first Scottish press,
though Thomas Davidson did more to perfect the
art. He introduced Roman type into Scotland,
printing with it the title-page of a book, "Ad
Serenissimum Scotorum regem Jacobum quintum
de suscepto regni/'etc., Edinburgh, 1528, of which
but a single copy is known to exist. Davidson's
magnum ofiuswas "The Hystory and Croniklis of
Scotland," printed in 1536.
Ireland is represented by Humphrey Powell,
who printed a Prayer Book there in 1551. The
first press of the New World was established in
the City of Mexico by Cromberger in 1540.
What are now the United States lagged much
behind, for it was not till 1638 that Stephen Daye
commenced business at Cambridge, Massachusetts; he printed the "Bay Psalm Book" there in
1640. It was there also in 1661-2 that John
Eliot's translation of the Bible into the language
of the Massachusetts Indians first saw the light
the first Bible printed in America. The first book
printed in Australia seems to have been Barron
Field's " First Fruits of Australian Poetry," 1819,
4to; the first book printed in Tasmania, " Michael
Howe, the Last and Worst of the Bushrangers,"
Hobart Town, 1818, 8vo. To pursue the subject
we find the first book printed in South Africa to
be G. F. Grand's " Narrative of the Life of a Gentleman long resident in India," Cape of Good
Hope, 1814, 4to; and the first book printed at
Quebec, a Prayer Book and Catechism compiled
by J. B. de la Brosse for the use of the Montagnais
Indians, 1767. Points like these are interesting,
and may, on occasion, prove useful.
In a short survey it is not possible to do more
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
than refer to a number of heads connected with
the art of typography, almost any one of which
would afford material for a large treatise. Few
statements could be made without fear of contradiction, and fewer still would be proof against
some measure of correction. Nothing can be said
to be so absolutely and definitely settled as to be
secure from controversy. In this dilemma we must
be prepared to accept the opinion of those who,
having devoted special study to different phases of an extensive subject, are most likely to approach
nearest to the truth. More, perhaps, in accord
with the very limited point of view from which we
are able to survey the subject are the distinguishing marks which, broadly speaking, marshal and
arrange very old books into something like order
of date. Many of these old time volumes do not
bear any date, or other particulars, and have only
been assigned to some particular period by refer- ence to the types with which they are printed, and
the history of the press from which they are adjudged to have proceeded. This, again, is an
obscure branch of the subject, rendered less diffi- cult, no doubt, by the labours of the late Mr.
Proctor and other bibliographers of our own day,
but still surrounded on every side with a great
deal of obscurity.
The age of a book may, however, be told, within
limits, by its appearance and general
" make up,"
as explained in Samuel Palmer's " General History of Printing." Should it contain a colophon, we
may assign it with some degree of certainty to a period prior to 1520. If the title-page is of the
" label
" variety, we may say with some confidence that the book was printed after 1480 and
92
EARLY PRINTED BOOKS
before 1520; should the title-page be more descriptive, the book cannot have been printed before 1470. The absence of capital letters at the
beginning of divisions, the spaces being left blank
for the rubricator to fill up, argues that the book
is older than one in which the open spaces are occupied by small printed letters as a guide to the
rubricator. The absence of figures at the top of
the pages and of signatures at the foot, an abundance of abbreviations, oblique strokes used in
places where we should use stops, as in Caxton's
books, irregularity and rudeness of type, are all distinguishing features more or less significant of
antiquity, while a combination of these features,
taken in conjunction with the kind of type used,
will go a long way to fix a probable date. In this
connection it is to be observed that the earliest
system of numbering was applied not to pages
but to leaves, the recto of each leaf having a Roman figure placed in the middle of the page,
at the side, and that catchwords, first used by
Vindelin de Spira or Speyer at Venice, preceded
the numbering of leaves ; that types were uniformly
Gothic till 1465, when they were to some extent
supplanted by Roman founts, so called because
they were introduced about that year at Rome.
Roman type was first used in England by Pynson
in 1518. There is, however, not much necessity
for detective work of this character nowadays, ex- cept for the purpose of remedying mistakes which
the bibliographers may have unwittingly made. It
is rare to meet with a book that is not catalogued
or referred to somewhere, and the older the book
the more likely is it to be known and to have been
described.
93
CHAPTER VII
ILLUSTRATED BOOKS
Printed initial letters The first illustrated books "Thymage
or Myrrour of the World " " Game and Playe of the Chesse"-
The "Hypnerotomachia" of 1499 Book illustration in England
Hans Holbein Halle's Chronicle Illustrations from copper
The earliest English examples Aims of the collector The
Bewicks Blake's works The Earl of Crewe's collection Muir's facsimiles Bartolozzi and other Illustrators Rogers's
"Italy" and "Poems" The Liber Studiorum The Liber
Veritatis Rowlandson, the Cruikshanks, and others Kinds
of illustrated books chiefly in demand The " Drawing-room
books " " Grangerizing" Nicolas Ferrar Examples of " Extra-Illustrated" books Printers' marks. IT
has already been pointed out that the efforts
of the earliest printers were directed towards
the production of books which should resemble
manuscripts, and that for some time spaces were
purposely left for the rubricator to fill in by hand.
Nevertheless, the advantage of dispensing with
the rubricator altogether speedily became apparent
and, as we have also seen, the Mentz Psalter of
1457, the first printed book having a printed date,
has its initial letters printed and not drawn. Theart of illustrating printed books by means of wood
blocks did not become perfect all at once, as weare assured the art of printing did; it evolved by
slow stages, for the Mentz Psalter must not be
taken to be representative of the artistic skill of
the period as exemplified by typography. That is 94
'
ILLUSTRATED BOOKS
an altogether exceptional book, showing certainly
what could be done when no question of expense
was involved, but by no means proving that this
method of ornamentation was usual, or likely to
become so. Hand-painted initials were common
for a long time. These were sometimes wholly
drawn and coloured; at others the initials were
printed in outline and ornamented by hand, as in
the case of several of Giinther Zainer's early books
printed at Augsburg about the year 1471.
The use of woodcut illustrations, an immense
step in the art of decoration, is first noticeable in
several books printed by Albrecht Pfister at Bamberg, two of which are dated respectively 1461 and
1462. From that time onward woodcut illustrations in books became more and more frequent,
till, by the close of the fifteenth century, they were common. The accompanying illustrations, seen in
the " Compilatio de Astrorum Scientia," printed by
Ratdolt in 1489, are reproduced to show one of
the uniformly primitive styles of the period. To
marshal the different styles of decoration into something like order would involve a treatise in itself, nor is there any necessity to attempt the impossible
task of doing so within the compass of a short
chapter, since Mr. A. W. Pollard's " Early Illus- trated Books," a history of the decoration and
illustration of books in the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries, is easily procurable, and should be in the
hands of all collectors who wish to obtain a general
idea of the special branch of bibliography to which
it relates. Mr. Pollard assigns the first German
illustrated books to the Augsburg Press of Giinther Zainer previously referred to. The edition
of Cardinal Turrecremata's " Meditationes," printed
95
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
by Ulrich Hahn at Rome in 1467, ranks as being
the first Italian work in which woodcut illustrations are found, while the Lyons edition of " Le Miroir de
la Redemption Humaine," 1478, occupies the same
position so far as France is concerned. In Holland
CUT FROM THE "COMPILATIO DE ASTRORUM SCIENTIA," PRINTED
BY ERHARD RATDOLT IN 1489 an edition of Rolewinck's " Fasciculus Temporum,"
containing nine illustrations, appeared in 1475, and
in 1 480 or the year following, Caxton's " Thymageor Myrrour of the World" was partly printed,
partly written, with two series of cuts, one consisting of diagrams, and the other of school scenes. 96
ILLUSTRATED BOOKS
The illustrations to the second edition of Caxton's
" Game and Playe of the Chesse," supposed to have been printed in 1481, are, however, better
known, and as they seem to have been designed
CUT FROM THE "COMPILATIO DE ASTRORUM SCIENTIA," PRINTED
BY ERHARD RATDOLT IN 1489
and cut in England, we give a reproduction of one of them. It has been justly observed that the
illustrations to this book are so primitive in design,
and so badly cut that any one who could hold a
knife would have been capable of producing them.
Under these circumstances there was obviously
97 H
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
no occasion to have the work done abroad, as someauthorities believe it to have been. Caxton's useof illustrations seems to have begun with twosmall woodcuts of a master and scholars in thethird edition of the " Parvus Catho." These cuts were used again, with many others, in the " Myrrour of the World."
Almost all authors who have written on the early
illustration of books, refer in glowing terms to the" Hypnerotomachia," printed by Aldus Manutius at
Venice in 1499, remarkable alike no less for its 168illustrations than for its fine types and initial let- ters. The woodcuts have, at times, been attributed
to Giovanni Bellini, a Venetian artist, who died in
1 5
1 6 at a very advanced age, to Carpaccio, and also
to Botticelli and other artists, though apparently onno grounds that can be considered entirely satisfactory. Indeed, very little is known of the "Hypnerotomachia," most people being content to regard it as a notable product of the Aldine Press and amasterpiece of book illustration. Even its authorship was for a long time a matter of doubt, andwas only discovered as the result of a happy inspiration. The book is divided into thirty-eight
chapters, and when the initial letters of each aretabulated in order, they are found to give thelegend,
" Poliam frater Franciscvs Colvmna peramavit." Hence it was assumed, and is now generally believed, that Francisco Colonna or Columna,a Dominican Friar, who died at Venice in 1527,was the author of this celebrated book, an accountof which is given in Fontanini's " Biblioteca dell' Eloquenza Italiana," ed. 1803, with notes and cor- rections by Zeno. A second Aldine edition, havingan Italian in substitution for the original Latin title,
98
p&ge fottta name^
i* a m
AII mcfutc i e
rcncmco of ( ctSc ^a( fy teffctott
fbuC g fvn;
PAGE FROM CAXTONS "GAME AND PLAYE OF THE CHESSE
circa 1481
\Tofacep.

ILLUSTRATED BOOKS
was published in 1545. The original edition of the
" Hypnerotomachia," though rarely met with in
thoroughly sound condition, is not so scarce as might be supposed, taking into consideration its undoubted importance. In 1592 Simon Waterson
printed a version of it in quarto, under the title of " Polyphili Hypnerotomachia; the Strife of
Loue in a Dreame," consisting of 104 leaves, with
copies of some of the original Venetian woodcuts.
This book is, however, just as hard to procure as the original ; indeed, the collector will, no doubt,
understand that all old illustrated books of the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries are, from their
very nature, more or less difficult to meet with.
A facsimile of the first or 1499 edition has recently
been published. It is in every respect but one a
capital substitute for the original.
The history of book illustration in England is ancient, though by no means glorious. It is probable that many of the wood blocks used by
Wynkyn de Worde, Richard Pynson, and other
early printers were prepared abroad from foreign
designs; indeed, it seems to have become a tradition
that our English woodcuts of the period can be
recognized at a glance by its inferiority. If so, and we do not assert this pessimistic idea to be
justified by the facts, what was bad to begin with
became much worse as time went on. De Worde
died in 1 534-5, and his books, nearly all of a popular
character, lending themselves admirably to illus- tration, lost their vogue. His blocks were sold to
other printers, and used again and again till they
were worn out. Holbein did much to stay the
depreciation which had set in, and many of the
illustrated books printed in England during his
99
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
residence here are undoubtedly of good artistic
quality. Holbein was employed in England as a
portrait-painter in 1526, and remained here till 1528. He returned again from Basle in 1532, and
this time remained six years. Finally he returned
to the Continent, but only for a short period, and
died in London in 1543. Roughly speaking, his
influence in this country extended from 1526 to
1543, and during that period he and also other
artists, who necessarily had to work their best in
order to compete with him, illustrated a large
number of books in a style altogether superior to that hitherto seen. An example of Holbein's work
will be found in Edward Halle's " Union of the
two noble and illustre Famelies of Lancastre and
Yorke," printed by Grafton in 1548, in which the
King is represented sitting in Parliament.
It has been stated, though erroneously, that
the earliest examples of copperplate engraving
executed in England are to be found in HughBroughton's "A Concent of Scripture," first printed
in 1596. This contains an engraved frontispiece, a map of the world, and four full page allegorical
plates, the latter by William Rogers. All these are doubtless from metal plates, but they cannot rank
as the first produced in that style in this country.
For instance, " The Byrth of Mankynde," by
Eucharius Rhodion, or, as he is more commonlycalled, Thomas Raynald, 1540, 4to, contains four
copperplate engravings, apparently of home production, and the illustrations to Holinshed's
"Chronicles of England," 2 vols., folio, 1577, are probably not from wood, as Lowndes describes
them to be, but from copper.
The collector will, should he follow the rule
100
ILLUSTRATED BOOKS
generally observed, endeavour to discriminate between woodcuts and engravings from metal, and
arrange his books in order of date in two divisions,
thus showing the rise and progress of each branch
of the art. He will then find that, subject to occasional revivals more or less prolonged in their
duration, the general tendency of the art of en- graving on wood in this country was downward
until it was revived by Bewick. Metal engraving, on the contrary, followed an upward course, till it practically died out with the " Drawing Room
Scrap Books," and other annuals of sixty or seventy years of ago. The revival of wood en- graving injured it severely, and in later days
etched illustrations have been generally preferred,
to say nothing of the far more numerous class of
mechanical productions owing their existence to
photography.
Perhaps the most advantageous if not the most
interesting period for the collector to study would,
so far as engravings from wood are concerned, be
that between 1 700 and 1 779, the year in which the
Bewicks illustrated an edition of Gay's
" Fables."
A regular succession of cuts can be traced in
English as also in foreign books published between the years in question, and they are generally
bad enough to invest the study with a certain degree of amusement. The art of wood engraving
had indeed fallen into utter disrepute at that period.
Design and execution alike were, with very few exceptions, in the lowest style of art. Thus it has even
been said that it is not necessary to trace the history
of wood engraving in England further back than
the last quarter of the eighteenth century. The collector must, however, take this statement cumgrano
101
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
salis> as the earliest books are extremely important,
while even those of the degenerate age have their
merits as links in a long chain, which would be no
chain at all unless kept intact. There is some satisfaction in looking over the pages of a succession
of wretchedly illustrated volumes, and finding the
monotony relieved occasionally by such superior
work as that observable in Howell's " Medulla Historise Anglicanse," 1712, Maittaire's Latin Classics,
1713, and the " Fables of yEsop," printed in 1722,
all of which contain cuts, probably by Kirkall, of a quality far superior to any found in works of the
same kind printed either in England or France for a period of nearly eighty years.
From the time of the Bewicks to our own there
is of course vast material to be noted and arranged.
Thomas Bewick's woodcut illustrations to the
" British Birds," the " Quadrupeds," and many
other books described in Hugo's
" Descriptive
Catalogue," are, of course, of excellent quality and
recognized as such all the world over. The same
may be said of the cuts after Stothard and others
to be found in the twenty-three volumes of the
" Novelists' Magazine," published by Harrison
between 1780 and 1788. The first edition of
Butler's " Hudibras " having Hogarth's cuts,
1726, is also noticeable. The third edition by
Jarvis, of " Don Quixote," 2 vols., 4to, with its 68 plates by Vander Gucht, the edition of Horace
by John Pine, 2 vols., royal 8vo, 1733-7, remarkable for the beauty of its illustrations, especially
in the first issue, which can be easily told by the
mistake (" Post est" for " Potest"), on the medal
of Caesar at page 108, vol. ii, and the Prayer
Book of 1717, engraved throughout, text and all, 102
ILLUSTRATED BOOKS
by John Sturt, all contain excellent designs from
metal plates, and will fall into line in the division
to which they are assigned.
Books illustrated by William Blake, as for ex- ample,
" Silver Drops, or Serious Things
" (about
1780), Blair's "The Grave," 1808, and Young's
"Night Thoughts," 1797, are also most desirable
additions to any library, though they are not to be
compared in point of either interest or pecuniary
value with those more weird productions that
have invested the name of Blake with a strange
glamour. The Earl of Crewe's fine collection of
these wonderful books was sold at Sotheby's in
March, 1903. The "Illustrations of the Book of
Job," invented, engraved and published by Blake
in 1 82 5, comprising twenty-two engravings, original
proof impressions on India and large paper, to- gether with the original designs in colours, realized no less than ^5,600. The original series of water
colours or
" Inventions" constituted the feature of
this expensive volume, but all Blake's works of
the particular kind under discussion are very expensive, and recourse has generally to be had to
the facsimiles so carefully prepared by Mr. Muir
and others.
Contemporary with Blake were a large number
of artists and engravers whose plates are found
in books, as for example Bartolozzi, Schiavonetti,
Turner, and many more. Rogers's
"
Italy," 1830,
and "Poems," 1834, each with fine illustrations
after Turner, Stothard, and others, are said to
have cost the Banker-Poet ^7,000 at least, and
the seventy plates of the " Liber Studiorum,"
drawn and etched by Turner, and engraved by
Charles Turner, F. C. Lewis and others, must
103
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
have been very costly to produce. The same maybe said of Claude's " Liber Veritatis," with its 300 plates executed by Earlom and published
1777-1804, and a great many other books issued
during the eighteenth century, both in France
and England, as described in Cohen's " Guide de
1'Amateur," and in Lewine's " Bibliography of
Eighteenth-century Art and Illustrated Books,"
published in 1898. Rowlandson is another artist
of the same period, though books illustrated by
him belong to a wholly different class, as also do
those containing plates by Cruikshank, Leech,
" Phiz," Onwhyn, and other more modern workers
whose names are constantly met with.
It is apparent that the collector of illustrated
books must ex necessitate rei confine his attention
to some particular class. The field is much too
extensive to be approached in its entirety, while to
traverse it would require not only a profound
knowledge of its many intricacies, not likely to
be in the possession of any single person, but a period of time far outside the compass of a single
life. The cost, too, would be enormous, so that a
limitation of some kind is essential.
There are many kinds of illustrated books, but
the ones in chief demand at the present time are
as follows: i. Incunabula, that is to say, books
printed prior to 1500. These are invariably
most difficult to procure, and, of course, expensive. The illustrations are generally from wood
blocks, though the early printers sometimes used
metal plates, as did Bettini for his " Monte Santo
di Dio," printed in 1477. The " Hypnerotomachia," printed by Aldus in 1499, would be the
last book of the series comprising this division,
104
ILLUSTRATED BOOKS
its excellence reaching the culminating point. 2. English and foreign books dating from 1500 to
1 700, arranged under the countries in which they
were published. 3. English books of the eighteenth century, including the works of Blake. 4. French books of the eighteenth century, illus- trated by the "
little masters," among whom, as engravers, the names of Baquoy, Halbou, de
Longueil, Ponce, and Massard are prominent,
those of Cochin, Eisen, and Moreau being celebrated among book-artists of the same period. 5. Books illustrated by the Cruikshanks, Leech,
H. K. Browne, and other artists of the same
school, including Rowlandson. 6. Books with
coloured plates, comprising fancy subjects, scenes
of a "racy" character, sporting views, and delineations of costume, battle and naval scenes,
and the like. English books containing line engravings are
rarely in request now. These consist chiefly of
artistic annuals, known as
" Drawing Room
Books," published at a high price and in large
numbers during the years 1 830-40, and even later. Many of the very artistic and fine plates in these
books were engraved by the Findens, but so far as can be seen there is very littlechance of their coming
into favour again. They are, and have been for
many years, utterly discarded by collectors, though
without much reason ; for, at any rate, they show
the art of line engraving at its best, and are worthy
of a place on the shelf for that reason alone. From
a literary point of view they are, perhaps, not so
noticeable.
An " extra illustrated
" book is one that is "crammed, like a candidate for honours, with all
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
that relates to all that the book contains," and the
process of extra illustrating is known as
" Grangerizing," by reason of the fact that Granger's
"Biographical History of England" was at one
time most frequently selected for embellishment
in this particular way. Still, any book might be
chosen, and the object was, and indeed is, for
extra illustrating is not by any means extinct, to
procure views of the places mentioned in the text,
portraits of the persons referred to, or failing any
of these, original drawings. When the collection
becomes as complete as circumstances permit of,
the book is taken to pieces, the illustrations in- serted in their proper places, and the whole bound
up, after possibly being
" inlaid
" on leaves of a
larger size. The first " Grangerizer," though he
would then be called by a different name, seems to
have been Nicholas Ferrar, of "John Inglesant"
fame, who lived in the reign of Charles I. His
"Concordance of the Four Evangelists," now in the
British Museum Library, is profusely illustrated " with a very great number of prints engraved by
the best masters of that time, all relative to historical passages of the Old and New Testaments."
Mention has to be made of books of this character because, although they are not illustrated in
the popular sense of the word, they yet contain
illustrations, added though they be. A whole life- time might he spent in extra illustrating a book of
moderate size. Pennant's " History of London,"
bequeathed to the British Museum by Mr. Crowle,
cost that gentleman years of labour and about
.7,000. Mr. Sutherland's illustrated " Clarendon
and Burnet," now in the Bodleian, is enlarged to
sixty-seven folio volumes, and is said to have
1 06
ILLUSTRATED BOOKS
swallowed up ,12,000. This system of "
illustration
"
is not generally popular, because the demand
made upon the patience and money of the operator
THE DEVICE OR PRINTER'S MARK OF ANDRO MYLLAR
has no finality. Furthermore, it requires a considerable amount of knowledge and skill if it is to
be carried out with satisfactory results. Nor is it popular with collectors as a whole, for it involves
107
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
the mutilation or even destruction of the books
drawn upon to furnish the necessary material. It
is not popular with bibliographers, for they are apt to become exasperated when they find some
volume, which they have perhaps long sought for,
denuded of its frontispiece, portrait, or even title- page, to make what they call a Vandal's Library.
It comes to pass, therefore, that " Grangerizers
" are stigmatized by almost everybody, except those
of their own class, as objectionable persons, re- probates with disgusting tastes, and even ghouls
in that they prey upon the dead. No one has a good word to say for them ; they are the pariahs
of bookish society.
The subject of printers' marks must just be re- ferred to since they are illustrations in a sense. Many of them are indeed extremely quaint, while
others have every claim to be called artistic. Our
illustration gives a reproduction of the device of
Andro Myllar, referred to in the last chapter as having printed some poetical pamphlets at Edinburgh in 1 508. The marks or devices used by the
printers were in reality trade-marks, designed to
protect the books in which they appeared from
piracy, or to afford indication of the printer's name
and place of printing, where those details were
omitted, as they often were. They were used from
the very earliest times, as witness the red-coupled
shield of Fust and Schoeffer seen on their Bible of
1462, and are frequently used now by publishers
though they may no longer themselves print the
works they issue. Later on we shall reproduce the
marks of the Aldine and Elzevir Presses, as being
perhaps the most noticeable of these ancient symbols.
1 08
ILLUSTRATED BOOKS
It is perhaps unnecessary to say that the subject
of printers' marks is itself a very large one. Numerous books have been devoted to it and,
like most branches of bibliography, it is so inti- mately connected with other divisions that it can- not be ignored. These symbols or devices were
often placed "with the colophon on the concluding
leaf of the book, or on a separate leaf, or on the
index at the commencement, or, in later days, on
the title-page, or on the half title. Sometimes they
occupy a whole leaf, at others only part of it.
THE RED COUPLED SHIELD OF FUST AND SCHOEFFER
There is no rule. The printer's device appears
always to have been a law unto itself; it is so now
and probably ever will be. As we have said, there
are many books devoted to the subject. The most
convenient, as it is one of the most useful, is that
by Mr. W. Roberts, published in 1893, under the
title " Printers' Marks," and reference should be
made to that for further information. The bibliography at the end of the volume mentions seventeen treatises of a general character, which it would
perhaps be necessary to consult were a thorough
knowledge of the subject important.
109
CHAPTER VIII
SOME CELEBRATED PRESSES
Specialist collectors The Aldine Press The Elzevir Press The Estiennes The Plantin Press Erhard Ratdolt Jen- son The Junta Geoffrey Tory Etienne Dolet and Bodoni
English printers John Daye Baskerville The Strawberry
Hill and other Presses The Kelmscott, Vale, Doves, Essex House, and Walpole Presses Privately printed books The
importance of a collection considered apart from the individual books contained in it. MOST
libraries of recent formation will be
found, as suggested on a prior page, to
possess a distinctive character showing that the
owner has, during the process of formation, been
dominated by some special desire to possess books
of a certain definite class. In other words, most
modern collectors are specialists to at least some
extent, and they are indeed practically compelled
to be so. Very often the specialist directs his at- tention to some particular subject, seeking to ac- quire a representative selection of books relating
to it. This is now the usual, though by no means
exclusive practice, and many fine libraries formed on this principle are in private hands. This, however, is only one of the schemes formulated by
the modern collector, who will sometimes confine
his attention to books printed at certain presses,
selecting, as a rule, one or two of the more celebrated, and endeavouring, as far as possible, to
no
CELEBRATED PRESSES
make up a series of works printed during the
period of their existence. Every press, new or
old, has its history, and it is frequently interesting to trace it by reference to the books printed
there from time to time, but in order to do that
the books must, of course, first be procured. This
is by no means an easy matter in any case ; sometimes it is quite impracticable, and consequently
the collector should fix his attention upon those
presses which afford the greatest probability of
yielding a satisfactory result. For example, it would be no use endeavouring to form a collection
of books printed by Caxton, even though expense
should be no object. One or two might be procured, for books from Caxton's Press certainly do
appear in the auction rooms and elsewhere on
occasion. But they take their place merely as witnesses to the history of early English printing
as a whole, and are not available in sufficient
numbers to justify any one, however rich he may
be, in making a speciality of them. In a minor
degree the same may be said of the works of all the earliest English printers, and when we look at
those of the foreign schools we find that the very
same principles are involved. The great public
libraries of the world have absorbed most of these
books, and those which remain in private hands
are not available in sufficient numbers to make
what may fairly be termed a collection possible.
Some old presses and many new ones can, however, be readily drawn upon, and the purpose of
this chapter is to point out a few of those which
have either in times past or are now in favour.
Some years ago the Venetian Press of Aldus
Manutius and his successors afforded a great field
in
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
for the specialist, many of the books from this source selling frequently for large sums in conse- quence. Of late, however, they have been comparatively neglected, though some of them are even yet of sufficient importance and interest to
make one think that some day, perhaps not so far
distant as we may suppose, they will come into
universal favour again. And they deserve to do
so, for the books printed by Aldus are of the very
greatest importance, as they are from the best
texts this indefatigable scholar could procure, and
printed from specially cast and fine types, which, in
the case of the Greek characters modelled on the
ordinary script of his day, are altogether superior
to the small and crabbed specimens which had
hitherto done duty at Venice and elsewhere.
Aldus printed the editiones principes of the works
of Aristophanes, Demosthenes, Euripides, Herodotus, Pindar, Sophocles, and other classical
authors of world wide repute, his most notable
production being the Aristotle of 1495-8, a splendid monument to his scholarly research, in five
folio volumes. He is also entitled to the credit
of having made several improvements connected
with the production of books. He introduced an
artistic style of binding (as explained in the next
chapter), added the semicolon the only punctuations used before his day being the colon and full stop and first used italic letters said to have been
suggested to him by the writing of Petrarch. The
first book printed in italics was perhaps the Aldine
Virgil of 1501. The copy from which the accom- panying illustration is taken is printed on vellum,
and contains 228 unnumbered leaves. It is printed
with the italic types invented by Francesco da
112
.-M-MANrv ANI B V COLICORVM
T ITTR.V s.
Ityre tu pdtulte rfcubJs ft ttgini nc fig MeSylueflrctn tenui mufim medtta. - rif aacna -
pttri
artta, N ospAtridtn frg>nns,tuTityrelcntustnmt>r4 F
ormofAmrtforutrsdoas knutryltida fyltids. M.elibxe
y deus nolis h<ec oqa fiat. fi N dnog erit ille mihi femfer dots illinf dram
S &pe tener nofiry A\J ouilibut imi>uet <tgnut
1 lie meMerrarcboucstUt arrisjCtipfim L uderef qua uellem , addmo perrmfit agrefr
. N on evident tnnideo,miror mags, tmdia; tons Me
V fyuetdeoturyaturagris.enip/eatpelld} P rottnus
<gr dgo hanc ctiamuix. Tityre dW
H ic inter denfas corylos modo
D e roiio ta'&t; memni pr*dicerc querou * <epepruftr<i(aH<tFr<edixit<iyilicecorntx.
edhtmenJlh-deHfqui fit f da Tityre nol>ti. ~
rl>em
t <inamdicHntRomdm,tAeliyKe}>iitctui T,:
-
||S tulttttcff tv.iic noftr* fitmlem- ^o [ape fblem
A PAGE KROM THE FIRST BOOK PRINTED IX ITALICS
(VIRGILII OPERA. ALDUS, 1501)
[To face /> 1 12

CELEBRATED PRESSES
Bologna, as disclosed by the inscription on the reverse of the title : Qui gratiis dedit Aldus en [sic] Latinis Dat nunc grammata sculpta daedaleis
Francisci manibus Bononiensis.
The reproduction discloses the first page of this
fine copy, which formerly belonged to the Gonzaga
family, and it must be stated that the designs in
the margins are worked and coloured by hand.
Aldus was not, however, the earliest printer in
Greek type, though he was the first to make a practice of printing in that character. The first work
entirely printed with Greek types was the " Grammatica Grseca," of Lascaris, printed by Zaroto at
Milan in 1476, and the earliest Greek Classic the
" Batrachomyomachia
" of Homer. Dibdin's "
Introduction to the knowledge of rare and valuable
editions of the Classics," and Dr. Harwood's
" View of the various editions of the Greek and
Roman Classics," are the books usually consulted, so far as works of the kind are concerned. The
Greek and Latin Classics have, however, fallen
upon evil days, and for that reason, no doubt, the
volumes printed by Aldus are not now sought for
to anything like the extent they once were. If
the collector should make up his mind to ignore
market prices, and to fix his attention solely upon
good sterling work, which must some day receive
its due reward, in spite of any change in sentiment, he will find much to interest him in the
productions of the Aldine Press, as did the great
Grolier four centuries ago. We do not propose to give a history of this
Press, as minute details are given in Renouard's
" Annales de I'lmprimerie des Aide," a work pub113 i
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
lished in 1 834. It will be sufficient to say that Aldus
commenced his career at Venice in 1495 with an
edition of the " Grammatica Graeca" of Lascaris
(see Illustration), himself printing altogether 126
editions known to Renouard. He died in 1515, and
as his son Paulus, or Paolo, was at that time but
three years ofage, Andrea Torresano, of Asola, and
his sons carried on the business under a trust. In
1540 Paulus Manutius took exclusive possession
of his father's business and died in 1 574. His son,
MARKS OF ANDREA TORRESANO OF ASOLA AND HIS SONS
known as Aldus the Younger, continued to print
till 1597, when the Aldine Press finally ceased to
exist. During the period of rather more than a
century 823 works had been printed, not to mention about fifty others, which, though sometimes
attributed to this Press, cannot be assigned to it with certainty, and a number of undoubtedly
spurious volumes.
The well-known mark of Aldus Manutius, the
Anchor entwined by a Dolphin, was first used on
the 1 502 edition of Dante's " Le Terze Rime," and
was continued not only till the death of Aldus in
114
* g flagris
ccda
pof
uidco
ui
W-. bo
r5

CELEBRATED PRESSES
1515, but for more than a year afterwards. It is
THE SECOND ALDINE ANCHOR
1519-1524
THE FIRST ALDINE ANCHOR
1502-1515 1524-1540
THE ALDINE ANCHOR AS USED FROM 1546 TO 1554
found for instance on the second edition of the
" De Mysteriis
" of lamblichus, which bears the
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
imprint
" Venetiis in Aedibus Aldi, et Andreae
Soceri mense Novembri MDXVI." Torresano,
however, usually used his mark of a Tower; and
then the Anchor, with various modifications, came
into use again. Our illustrations of the marks used
at various periods are taken from Mr. Roberts's "
Printers' Marks." Others were in use, but these
comprise the principal varieties.
One word to the collector who makes up his
mind to study the productions of the Aldine
Press, and with that object to procure as manyexamples as possible. It
is in his favour that he
can obtain them for very
much less than he would
have had to pay about
fifty years ago. As a rule
the value of these books
has declined since then
by about sixty per cent.
One of the largest collections of books from the
Aldine Press sold during
recent years was that formed by Sir EdwardSullivan, at one time Lord Chancellor of Ireland.
They were sold by auction at Sotheby's in May,1890, and realized what would have been thought
ridiculous prices at the beginning of the last
century. The "Opera Omnia" of Xenophon,1525, folio, went for 38^., of Thucydides, 1502,
folio, for ^5 5^., the " Graecise Descriptio" of
Pausanias, editio princepsy 1516, folio, for 33^., and116
THE ALDINE ANCHOR OF
1555-1574
CELEBRATED PRESSES
a large copy of Caesar's " Commentarii," bound
in morocco extra, 1513, folio, for a guinea. These
were not exceptionally low prices ; they furnish
fair evidence of the great depreciation which has
taken place in the value of most classical works
during recent years. The late Lady Dilke had a good collection of Aldines, which will eventually
come into the possession of the Nation.
Another old Press,
also greatly favoured by Lady Dilke,
which was at one
time in even greater
favour than the Aldine, is that of the
Elzevirs, carried on
at Leyden, Amsterdam, and Utrecht by
a succession of printers, the first ofwhom
was Louis Elzevir,
who began work at Leyden in 1583. The A LATER FORM OF THE ANCHOR
reader will find the iSTS^S 81 productions of these
presses catalogued with great fidelity by M. Willems in his " Les Elzevier," published at Brussels
in 1880. Although they are not to be compared
in point of textual accuracy with the books of
Aldus they have until comparatively recent times
been in much greater request. At one period there
was a rage for the books of the Elzevirs, and collectors distinguished between those belonging to
" right" and " wrong" editions. For example, the
117
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
beautifully printed little Caesar of 1635 may be
right or wrong, according to circumstances. The" right
" issue (there are three issues) of that date
has a scroll disclosing a buffalo's head at the top
of the dedication leaf, and there are thirty-five
lines to the page. The numbering of certain pages
(149, 335, and 475) is incorrect. The other two
issues do not disclose these peculiarities, and are of no account. Then again there is the celebrated
Virgil of 1636, edited by Heinsius and full of mistakes, which Charles Nodier sought for in vain
in its uncut state with the two passages in red.
There are many similar instances : that certain
words should be printed in red instead of in black
in certain volumes is essential, and it is customary
to measure the height of all books from the Elzevir
presses in millimetres, 25.4 of which go to the inch.
The loss of a millimetre or two in height meant a
great diminution not only in interest but in marketable value.
The "right" dates begin in 1625 and end in
1655, but not all books printed by the Elzevirs
between those dates are important. It depends
entirely upon the edition or, where there are several
editions of the same date, upon the issue. Thetests by which one issue can be distinguished from
another are all given in the work by Willems, and
he has also added particulars of measurements,
market prices based upon those measurements, and
other details which the collector will find absolutely
necessary for his purpose. According to this author
the books printed by the Elzevirs number 1,608,
the majority being in Latin and one only in
English. This last is entitled " Confession of Faith
and the Larger and Shorter Cathechisme," etc.,
118
CELEBRATED PRESSES
and was printed by Louis Elzevir at Amsterdam in
1649 for Andrew Wilson of Edinburgh. Although
" Elzevirs," as they are popularly called, have
fallen away in price to comparatively nothing, this
book will sometimes realize as much as 25 or ^30 (the Scott copy sold for ^36 in April last),
while the " Pastissier Francois," printed by
Louis and Daniel Elzevir at Amsterdam in 1655,
recently (i8th April, 1904) realized as much as ^50, that, however, being but half as much as the Earl of Orford's copy brought in 1895. The
value of these books depends, as stated, on their
measurement to a very great extent; and an uncut
" Pastissier" has sold for as much as ^400 before now. The truth is, however, that the glamour once
surrounding the works of the Elzevirs has almost
entirely disappeared, and that very few of them
are now worth troubling about. Cropped examples
are to be frequently met with for a mere trifle in
spite of the eulogies of modern writers, poets and
novelists chiefly, who do not seem to understand
that the once consuming passion felt by multitudes
of collectors for these works has practically ceased
to exist. In memory of old times, rather than for
present use, we give illustrations of two of the
marks used by this family of printers. They are known respectively as "The Old Sage" and "The
Sphere." The last named is the better known, as
it was inconstant use from 1626, when it first appeared on the " Sphaera Mundi " of Johannis de
Sacrobosco, to 1680. The spurious Sphere, which
is also displayed, is not Elzevirian; it was used
by many other booksellers and printers of the
seventeenth centry in imitation of the original, and
though very much like it at first sight will be seen 119
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
on closer investigation to be comparatively ill drawn and crude. The Sphere of the Elzevirs
indeed attained such wide popularity that the word
was often used as an address. In 1684 there was,
for instance, a press at
Cologne whence issued
the "Recueil deQuelques
Pieces Nouvelles et Galantes"; the imprint to
this work is "Cologne, a
la Sphere," in obvious
allusion to the celebrated
device of the Elzevirs.
The last Elzevir Press
THE SAGE ceased to exist in 1712,
its total period being
measured from 1583 to that date. It may be said
of the Elzevirs, as a family of printers, that their
productions were beautiful ; their classical attainTHE ELZEVIR SPHERE
THE SPURIOUS SPHERE THE GENUINE SPHERE
ments small. Some of their books are brimful of
textual errors. Of all the great printers that France has produced, the family of the Estiennes, who flourished
from 1502 to 1664, is the most noticeable. A col1 20
CELEBRATED PRESSES
lection of works by these printers, such as is often
met with in France, would be most interesting, nor would it be particularly difficult to form. The
"right" period of this Press extends from 1502 to
I 57o, when the second Henri became insolvent.
Renouard, who in 1837 wrote and published the
history of the family and Press under the title of
" Annales del'Imprimeriedes Estienne," mentions
thirteen printers, and gives lists of the works they
produced. Robert, who in 1526 succeeded his
father Henri, the founder of the family, was the
most celebrated, for he was author, corrector,
printer, and publisher in one, producing volumes
which for accuracy and beauty of workmanship
are inferior not even to those of Aldus. For many
years he carried on business at Paris, but in 1552
was driven from there to Geneva by the malevol- ence of the priests, who bitterly resented the
publication of his three-column Polyglot Bible.
They stigmatized it as
" Christ between two
thieves," and openly threatened to burn both it and its printer in a common fire. Books from the Plantin Press of Antwerp might
be collected with every confidence in their excellence and taste. The work of M. Max Rooses,
entitled " Christophe Plantin, Imprimeur Anversois," is the best guide to the works from this
Press. The last descendant of the family, M.
Moretus, disposed of the old house and all its contents to the town of Antwerp, and it is now
open to the public as a museum.
The choice of a Press to which the collector
may specially devote himself is, of course, a matter of individual taste. Some may prefer
the works of Erhard Ratdolt, of Venice, cele121
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
brated as having produced the first artistic title- page as yet discovered, and the first edition of
Euclid in print, that being also the first book
known to possess a continuous series of geometrical diagrams. Mr. G. R. Redgrave has written
" Ratdolt and his work at Venice," and this is the guide which would necessarily have to be
procured by a collector of the works of that Press.
Guides to the presses of different countries are numerous, though special biographies of the
printers themselves are not so. Sardini treats of
the press of Jenson, and Bandini of those of the
Junta; Aug. Bernard treats on Geofroy Tory, the
late Mr. Christie on Etienne Dolet, and Bernardi on Bodoni. Other monographs are also in exist- ence for the benefit of those who may wish to consult them. Among general works we have Hain's
" Repertorium Bibliographicum," four vols., 1826-
1838, with Dr. Copinger's Supplement in three
vols., 1895-1902, the " Annales Typographic!
" of
Panzer, and the various elaborate works of the
late Mr. Proctor. Guides of this comprehensive
character are indispensable to bibliographers and
advanced collectors, and will also be found neces- sary to consult on occasion.
Collectors of English printed books have been
considerably helped of late by the various publications of the Bibliographical Society, but a
great deal yet remains to be done. For instance,
who was the Thomas Bercula who printed the
" Vulgaria
" of Robert Whittington at London in
1520, with an ornamental woodcut border on the
title-page, appearing in other and later books,
notably in the work by King Henry VIII against
Luther ? He calls himself " Typographus," and
122
CELEBRATED PRESSES
speaks of "cum typis nostris," and yet it would
seem that absolutely nothing is known of him.
Perhaps he was a sleeping partner, but that is only
conjectural. For English printers before 1600,
Herbert's edition of Ames' " Typographical Antiquities
"
is generally consulted, and for those of
the eighteenth century Nichols's " Literary Anecdotes." Dickson and Edmund's "Annals of Scottish Printing
"
is an excellent work on the special
branch of bibliography to which it relates, and
mention must, of course, be made of Lowndes'
" Bibliographer's Manual," useful in every way,
except for the quoted prices, which have long
been obsolete. It is needless to say that the
earliest books printed in England are all ex- tremely scarce, and that from a thoroughly practical point of view such guides as William Blades'
" Biography and Typography of William Caxton,"
and his introduction to the reprint of the " Boke
of St. Alban's," are of little use. They would be of
much value if we could get the books described and
commented upon, but we cannot, and all that need
be said of them is, that they are scholarly guides
to subjects of occasional rather than of everyday
and practical interest. The collector who turns
his attention to English printed books might, perhaps, begin more profitably with the press of John
Daye, the printer of the Reformation, or one or more of the later presses mentioned in Herbert's
edition of Ames, or, as a suggestion, that of John
Baskerville might be selected in preference, as it has never received the attention to which it is un- doubtedly entitled, except on the part of Mr.
Samuel Timmins, of Birmingham, who made a
life study of the subject.
123
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
John Baskerville, who was born at Wolverley
in 1706, found the condition of printing in this
country in a very unsatisfactory state, and set
to work to improve it. He is said to have spent
six years and considerably more than ^600 in the
effort to produce a type sufficiently perfect to
satisfy his fastidious taste. That he succeeded is evidenced by his celebrated Virgil of 1757 and the
" Paradise Lost
" of the following year, both being
works of singular merit and beauty. In Roman
and Italic letters he excelled all other printers of
his day, though curiously enough he is charged
with having failed in his Greek types. Dibdin
says they are
" like no Greek characters I have
ever seen," and other authorities speak of them as
" execrable." Nevertheless, the Greek types used
in England at the present day are said by other
authorities to be based upon those of Baskerville,
modified to some extent by Porson in the direction of simplicity. A page from his Greek Testament of 1763 (see illustration) will enable the
reader to judge of these matters for himself. This
Testament was printed at the Clarendon Press,
Oxford, from new types supplied by Baskerville.
The magnum opus of this great printer is, however, the folio Bible of 1763. After his death
on 8th January, 1775, his widow seems to have
printed two books, and four years later his foundry
and its contents were bought by Beaumarchais for
the Societe Litteraire-Typographique and transferred to Kehl in France, where the types were
used for printing an edition of Voltaire in 70
volumes, 1 784-9, well known to bookmen. Some
very useful information respecting Baskerville and
the works printed by him and from his types,
124
sgz n A r A o r
TOT
H n PO
EIII2TOAH.
KEQAAA10N A'. i.
j IAYA02 dxogoXo', w ax dv^owov, $te SttaSfaxy, oXAd Sid.'Ijisy i * *
Xp/^3, xai craTpo$ r5 t^/oavro; aurov w vzxpfiv, Kal ol aw Ipoi 2 0am{ dStXyot, talc, badofSea^ rfc r^atlaf Xdpt^ vplv xai
eJpjfv^ a'rd &i? 3
' Ts Sovroi, eavrov vxip ra>v a'ftapnwv ?ffta>>', 4
aiuvot, taovripg, KO.TO. TO 5e'Xjj/xa TS 6f xa
wuva^ TCJV alojvov. 'jl//^v. 6a'jp.aa> ors STCO 5 , ^eo; (iTarid$re arc) rS xaXcVat^o; J/^a; cv x4'ri X/s^i?, e/; T/5ov efajj&jar
ix 7<v aW.o* / /a| rn-f; e/v o/ rapaojoT5 u/za^, xai 5&om; f^rai^p^ai 7
TO rJa/^'Aiov TS X/JIJK. '^lAAd xai-e'a'v ij/tfT; ^ 0^X05 e'S pav5 fJa^A/Jjjrai 8
A PAGE FROM BASKERVILLE; S GREEK TESTAMENT OK I 763
[ Toface /*. 124

CELEBRATED PRESSES
will be found in Reed's " History of the old
English Letter Foundries," 1887, p. 268, et seq. The celebrated Glasgow printers, Robert and
Andrew Foulis, produced some excellent work to
which special attention might be directed. Robert
printed his first book in 1740, and in conjunction
with his brother speedily became noted for his
elegant and correct editions of the Classics. I f ever
the Classics should come into popular favour again,
books from this press will occupy a very high
position, as indeed they did formerly.
During the latter part of the eighteenth century,
and at different periods during the nineteenth,
large numbers of books were produced at private or semi-private presses, and these also afford
ample scope for the collector. The celebrated
Strawberry Hill Press at Twickenham, the seat of
Horace Walpole, commenced operations in 1757,
" Two Odes by Mr. Gray
" being printed there in
that year ; the Auchinleck Press was established
in 1815 at Auchinleck House, near Cumnock,
Dumfriesshire, the seat of the late Sir Alexander
Boswell, son of James Boswell, biographer of
Dr. Johnson and the Darlington Press about
1770, at the Grange, in that town. The private
press of Thomas Johnes was established at Hafod
in Cardiganshire. He printed there Froissart's
"Chronicles" in four vols., 4to, 1803-1805, and
subsequently many other chronicles which he
translated himself and distributed among private
friends. Then come the Lee Priory Press, founded
in 1813, at Ickham, near Canterbury, Lee Priory
being the seat of Sir Egerton Brydges ; the Middle
Hill Press, Worcestershire, established in 1819,
under the control of Sir Thomas Phillipps and the
125
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
private presses of Mr. H. Daniel at Oxford, and
of Mr. G. Polidori at 15, Park Village East,
Regent's Park, where Dante Rossetti's schoolboy poem "Sir Hugh the Heron" was printed
in 1843.
Better known than any of these, however, is the celebrated Kelmscott Press, founded in 1891
by the late Mr. William Morris, at the Upper
Mall, Hammersmith, and closed in April 1898.
Books from this source reached high prices during
the years 1899-1900, but they have since very
greatly declined, and can now be procured at a
reasonable rate. We have it from Mr. Morris
himself that he commenced printing in the hope of
producing something which would have a definite
claim to beauty, while being at the same time
easy to read. With this object he applied himself
to a close study of the caligraphy of the Middle
Ages and the types of the earlier printers that
took its place, eliminating, as far as possible, those
which dazzled the eye, or troubled the intellect of
the reader by their eccentricity. His well-known
" Golden Type
" was founded on, or evolved from,
the general appearance of the letters in the fif- teenth-century folio containing the twelve books
of the " Historia del Popolo Fiorentina," which
Leonardus of Arezzo caused to be printed in 1476.
Everything connected with the productions of this
Press was the result of careful study for effect, and
the same may be said of some of the other presses
of modern date, such as the Vale Press, the Doves
Press, the Essex House Press, the Walpole Press,
and the Ashendene Press of Mr. St. John Hornby
at Shelley House, Chelsea. Books from these
sources can also be obtained much more readily,
126
CELEBRATED PRESSES
and at considerably less cost than was at one time
possible, and as all alike are distinguished for
their quaintness and the beauty of the types used,
the money expended upon them will probably not
be regretted. Examples printed upon vellum are, of course, the most highly prized.
The subject of " Privately Printed Books "
is intimately connected with that under discussion,
for many presses have been and are essentially
private in the sense that none of the books issued
from them were for sale to the public. The public
may, of course, acquire them, but only at second
hand, and this circumstance should add very appreciably to the interest with which they are regarded.
On the whole, we are disposed to think that a small library of books from the Baskerville
Press would best repay formation, and that from
every point of view, by the collector who makes
up his mind to discard very old printers and
presses and to confine his attention to more
modern productions. Books from that Press are inexpensive as a rule, though it is highly probable
that they will not always remain so. As already
stated, individual choice is a matter of taste, in- fluenced very largely by the question of cost, and
in connection with this phase of the question
there are one or two matters which it is neces- sary to refer to very briefly. One is that the value
intrinsic and pecuniary alike of a collection
of books depends chiefly upon its completeness,
and the other, that even common books are not
always so easy to hunt down as might be supposed.
To form a complete and perfect collection of
anything is perhaps impossible ; the utmost that
127
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
can be done is to approach perfection. The importance of a collection as a whole cannot be ar- rived at by calculating that of the units which
compose it. Its interest and value is enhanced in
proportion to its extent, and the more complete it becomes, the more useful and valuable it will be
found to be. It is conceivable, and indeed arguable, that a large assortment of very inferior books
might be of great importance if they related to an
identical subject or were intimately connected by
a common thread showing that they had been
collected in pursuance of some definite principle
and not at random. Mr. Waterton's collection of
editions of the " Imitatio Christi" affords a very
good example of what is meant to be conveyed.
That gentleman spent a lifetime in accumulating
as many different editions as possible of the immortal work attributed to Thomas a Kempis. He
had acquired more than eight hundred different
issues and versions in nearly every European
language and dialect, and when his collection was
sold by auction after his death it excited wide at- tention and realized a very considerable amount,
though nothing like so much as it ought to have
done. The point is that very many of these books
were, individually, of no importance whatever, and
must have been picked up from time to time for a mere trifle a few pence perhaps. But their place
in the collection was of great importance. They
added to it and became part of it, and in their way
were just as interesting as the other books which
kept them company.
128
CHAPTER IX
ON BOOKBINDING
Binding a protection Rebinding books Cloth bindings of
the present day Buckram Vellum Boards Half bound
books Monastic bindings The Byzantine style Dagaeus the Monk The Saracenic style Early binding in Germany and
the Netherlands Early binding in Italy and France The
Fanfare and Pointille styles Binding in England The Winchester School The cottage and Etruscan styles The Harleian
and Roxburghe styles Eighteenth and nineteenth century
binders Roger Payne Embroidered bindings Decorated
edges Edwards of Halifax Armorial bindings.
THERE
can be no doubt that the practice of
binding books had its origin in the desire to
protect them, and that what was once regarded as a work of necessity has in many cases come to be
looked upon as an art. From very early periods,
in England as well as in other countries, though
perhaps not at first to the same extent, utility gave
way to considerations of refinement, and it is not
too much to say that many of the old bindings
now in existence demand far more precautions for
their safety than the books they cover. That they
are actual, indeed very powerful protectors cannot
be doubted, for in preserving them one necessarily
preserves the books also, and in that way these
memorials of past days answer a very useful purpose, apart altogether from any question of historic or personal interest.
129 K
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
It must be understood that the question of binding is at all times and under all circumstances a most important factor, for a book may be very
seriously injured by being rebound, no matter in
what style or at what cost. This question of re- binding is one of the most weighty to face the
collector at the outset of his career ; later on he
discovers for himself that it is never wise to rebind
a book so long as the original covers are capable
of being repaired, though at first he is apt to re- bind any book showing signs of wear and tear. We are not, of course, speaking now of books of
utility, such as works of every day reference.
These are best in a good strong binding, suitable
to their condition, and the work expected from
them. They are not collectors' books in the strict
acceptation of that term, nor are they subject
in any way to the ordinary rules which collectors
have laid down. This is a matter of common sense and needs no elaboration. It will also be understood instinctively that to strip off an old and
choice binding would be not only an act of vandalism, but of extreme folly from a commercial
point of view. Such bookish depravity, though it may exist, must be so extremely rare that it would
not be worth while to refer to it, were it not that
the principle involved is the same whenever the
question of rebinding comes to the front.
Should rebinding be a necessity, specific in- structions should be given to the binder, that on
no account are the edges of the leaves to be
trimmed. As before stated, books of pure refer- ence or for every day use are not included in these
observations, but they constitute practically the
only exceptions to the rule which is applicable to
130
BOOKBINDING
modern as well as to old books, unless indeed it is necessary to mention the modern Continental
volumes which are issued almost invariably in
paper wrappers. These are published in that way
so that they can be bound to any pattern with
facility, for the Continental collector appears to
be more solicitous of the appearance of his library
than we are in England. He likes to have his new
books bound uniformly. The practice is, however,
dangerous, and has been productive of great loss
before now. As is well known, modern books published in
England are usually in a cloth binding, often
stamped with some artistic device or embellishment, and now always lettered with the title. Bindings of this kind were first introduced in
1822 by Archibald Leighton, who issued a volume (not the first), of Pickering's Diamond
Classics in that form. Gilt stamping upon the
cloth which had, at first, a smooth, washed surface
did not come into fashion till ten years later, when
the second volume of Lord Byron's
" Poetical
Works," 17 vols., 8vo, 1832-3, was published by
Murray in that style. In original sets the first volume certainly has the title printed in gilt, but
it is upon a paper label, whereas in the case of the
second and succeeding volumes the title is stamped
upon the cloth itself. It may be taken for granted
that any volume earlier in date than 1822 must
have been rebound subsequently if it is found in
cloth.
Prior to that date two styles of binding were
in common use in England, the more expensive
consisting of leather, and the cheaper of millboard, though, as we have already pointed out
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
in the first chapter, not all copies of the sameedition are invariably bound alike. Though the
edition as a whole may have been issued in
leather, a few trial copies may exist in boards or
vice versa, and it is the possible existence of these
exceptional copies which often induces the ardent
collector to go to great trouble and expense in
order to procure them. This in itself is sufficient
to show that original bindings should be left intact,
and though paper wrappers can hardly be called a
" binding," the rule is applicable in their case
also.
Only the other day a copy of Apperley's
" Life
of a Sportsman," first edition, 1842, containing
thirty-six coloured plates by Alken, sold by auction
for ^13. It had been rebound in morocco extra,
with gilt edges, in a very expensive style, but hadit been in its original blue cloth covers, and clean,
it ought to have brought ^30 at least. The original edition of Fielding's "Tom Jones," consisting
of six volumes, was published in 1 749 in a leather
binding, though a few sets appear to have beenbound up in boards, probably for some experimental
purpose. The six volumes in leather can often bemet with for a few pounds, while a set in boards,
if it could be procured, might cost ^100. Yetanother instance. The first edition of Sterne's
" Sentimental Journey," two vols., 1 768, was issued
in calf, and is worth in that style some j$ or 6. It seems, however, that a few copies were inclosed
in wrappers, and one of these, excessively dirty,
and not even perfect, but " uncut," sold by auction
in November 1903 for as much as ^28. Theseenormous variations in the prices paid for twodifferent copies of the very same work emphasize132
BOOKBINDING
the twofold position advanced more than once in
these pages, that an " uncut
" copy is, as a rule, of
much greater interest than one having its edges
trimmed or smoothed, and that it is most unwise
to rebind any volume merely because it looks as though it needed binding, without, at any rate,
very careful consideration.
And if this is so in the case of comparatively
modern books, clothed in covers of no interest as bindings, it is not necessary to provide any argument to prove that old and distinctive bindings
should in no case be interfered with. There are
collectors of bindings, just as there are of books,
and every collector likes to have, and endeavours
to procure, books in their original, or failing that,
contemporary covers; or, better than all, except in a very few cases, in bindings having about them
something of the glamour of history or romance. One of the finest and most extensive collections
of old bindings was formed by the late Professor Corfield, of Savile Row, with the object
of exemplifying in some way or another the art,
workmanship, or development of bookbinding. A
considerable number of these books, all of which were on view at Sotheby's in November last year, were selected for exhibition at the Burlington Fine
Arts Club. The English portion was particularly
fine. The early London stamped-panel binders were represented by three different examples; by
John Reynes, by the binders H. R., A. H., G. C.,
and the very rare M. D. There were two specimens
of the Wotton binder, one each by Berthelet and
Garret Godfrey of Cambridge, and upwards of fifty
specimens by the royal binders, Samuel and Charles
Mearne. French and other foreign bindings found
133
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
their place in this library in large numbers, and
formed an extensive history of the art. Before proceeding to consider the subject of
bookbinding from an historical standpoint, mention
must be made of some of the ordinary styles in
common use at the present day. Cloth binding has
already been mentioned, and there is no need to
refer to it further, as examples may be seen in
any bookseller's window. "Buckram" is a species
of coarse linen cloth stiffened with glue, stronger
than the ordinary cloth covers so often seen, but
not differing much in appearance at first sight.
When looked at closer, the " web " of the cloth is seen more distinctly, and the whole appearance is more suggestive of durability. Of late, many new
books have been published in vellum covers in
imitation of the old-style patterns, or with no pattern, and sometimes tied with silk ribbon. In a few
cases metal clasps are substituted for the ties, as, for instance, in the case of " The Legendary History of the Cross," comprising a series of sixty-four
woodcuts reprinted by Mr. Fisher Unwin in 1887
from a Dutch book published by Veldener in 1483.
Boards, i.e., covers of cardboard, are sometimes
used, and leatherbindings,such as calf and morocco,
often. A book is said to be half bound when it has
the sides of cloth or boards, and the corners and
face or back of leather, vellum, or some other
material different from the sides. This makes an
ideally cheap and durable binding, showing a face
of leather, often ornamental, when placed upon
the shelf, and for this reason is in much request.
These half bindings, especially those in half calf,
have, however, been productive of much mutilation
in the past, it being rare to see a book bound in
134
BINDING. THE BYZANTINE STYLE
[ Toface />. 134

BOOKBINDING
half calf which has not also been cut down by the
binder. " Leatherette
" bindings are a cheap substitute for morocco or roan. They are not inartistic,
but neither are they durable, being very apt to
crack at the joints. Vegetable parchment is sometimes used to slip over the paper wrappers in which
nearly all French books are published, and the
practice has been introduced into this country, so
that this style of binding, if such it can be called,
is met with occasionally. We now come to the historic aspect of the subject, though it will not be necessary to refer to it at any great length. M. Paul Lacroix expresses
the opinion that " as soon as the Ancients had
made square books, more convenient to read than
the rolls, bookbinding was invented," and this
carries us back to a rather remote period, for it is clear that the Greeks and Romans were perfectly
well acquainted with books prepared in the manner
in which we now see them. Literary treatises were
perhaps generally written on rolls, but books of
accounts and others which were useful only to the
degree in which they could be readily consulted
appear to have been made up into pages exactly
as our ledgers and day books are made up now.
In later days the monks usually prepared their
Bibles and books of devotion writing, illuminating, and binding them, and it is worthy of note that
the earliest works from the printing press were bound in imitation of these manuscript volumes.
Many of the early monastic bindings were very
elaborate and costly. The monks prepared them
up to a certain point, and then sent the covers to
the jeweller and goldsmith for ornamentation in
what has now come to be known as the " Byzan135
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
tine style." Our illustration shows a binding of
this kind, supposed to have been executed in the
twelfth century; it is formed of wooden boards,
padded with cloth, upon which are nailed thin
plates of silver gilt with figures in relief. These
Byzantine coatings are often formed of gold and
silver, sometimes studded with jewels, and carved
ivory and enamel were afterwards used for the
same purpose. Relics of this kind are exceedingly
scarce, especially in this country, where the rav- ages attending the Reformation were widespread
and most destructive. In February last Messrs.
Sotheby sold by private contract five volumes of
this class which had formerly been in the Libri
Collection, for the enormous sum of; 20,000. They
were ancient manuscripts, important in themselves no doubt, though the attraction really centred in the
bindings of silver gilt ornamented with pearls, precious stones, and enamels. Dibdin describes many
of the ornamental and jewelled bindings found in
Continental libraries in the third volume of his "
Bibliographical Tour," and the whole subject is exhaustively dealt with by Mr. W. Salt Brassington, in his " History of the Art of Bookbinding."
The first binder known to history appears to
have been Dagaeus, an Irish monk, who lived
about the year 550. Bilfrid, a monk of Durham
(c. 720), is mentioned in Simon of Durham's
"Historia Ecclesiae Dunelmensis," in connection
with a book known as the " Textus Sanctus Cuthberti," now preserved in the British Museum,
though shorn of its adornment of gold and silver
plates once set with "precious gems and gold."
This is the book incautiously dropped into the sea by the monks of Lindisfarn in their haste to 136
SECTIONS OF EARLY SIXTEENTH CENTURY BINDINGS OF
ITALIAN DESIGN SHOWING THK " STRAP WORK"
TOOLING OF THE PERIOD
\Tofacc f>. 136

BOOKBINDING
escape the Danes, but which was nevertheless
miraculously restored to them uninjured through
the merits of the saint whose name it bears.
Monastic bindings of this costly character were
of course exceptional. More often books were bound in vellum, calf, or pigskin, protected with
metal bosses and corner plates, and sometimes
stamped in blind tool (i.e., without gilt adornment).
Sometimes they were bound in rough covers of
skin, from which the hair was only removed sufficiently to permit of the title being inscribed.
These were the ordinary styles of binding in use
in Germany and the Netherlands, though in these
countries, as elsewhere, velvet, figured silk, and
brocade came into use with the Renaissance. Indeed, the age which witnessed the invention of
printing also saw the art of bookbinding advanced
to great perfection, though it was not till the end
of the fifteenth century that it began to rank as an
art in itself. What is known as
" Saracenic " binding was
practised in the East, in the Levant especially, and
was contemporary with the stamped work of Western Europe. Its distinguishing feature is plainly
apparent, for the ornaments invariably consist of
rope twists arranged in geometrical designs. The
" rope
" design is essentially Saracenic. During the
first half of the sixteenth century Italian and French
gold tooling chiefly assumed the forms of interlacings suggestive of " strap- work," frequently re- lieved with foliated ornamentation, as shown in the
illustration. These four designs belong to the earlier
portion of the sixteenth century, and are of Italian
origin.
There can be no doubt that the early printers
137
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
were frequently their own binders. In our own
country Caxton, Wynkyn de Worde, Lettou and
Machlinia, the first London printers, Richard Pynson, Berthelet, and many other English craftsmen
themselves bound the books they printed. About
this time blind tooling came into vogue in this
country, though it had been employed elsewhere
long before, and shortly after gilt tooling, also, of
course, by hand. The art of applying gold orna- ment to leather is, however, of unknown antiquity.
It was practised in ancient Egypt, though in
modern times Aldus Manutius, the celebrated
Venetian printer was probably the first to employ
decorative art of the highest character. Some of
the designs on his bindings are imitations of those seen on the walls of Eastern mosques. He has
been styled the reformer of European binding.
He employed vellum and leather, usually plain
but sometimes gilt-tooled to an arabesque or other
design, the edges of the leaves being occasionally
gauffered and coloured. His example in the matter
of neat and effective bindings was speedily followed
in all the Italian centres. From there the art spread
to France, for the dictum " La reliure est un art
tout fran^ais
"
is not based upon any substratum
of fact ; the Italians were the first to use calf and
morocco in substitution for the old bindings of pigskin and leather laid down on oaken boards.
So far as France is concerned two particular
styles of binding, often referred to and sometimes
imitated at the present day, claim attention. The
first of these, known as the Fanfare style, was in- troduced by Nicolas and Clovis Eve, two celebrated binders of the age of Henri III (1574-89).
The Fanfare design consists of geometrical pat138
SECTION OF BINDING TOOLED A LA FANFARE
\Tofacf p. 138

BINDING SHOWING THE POINTILLE STYLE. THE CENTRE-PIECE IS OF POINTILLE SCROLLS
[Toface p. 138

BOOKBINDING
terns, with sprays of palm branches, leaves, and
foliated forms, deftly introduced, the whole being
tooled in gold. These decorations assumed different forms and designs, though a pronounced style
is common to all of them, and was probably a reaction against the gloomy bindings in which Henri III
took such great delight. The precise meaning of
the word Fanfare, as here used, is not very clear. Colloquially it means a "flourish of trumpets,"
which by a stretch of imagination may be regarded
as the antithesis of something staid, solid, and
morose. On the other hand Fanfare is said by
some authorities to be merely the name of a book
which a collector had bound in imitation of one of
the bindings of De Thou. The illustration discloses a fine example of a Fanfare design.
The other distinctive style of binding, known as Pointill was introduced by Florimond Badier,
in the middle of the seventeenth century. Badier,
who may have been identical with Le Gascon, was
probably a workman in the employ of the Eves.
Like those binders, he first designed geometrical
outlines, but filled them in, not with branches and
leaves as they usually did, but with innumerable
gold dots, each dot separately tooled, and the whole
forming a brilliant series of fine stars falling in patterns on a ground of scarlet morocco. The reproduction we give is of a binding decorated by Le
Gascon in the PointilU style. This style, though
luxurious, was too laborious and expensive to re- main in fashion for long. It practically died out in
France about the year 1 660, though traces of it were
found for many years afterwards in the bindings of
Duseuil, Padeloup, Derome, and other celebrated
workmen.
139
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
The history of the art in England is obscure.
We know that, as already asserted, the early
printers bound their own books, that Julian
Notary was a celebrated binder in the reign of
Henry VII, John Reynes and Berthelet in that of
Henry VIII, John Gibson in that of James VI (of
Scotland) and Samuel and Charles Mearne in the
reign of Charles II, but, unfortunately, it is impossible to connect many existing bindings with any of
these names and to say with certainty that they are the work of such and such a craftsman. Long before
their time, however, a school of binding flourished
at Winchester and spread afterwards to London,
Durham, and Oxford. It existed from the twelfth
century, or perhaps earlier, to the end of the fif- teenth, when the large panel stamps were imported
from France. The Winchester bindings are usually
covered with small stamps an inch or less in size,
of a square or circular shape, containing figures of
saints, grotesque or nondescript subjects. The
Cathedral Libraries of Durham and Hereford
have many examples of this style of binding, and
a fairly well preserved specimen, belonging to the
late Mr. William Morris, realized ^180 at his sale
in December, 1 898. It was in oaken boards covered
with leather, stamped with circular, oval, and
square dies of fabulous animals and birds. Two
large centre circulars inclosing similar dies were
on the upper cover, while the under cover was
entirely comprised of square dies representing
gladiators, Una and the Lion, and other devices.
As a rule, the later English bindings are imitative and have few original features, though there
are exceptions, one of which is disclosed by what
is known as the "Cottage" style (see illustration).
140
A "COTTAGE BINDING
\ToJacc p. 140

BOOKBINDING
This style was common in France about the year
1630, though it is purely English in conception
and origin. It discloses an arrangement of closely
confined but not formal lines at the top, bottom,
and sides, the spaces being filled in sometimes
with sprays and leaves a la Fanfare, in combination with lace-work, at others, with small rings
and scales. The University presses of Oxford and
Cambridge adopted the Cottage style extensively,
and it is often seen. The Harleian style of binding was designed by
the son of Robert Harley, first Earl of Oxford,
who had his father's books expensively bound to a pattern by two craftsmen named Elliot and
Chapman. The Roxburghe binding, now often
seen, was used by the Roxburghe Club, founded
in 1812, immediately after the great sale held in
that year. Another essentially English binding is known as the Etruscan. It is not necessary to describe it further than to say that it shows a decoration of Etruscan vases sometimes copied in colours
by means of acids. This is severe, not very artistic,
and cannot be described as original. Itwas initiated
by John Whitaker, and for a time enjoyed a fair measure of success. Strictly speaking, there would
not appear to have been any purely English style
of binding, the Cottage pattern excepted, since the
old Winchester days. Berthelet was a clever craftsman, but without originality, for his work is based on French and Italian models. The art of tooling
in gold was not practised here till about 1 540, and
in searching for a
" School," we are driven to fall back upon the printer, John Daye, who certainly
did turn out some tasteful, and not altogether conventional, designs, composed chiefly of a large
141
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
centre ornament and corner decorations, sometimes inlaid with white leather upon brown. Still,
not even Daye's designs were entirely original.
It is impossible to speak too highly of the celebrated English binders of the end of the eighteenth
and beginning of the nineteenth centuries. The
names of Baumgarten, Kalthoeber, and Staggemeier, are a sufficient guarantee of the excellence of any binding attributed to them. These
craftsmen were succeeded by Hering, Lewis,
Hayday, Riviere, Bedford, and Zaehnsdorf, while
among living artists, for such they really are, the
names of Mr. Zaehnsdorf (son of the preceding),
Mr. Cobden-Sanderson, and Mr. Douglas Cockerell will be familiar. The guild of women-binders
and the Hampstead bindery have also turned out
some good work, much of which has been sold by
auction during the last two or three years. Hering
followed, to a great extent, the style of Roger
Payne, while the bindings of Kalthoeber nearly
always disclose a circular ornament or star on the
back.
Roger Payne (1739-97), one of whose bindings in scored Russia we reproduce, was the first modern native binder of any real talent, for the
French emigrants, who made their home in
this country towards the end of the eighteenth
century, merely imported a foreign reputation.
Payne is described as being dissolute and dirty in
his habits. He lived in a garret, by all accounts,
and littered it with odds and ends, stale bread and
scraps of food, grease from guttering candles, wornout shoes, which he was too indolent to throw
away, and refuse of all kinds.
Probably this picture of his domestic life is 142
SECTION OF A BINDING 15Y ROCiER PAYNE
{Toface f>. 142

BOOKBINDING
greatly exaggerated, but however that may be,
Roger Payne, as a binder, displayed very opposite
qualities. Negligent he was not, for his work shows
every trace of extreme care and laborious accuracy
of detail. His designs, though simple for the most
part, are elegant and refined, while his taste, ex- emplified in his choice of ornament and general
appropriateness of design, has never been sur- passed, and very rarely equalled in this country.
As to this and much more the reader should refer
to " Roger Payne and his Art," by W. L. Andrews,
an excellent book published at New York in
1892.
A few words are necessary on the subject of
embroidered bindings, which came into early use
in England. In the British Museum there is a
thirteenth-century Psalter bound in a cover worked
with gold thread, and this is probably the earliest
example of an embroidered binding in existence.
It is in a very bad state of repair, but enough of
the original cover remains to show that the work
was well done. The " Miroir or Glasse of the
Synneful Soul," a manuscript in the hand of the
Princess Elizabeth, afterwards Queen, is preserved
in the Bodleian. She translated it from the French
rhyme into English prose in the year 1544, and
embroidered the binding probably with her own
hands. Mr. Cyril Davenport gives illustrations of
both these bindings ("English Embroidered Bookbindings," 1899), as well as of many others, disclosing heraldic, floral, and other designs, some of
which were exhibited at the Burlington Fine Arts
Club in 1891.
Nicholas Ferrar's "Protestant Nunnery" at Little Gidding is often credited with having proH3
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
duced embroidered bindings, though apparently
without any warrant. Auctioneers and booksellers'
catalogues nevertheless frequently contain the
entry,
" Embroidered by the Nuns of Little Gidding." Ferrar's niece, Mary Collet, and the other
ladies of the nunnery, undoubtedly used their
needles, but probably only to sew the leaves of
books to the bands, an important step certainly,
but not one from which much credit is usually obtained. Rightly or wrongly, it is said that there
is no embroidered binding known which can be
safely attributed to Nicholas Ferrar's ascetic es- tablishment.
Closely connected with the art of bookbinding,
though not actually forming part of it, is the decoration of the fore edges of books, a practice brought
to a great state of perfection by Edwards of Halifax. The oldest form of edge decoration is that
known as gauffering, or gilding a I*antique. Theprocess came into use in France in the reign of
Louis XII, and consisted in first covering the
edges of the book to be treated with a thin layer
of gold, which was then sized. When dry another
and thicker layer of gold was painted over the
first, and then the workman proceeded to prick a
pattern on the surface. Sometimes the design
shows dull on a bright ground and sometimes the
reverse, but in either case a distinctive pattern is produced. Books with gauffered edges are moreoften met with than those which show gilding onedges which have been merely marbled or coloured,
and are certainly more pleasing. Sometimes both
processes are used in combination. A third form
of edge decoration is that revived by Kalthoeber.
In this the edges of the leaves are painted with a 144
BOOKBINDING
landscape, or some other design, and afterwards
gilded. Books so treated sometimes show the
design when they are closed, but the practice of
Edwards, who took out a patent for the process
in 1785, was to "fan " the leaves, so to speak, and
then to paint upon them. The leaves are spread
or fanned out, and fixed firmly in that position.
The surface, having been rendered perfectly
smooth, is then painted upon with water colours,
and, when dry, gilded, so that on the book being
restored to its normal position the design entirely
disappears, and can only be seen when the leaves
are again spread out. Edwards worked in this
style upon vellum as well as upon paper. The
practice is not much resorted to nowadays, as the paper upon which books are printed is usually
too thick to admit of a successful design being
worked upon the edges. The various methods of
colouring and gilding the edges of books are treated
by Mr. W. J. E. Crane in his " Bookbinding for
Amateurs," an excellent and practical work, giving
particulars of every process and detail connected
with the art. One point remains to be mentioned before this
chapter is brought to a close. It will be noticed
that many old leather bindings have stamped upon
them, usually in gilt, the armorial bearings of their
former owners. This affords a clue to the library
from which they came, and it is therefore necessary
to be able to trace the arms to show the source. Like almost all phases of bibliography this is, in
itself, a distant branch of the science, and as armorial leather bindings are comparatively com- mon, though probably destined to become scarcer
in course of time, there is no lack of material upon
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
which to draw. One of the books usually consulted
whenever it is wished to trace armorials of this kind
is Guigard's "Armorial du Bibliophile," published
in 1870. It is profusely illustrated with many coats
of arms copied from old bindings which came, from
time to time, under the notice of the author.
146
CHAPTER X
GREAT COLLECTORS
Associations with the past Binding as evidence of former
ownership La Bruyere's " Fool " Lorenzo the Magnificent
"Tho Maioli et Amicorum" Other Italian collectors Antonio
Magliabecchi Jean Grolier The Golden Age of French col- lectors Henri II and Diane de Poictiers De Thou Gabriel Naude Cardinals Richelieu and Mazarin Moliere "Graille," " Coche," and "Loque" Marguerite d'Angouleme Nodier
and the later French School L'Abbe Deseuil The English
collectors Richard de Bury The Royal Libraries The Earls of Arundel and Leicester Later and modern collectors. ONE
of the chapters in Mr. J. Rogers Rees's
" Diversions of a Book-Worm," treats of
" The Loved Books of some other Folks." It is written in so simple and natural a manner that the
reader cannot help feeling that the heart of the
writer was in his work, and that books may on
occasion possess a special charm by reason of their
having belonged to illustrious persons or to celebrated collectors of the past. The far-off contact
with the hands of people whose names yet live in
the annals of history or romance still clings to many
a book that perhaps would otherwise be of no
account. Collectors appreciate such volumes, and
cherish them with especial care by reason of their
associations. It is just this feeling that invests
early editions of books with a prominence often
denied the later ones, for the collector likes to
147
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
think that the author of the book he holds in his
hand has looked upon its counterpart, or perhaps even upon that very copy itself. Every old book
has an extrinsic as well as intrinsic value. In the
vast majority of cases we may not be able to trace
its pedigree, or to say from whose library it came,
or who has turned over its leaves, but in others
we can do so with certainty, for the binding maybe of a distinctive kind or show some special device
or emblem identifying it with a former owner whomay also, though this is not often the case, have
written his name or motto within. " The LovedBooks of some other Folks" are of exceptional in- terest to us, even though they should have been
roughly handled, as many of the books once belonging to Charles Lamb evidently have been.
In fact, if they can be associated with any celebrated
person by reason of the character of the binding,
the manuscript notes or signatures they contain, or
in any other way, they at once become objects of
unique interest ; the collector recognizes that he
holds in his hand something which has not its fellow in the world. The feeling may be purely
sentimental, but it is a very real one notwithstanding.
It has often been said that France is the mother
of bibliography, and therefore of book collectors,
and that is to a certain extent true, for the French
converted into a science what the Italians had
previously regarded in the light of a pastime. We in England were, and perhaps still are, muchbehind the French in most branches of bibliographical knowledge. Richard de Bury was a
great collector, but he was not a scientist ; indeed
Blount's " Censura celebrium Authorum," a work148
COVKR OK A IJOOK. FROM THE LIBRARY OF THOMASSO MAIO1.I WITH HIS MOXOdRAM
. 148

GREAT COLLECTORS
printed in 1690, must be regarded as the first regular treatise on bibliography ever issued in
this country, while the " British Librarian " of
William Oldys, an unfinished work, published in
1737-8, is our first work devoted to old books in
contradistinction to new. About this time, too,
Michael Maittaire had completed his "Annales
Typographici," a monument of industry and re- search which first put the study of bibliography
in England on a solid basis. Blount, Oldys, and
Maittaire may, therefore, be regarded as the
builders of an edifice which succeeding generations have enlarged and beautified.
In this chapter we propose to mention the
names of some great collectors of the past whose
books can be identified by their bindings, for at one time it was the usual practice of those whose
absorbing passion centred in the library to have
their books bound to some particular pattern or in
some special style. This was sometimes carried
to very great lengths, as we shall presently have
occasion to see. Jean de la Bruyere, the celebrated French writer, who died in 1696, complains
very bitterly of the prevailing fashion of his day
for expensive morocco bindings, and narrates how
rich fools were wont to shout in his ear that the
volumes in what he calls their " tanners' shops
" had "
gilt edges," and were " elegantly tooled
" to a pattern. These same fools, he declares, never
read the books they owned. They were book collectors in name only ; mere imitators of those true
collectors who had preceded them ; they lacked
the spirit, possessing only the substance, and no- thing is known of them now. The names of many great collectors of this and
149
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
other countries who were saturated with the spirit
of all true book-men, have, however, come downto us, and volumes they once owned are often
regarded with the greatest interest. There would,
for instance, be a notable competition for anybook from the library of Lorenzo the Magnificent, stamped with the Medici arms, the laurel
branch, and the family motto "Semper." Everyone, of course, knows of the great collection of
Thomasso Maioli (1500-49), who adopted for his
book-covers a style of tooling prevalent in the
East, modified, however, by Italian influence, disclosing scroll-work and foliage, often in white,
edged with gold, and laid down upon a dark background, beautiful, no doubt, to behold when clean
and fresh (see illustration). It was this Maioli, one of the family of collectors, who adopted the
motto, afterwards imitated by Grolier "ThoMaioli et Amicorum." Pope Leo X (1513-21)
was another collector who had a fine library, andCardinal Bonelli (1541-98) was celebrated for the
costly bindings with which his books were clothed.
Demetrio Canevari, the physician to Pope UrbanVIII, perhaps inherited his books, but whateverthe truth in that respect, there is no mistaking
them. They invariably disclose an oval medallion
with his device, the figure of a charioteer driving
towards Pegasus, who stands on a precipitous
rock. The chariot, in blue or perhaps red, travels over a silver sea, and around is the motto, OP6n2KAI MH AOHlnS. Canevari's library remained
intact at Genoa till 1823, when it was dispersed.
Other celebrated Italian libraries, yet remembered,
are those of Alemanni, the poet, and Pasqual
Cicogna, the Doge of Venice. Books from any150
A BINDING FROM THE LIBRARY OF DEMETRIO CAXEVARI
[Toface /. 150

GREAT COLLECTORS
of these sources are of great interest to the
modern collector, and correspondingly expensive.
One of Canevari's bindings covering a copy of
Ariosto was in the collection of the late Professor
Corfield, and is displayed in the illustrated edition
of the catalogue issued by Messrs. Sotheby just
prior to the sale. We reproduce this by the kind
permission of the firm.
Perhaps the last Italian collector of world-wide
renown was Antonio Magliabecchi, who lived all his life at Florence and died there in 1714. He
commenced his career as a shop boy, and even in
those early days used to haunt the street stalls,
buying any book his means permitted. In after
years he became celebrated not only for his large
collection of books, but for his extraordinary
memory. It is said of him that he never forgot
anything that he once read; that having looked over a library, he obtained a perfect map of it in
his mind, being able to say, years after, where
such and such a book stood upon the shelf; that
he would often quote not merely some book as an
authority in support of an argument, but the page
or pages where the necessary passages were to be
found. Magliabecchi left the 30,000 volumes he
had succeeded in collecting to his native city of
Florence, where they are still to be seen, in com- pany with many others added since his day. His
books were catalogued and described by Follini
in 1793-5-
Though there can be no question that the
Italians were the first to be distinguished as collectors, the example set by them speedily travelled
to France, where all that had hitherto been ac- complished was soon put into the shade. In
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
France, books are and always have been re- garded as necessities. Nearly all the greatest
writers have been collectors, as well as all the
aristocracy. At the time of the Revolution innumerable volumes gathered from the libraries of
the nobles were scattered about the streets, their
armorial covers defaced or mutilated. One patriot
of the time expressed his conviction that a wellbound book was an enemy in itself, and to give
point to this contention, bought up books in order
to deface their covers. But there was probably a
great deal of method in the savagery of the Revolution. It was sometimes advisable to express
loudly one's patriotism in order to banish the
shadow of the guillotine, and the hand which openly
mutilated a book because it disclosed the symbols
of an aristocrat, may not infrequently have preserved its fellow in secret. The French have indeed at all times been great readers and collectors.
The literature of France is saturated with anecdotes of books, and many more books about books
have been published there than elsewhere. It is not possible to look at the " Melanges," printed
for the Societe des Bibliophiles Francois, in six
volumes, 1820-9, without arriving at this conclusion. The same spirit exists now as always, as witness M. Janin's
" L' Amour des Livres," published in Paris so recently as 1866.
The well remembered Jean Grolier de Servin,
Vicomte d'Aiguise (1479-1565), was a disciple and
contemporary of Maioli. He might almost be
regarded as an Italian collector, but for the fact
that he is identified with the history of France.
His family came from Verona and he was for some
time Ambassador at Rome; his bindings are very
A (1KOI.1KR MINDING
\Tofacep. 152

GREAT COLLECTORS
similar to those of Maioli, many of them were
executed in Italy, especially those disclosing
polychromatic designs, and he was dominated by
the spirit of Maioli, even to the extent of adopting a variation of his virtual invitation to borrow
" lo Grolierii et Amicorum." Furthermore,
Grolier, like Francis I, was a great collector of
books printed by the Venetian printer, Aldus,
whom he accounted his friend. He had a complete
collection of Aldines, many of them in covers designed by Geoffrey Tory, who was also a book
lover, others by Aldus himself, and others again
by Italian binders, whose names are unknown.
Grolier's bindings, one of which we reproduce, were gilt with a
" delicacy unknown before his
time." He collected some 8,000 volumes bound
in half a dozen different styles, geometrical orna- ments in compartments, gilt, with scroll-work, predominating. At first he used a simple combination
of various line patterns, afterwards introducing
into the design decorative ornaments, such as
flowers, wreaths, and so on. This fine library was
sold in 1676. Books from the library of Louis de
Sainte Maure are, however, scarcer than those of
his contemporary, Grolier. They can be recognized
by their bindings, which are mostly tooled with geometrical figures, and bear in the centre, on the side,
the motto,
" In via virtuti nulla est via." Such is the account given of them by Mr. Brassington,
and most people will have to be content with the
description, for it is practically impossible to obtain a book from this collection.
During the reign of Francis I (1515-47), the
French to some extent abandoned the Italian designs and struck out a line for themselves. From
153
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
this point the Italian influence became less and
less marked till it finally ceased almost entirely.
Francis was an admirer of Grolier and a great
collector. His Latin, Italian, and French books were bound in dark leather ; the Greek in morocco
of various colours, often in the Oriental style. WhenDauphin, Francis used the device of a dolphin,
probably suggested by the mark of Aldus, and the
motto,
" Nutrio et exstinguo." When he became
King the dolphin made way for the arms of
France, a Salamander attached to the collar of
St. Michael and the crowned " F." The large
paper copy of Homer which Aldus had presented
to the King was found in the library of the Marquis of Hastings after his death. It seems to have
been carried there at the time of the Revolution.
The Golden Age of French book-collecting is associated with the period of Henri II and Diane
de Poitiers, extending from about 1547 to 1566.
Catherine de Medicis, the wife of the King and
Marguerite de Valois, his daughter, were both
noted collectors, the former especially, as also was
Marie de Medicis. A specimen of her binding is shown in the annexed illustration. Marguerite
de Valois, whose binder seems to have been
Clovis Eve, used a design of daisies and other
flowers, gracefully entwined. Catherine had about
4,000 volumes, exclusive of manuscripts, the
greater part of which are now in the Bibliotheque
Nationale. Many of them had belonged to the
Mar^chal de Strozzi, which the Queen seized upon
when he died, and promised to pay for but did not. As to the King himself, he had four monograms,
one for himself and Queen, and the other three for
himself and Diane de Poitiers. The fair Diane
154
HOOK. FROM THE LIBRARY OK MARIE I)E MKDK'IS
{Toface p.

GREAT COLLECTORS
was also a most fastidious collector. After the
death of her husband her bindings show an arrow
issuing from a tomb and the motto,
" Sola vivit in
illo." When she became the mistress of the Due
d'Orleans, the tomb disappeared, and the motto
was changed to "Sola vivat in ilia." Many of
the books in her Chateau d'Anet are said to have
been bound by Le Petit Bernard. They often disclose her own and the King's initials, the " H
" and " D
" interlaced (see illustration), the Lily of
France twined round the crescent of Diana, the
quiver, the arrow and bow of the chase. Her
library remained intact in the Chateau d'Anet till the death of the Princesse de Conde in 1723,
when it was dispersed. Some of the books were bound by Nicholas Eve in morocco of various
colours, and closed with silver clasps.
The historian Thuanus or De Thou (1553-
1617), friend of Grolier and president of the Paris
Parliament, had a magnificent Library, which re- remained intact till 1789, when it was sold by the
heirs of Cardinal de Rohan, into whose possession
it had come. The books in this library were bound
in morocco or calf to a pattern varying with the
circumstances of the life of its founder. When
Thuanus was a bachelor, his arms appear in
silver, beneath two laurel branches, and his name
is given below. When he married Marie Barban^on in 1587, he discarded this design, and
placed his wife's escutcheon alongside his own,
with the initials J. A. M. After the death of his
wife, her and his own initials are interlaced, and
we see a wreath of twining stems tipped with
red berries. After 1 603, when he married Gasparde
de la Chastre, his new wife's escutcheon is seen in
155
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
conjunction with his own, and the initials appear
as J. A. G. Thuanus employed the Eves to bind
for him, and must have spent a fortune on decorative effect. His library was catalogued from an existing manuscript, and edited by Quesnel in
1679.
The celebrated family of the Eves came into
prominence during the reign of Charles IX(1560-74), of St. Bartholomew notoriety, and mayhave bound for Henri III, the debased and worthless king who is referred to by Dumas as a learned
monarch. His bindings were of the gloomiest. ADeath's Head with the motto,
" Memento Mori " or
" Spes mea Deus " was a favourite device,
though on the death of the Princesse de Cond6,
to whom he was greatly attached, he had her
initials stamped on his book covers, with a chaplet
of laurel. On one cover is seen a skull and cross- bones, and on the other the legend
" Mort m'est
vie."
The long reign of Louis XIV witnessed the
formation of many notable collections. The king,
who himself had a liking for books, powdered his covers with Fleurs de Lys, the royal crown appearing at each corner, back and front alike. He had
several binders, among them La Tour and Levasseur, and his librarian, Gabriel Naude\ who also
hunted for Cardinal Mazarin, was himself a collector. Naud would buy up a whole library to
procure perhaps half a dozen volumes which either
he or his patrons happened to want. According to
Rossi, who knew him well, he would buy books by
the ell. Cardinal Mazarin had a library, but it was
confiscated by the Parliament in 1652. On his
return to power he began to collect again, and it 156
SHIELD AND CROWN OF HENRI II, WITH THK TRIPLE CRESCENT
OK DIANE DE POITIERS, AND THE " H AND
" D" INTERLACED
[ Toface f>. 1 56

GREAT COLLECTORS
is this second collection which formed the germ of
the existing Bibliotheque Mazarine. Many of the
books are bound by Le Gascon, and disclose the
Cardinal's hat, glittering on red or olive morocco.
Cardinal Richelieu, the predecessor of Mazarin, was
also a noted collector, as was Jean Baptiste Colbert,
the oppressive minister of the king in later days.
His bindings disclose the emblem of an adder on
a shield surmounted by a crown. It is said that
Colbert did not read his books. Perhaps he collected with the intention of reading them some
day when the cares of State should become less onerous. Be that as it may, he had one of the
finest private libraries in Europe. All the ambassadors of France looked out for him. Of the
books in the library of Moliere, a mighty hunter
who searched the bookstalls at first hand, but a
single example is said to remain, the " De Imperio
Magni Mogolis," printed by the Elzevirs in 1631.
This is one of the set known as
" The Republics,"
and from a pencilled note seems to have cost
Moliere "
i livre 10 sols." Moliere's library consisted of about 350 volumes, as the catalogue
formed by M. Soulie discloses. The Abbe Cotin,
who figures in one of Moliere's plays, was likewise a collector, though of a different stamp. His
books are decorated with the interlaced C's.
The three forsaken daughters of Louis XV,
poor
" Graille," " Coche," and " Loque," had their
favourite books bound in citron, red and olive
moroccos, each her own colour, while the bindings
of Madame de Pompadour show her arms with the
three castles repeated in each of the corners, or on
a silver shield. All these ladies were collectors of
repute, as also was the Comtesse de Verrue,
157
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
daughter of Charles de Luynes, who had a library
of 18,000 volumes, bound by the greatest binders
of the day, placed carefully in velvet-lined, ebony
bookcases. The books of Marguerite d'Angouleme,
covered with golden daises, and those of Marie
Antoinette, showing her cipher, are sometimes to
be met with, as also are those of Nicholas and
Charles Louis Fouquet, showing a squirrel and
the motto " Quo non Ascendam."
Every one of course knows Charles Nodier, who,
though by no means a rich man, would pay, or owe, anything for a book, and recoup himself, when
compelled to do so, by selling other books from
his store. He had three libraries, but not a copy
of Virgil in any of them. Like Earl Spencer, whois credited with having bought the famous library
of the Duke of Cassano with the primary object of
acquiring an edition of Horace printed in 1474,
which he could not meet with elsewhere, Nodier
was, as we have already mentioned, haunted by
a book which continually eluded his grasp. Hewould have given anything in exchange, or paid
anything, for a clean, uncut copy of the " right
"
Virgil with the misprint and two passages in red,
but it is said that he could not obtain it, and so
preferred to do without a Virgil at all. Theparticular edition he wanted, and perhaps never
got, was printed at Leyden by Abraham Elzevir
in 1636. There is more than one issue of that
date, but the scarce one has a misprint on page 411,
and part of the letter to Augustus, before the
Bucolics " Ego vero frequentes a te literas accipio," etc., is not in black, but in red. The second
indispensable red passage occurs on page 92
" Si mihi susceptum," etc. A copy of the " right
" 158
GREAT COLLECTORS
issue could be got now with comparatively little difficulty. A tall copy sold by auction in April 1 902
for ii y and another copy, less "tall," for $ a
little time before.
French collectors of later times were, indeed, so numerous, that it is impracticable to do more than
just mention a few of the most prominent among
them. Longepierre, who stamped his covers with a golden fleece, is as well known as, but perhaps, on the whole, more highly esteemed than Guilbert
de Pixer^court, the book-lover and playwright, who
founded the Societe des Bibliophiles Fran9ais. He
was a great Elzevir collector, and when the Theatre
de Gaiet6 was burned down in 1835, and he found
himself ruined, his first thought was to pack up
his books and remove them from the reach of his
creditors. M. Paul Lacroix kept them safely for
him till the arrival of happier days.
Napoleon I was the last Imperial collector of
France. Barbier, his librarian, used to keep him
supplied with books in whatever part of the world
he might be, and even his travelling carriage was
fitted up with shelves. Napoleon was a great
reader, and no book failing to stand the test of
his critical judgement ever saw Paris again; he
would unceremoniously throw it out of the window
as his carriage rumbled along the road. Junot, one of his most trusted generals, was also a booklover; he is said to have confined his attention to
books printed on vellum, and even to have had
books specially printed for him on that material.
Mr. Salt Brassington mentions a French collector, 1'Abbe Deseuil or Du Seuil, who is supposed to have been his own binder, though he does
not appear to put much faith in his existence.
159
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
Deseuil lived, if indeed he lived at all, during the
last years of the seventeenth century and the beginning of the eighteenth, and, according to the
popular belief, bound his books in red moroccowith the figure of a vase in each angle. Popementions him in his " Moral Essays":
"These Aldus printed; those Duseuil has bound."
and his name frequently appears in the catalogue
of the Comte de Brienne's sale (1724). In the
Beckford catalogue (1882) there was a copy of
Macrobius, printed at Leyden in 1670, said to havebeen bound by Deseuil ; it brought ^39, though
another copy in its original vellum realized less
than 2os. In the library of the late Professor
Corfield, a work by Mercerius, quoted as
" DeConscribendo Epigrammate," Parisiis, 1653, wasdescribed as being bound by Deseuil. It disclosed a fine tooling of arabesques within a large panel,
the outer compartment being similarly decorated.
Whether such a collector and binder lived or not,
the books he is supposed to have accumulated can be identified by the device on their covers and are very expensive.
English collectors, though numerous enough in
the aggregate, do not seem to have been movedby the same force of enthusiasm as the French,
and with but comparatively few exceptions did
nothing to ear-mark, so to speak, the books they
acquired. The England of the twelfth century is described as being a paradise of scholars, but the
first English book-hunter of eminence seems to
have been the Richard de Bury, of whom wehave spoken on several occasions. He had morebooks than all the other Bishops in England
1 60
GREAT COLLECTORS
put together; the floors of his house at Auckland
were strewn with them so that visitors had to
take care lest they should trip and fall. The
great English book-collectors of the earliest times
were, however, monarchs for the most part. The
books of Edward IV were bound in silk and
velvet, as were those of Henry VII; some from
the library of the latter king are in the British
Museum, but they have been rebound. Henry
VIII added to his father's library, being assisted
by his librarian, the celebrated antiquary John
Leland, who rescued at least some books from the
tender mercies of the Reformers. Queen Catherine
Parr was a collector, and a few of her books in
embroidered bindings still exist. Edward VI had
a good library, now in the British Museum for the
most part, and in his time the Earl of Arundel
acquired many books, binding them in fine leathers,
disclosing a white horse on a centre medallion.
Queen Mary too had her library ; she had her
books bound in velvet of various colours, gorgeous
in the extreme. The use of velvet for purposes
of binding books continued till about the end of
the sixteenth century, when other material gradually supplanted it. Many of the volumes collected
by Elizabeth were bound in velvet. Elizabeth was
a great lover of books, and frequently employed
her needle to embroider the covers. The mention
of this Queen conjures up the memory of Robert
Dudley, the great Earl of Leicester, who had a
collection of books showing his initials on the covers and his device, the bear and the ragged
staff. Needless to say, James I was a great bookman ; he was fond of velvet bindings, but also
used morocco, as did his son, Prince Henry, who
161 M
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
acquired a part of Cranmer's library. Charles I was not much of a collector; when Prince of Waleshe seems to have had some of his books boundwith his arms and initials " C. P." The books ofCharles II are all in solid, ornamented bindings,disclosing two Cs, crowned, within a wreath oflaurel. Books from his library, as from those ofJames II, William of Orange, and Mary hisQueen, are in the National Collection. The ac-companying illustration discloses a binding ofItalian calf with the arms of the Old Pretenderwho was also a collector. This book was at onetime in the Library of the Cardinal of York.Books that once belonged to English royalcollectors are very seldom met with in privatehands. The late Mr. Henry White, of Queen'sGate, had several. A Common Prayer Book, 1636,folio, from the library of Charles I, beautifullybound by S. Mearne, with the Royal Arms in thecentre, realized 61 at his sale in 1902. KingJames I's copy of the " Tragoediae" of Aeschylus,printed by Stephanus in 1557, small 410, perhapsbound by John Gibson of Edinburgh, brought ^13,and Queen Elizabeth's copy of Peter Viret's " DeOrigine Verbi Dei," also printed by Stephanus,1554, folio, ^15 i os. The late Professor Corfieldhad many books from the libraries of Edward VI,James I, Charles II, Queen Anne, and othermonarchs.
In a later chapter we give a list of all the moreimportant sales by auction that have been held inEngland during the last hundred years, and thenames ofmany noted book-collectors whose librarieshave been dispersed are disclosed in it. Some collections are, however, still intact, as that of Bishop162
BINDING OK ITALIAN CALK, WITH THK ARMS OK THE OLD PRETENDER
circa 1724
\Tofacep. 162

GREAT COLLECTORS
Moore, who has been called the " father of blackletter collectors." The Bishop accumulated some
30,000 volumes, which were secured by George I, and are now in the library of Cambridge University. Harley bought the manuscripts collected
by Sir Symonds d'Ewes; and the whole collection, comprising some 7,600 volumes, exclusive of
legal documents, is in the British Museum. The
library of the Duke of Bridgewater, now in the
possession of the Earl of Ellesmere, the fine
library at Chatsworth, the Spencer collection now
at Manchester, the Huth Library, and a number
of other collections have so far remained intact.
Elias Ashmole's Library, which includes the collections of William Lilly and John Booker, the
astrologers, is in the Ashmolean Library at
Oxford.
The Bodleian was founded in 1445 DY Humphrey,
Duke of Gloucester, son of Henry IV, and Regent
of England during the minority of Henry VI, but
its real founder, by the great bequest he made to
it, and after whom it is named, was Thomas
Bodley, who was born at Exeter in 1545. Sir
Robert Cotton's library also exists, though many
of his books were badly damaged in the fire at
Ashburnham House in 1727. The library of
Robert Harley, Earl of Oxford, bound principally in red morocco, showing the device of a
pineapple, still exists in part, though Osborne,
the bookseller, bought the printed books for
,13,000 and sold them for small sums. His catalogue, known as the " Bibliotheca Harleiana," was
prepared by Dr. Johnson and Oldys in collaboration. Dibdin gives a summary of the collection in
the " Bibliomania," and remarks that many of the
163
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
books were priced at as many shillings as wouldhave realized pounds in his day. Osborne oncemade a bargain with a collector, David Papillon,
who died about 1 763, that he would supply him with8,000 different books, all perfect, at a uniform price
of $d. each. At first he had no difficulty, but afterwards he was glad to have the agreement cancelled,
for he had perforce been delivering books worthmuch more than $d. each.
Sir Kenelm Digby's fine library was dispersed in
1680, though he gave one of his collections to theBodleian. The library of the Earl of Sunderland,one of the most noted collectors of the eighteenthcentury, was sold by auction in 1881-2 ; in fact, mostof the old collections, the royal libraries excepted,found their way, sooner or later, to the auction rooms.That seems indeed to be the certain fate of almostevery English library, and it must be rememberedthat when once these collections are dispersed, it
is often a very difficult matter to identify the booksagain. It is not, and never has been, the practice
in this country for private collectors to bind their
books in the distinctive style of a Grolier or a DeThou, or in any special manner. The most theyhave ever done is to write their names on the fly
leaves or title-pages, as did Bradshaw, the regicide, or in later days to paste bookplates withinthe covers. To this rule there have, of course,
been exceptions. The Earl of Leicester used his
badge, and so also did the Earl of Arundel, as wehave seen, and Thomas Hollis, the antiquary,
employed many different devices. The last-namedseems to have been imbued with the spirit of theFrench collector, as he existed in the days of Dianede Poitiers. His method only varied. He had his
164
GREAT COLLECTORS
books bound in calf of various colours, and upon
each placed an emblem suitable to the character
of the work. Did it treat of philosophy, he would
enlist the owl ; of medicine, the wand of ALscula.-
pius ; of eloquence, the Caduceus of Mercury.
That book, treating of gladiatorial combats, has
the short Roman stabbing-sword or the net of the
Retiarius; and this history of the Egyptian mysteries, the lotus, or sacred grasshopper. Hollis
died in 1774, and it is curious that from that time
the love of books in England seemed to wane, till Dibdin and the Roxburghe sale spurred it into full vigour once more.
CHAPTER XI
AUCTION SALES AND CATALOGUES
The first book auctions Prices of books Knowledge of
their value essential Books of reference Auction statistics and catalogues Alphabetical list of the principal book sales held from 1800 to date Fluctuation in prices The extent of
the demand rules the price Booksellers' catalogues The
principles of valuation Books as an investment. BOOK
auctions, though now of everyday
occurrence, were until comparatively recent
times quite unknown. In the early days most
private collections appear to have been sold en bloc. What seems to us an obvious method of disposing
of books where a speedy settlement is desired, the
alternative being, of course, a private sale of a few
books at a time, or more commonly of the entire
collection, was not thought of before the Elzevirs
sold by auction, in their house at Leyden, the
libraries of the learned George and John Dousa.
This was in 1604, and the success of the ex- periment led the same printers to conduct other
notable sales in the same way, that of the library
of John Rutgers in 1633 among the number.
In England, book auctions were commenced in
October, 1676, by William Cooper, a bookseller,
carrying on business at the sign of the " Pelican
" in Little Britain, who in that month dispersed the
library of Dr. Lazarus Seaman. The catalogue of
this first sale of books ever held by auction in this
1 66
AUCTION SALES
country is extant, and the prices of the books
realized then, when contrasted with what would
be obtained for them now, are calculated to make
the enthusiastic book-hunter wish he could set
back the clock so as to be able to secure, for
example, Eliot's Indian Bible for iqs., and the
Editio Princeps of Homer for 8s., to say nothing
of numerous American books and tracts, now
worth more than their weight in gold, for the price
of an old song. It must be remembered, however,
that the difference in the purchasing power of money
being taken into consideration, the value of books
as a whole is not increasing, but rather the reverse ; indeed some classes of books, notably ordinary
editions of the Greek and Latin Classics and of
Theological Treatises, can now be got for a fourth or fifth of the amount they would have realized a hundred years ago. Modern editions of ordinary
standard works are also cheap enough, but there
are, on the other hand, some books which are in- creasing in value with each succeeding year. These
are, for the most part, first or very early editions
of celebrated works, and books produced by the
early printers of our own and other countries,
especially those which contain illustrations, or are bound by celebrated binders.
This reference to prices was, as stated in the first chapter, extremely distasteful to collectors of the
old school those sober-minded, earnest, and for
the most part well-endowed bookmen of a century
ago, or even less, of whom John Hill Burton was a
type. They were saturated with the idea that the
book-lover had no concern with the cost of his
treasures, and that money and all considerations
relating thereto were distinctly subordinate to the
167
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
main principle to which they devoted their time and
energy. Those days have, however, almost gone,
and although no book-lover worthy of the namebuys a book simply because he thinks it cheap at
the price, and hopes to make a profit upon it in the
future, he is compelled, in most cases at any rate,
to adapt himself to the circumstances in which he
is placed and to do as others do. To pay too muchfor what, after all, is but a temporary possession, and
to leave those who follow us in the race of life the worse off for our indifference or negligence, has
come to be regarded as an exhibition of selfishness,
far outweighing that " gentility of tradition
" which
was at one time the guiding principle in matters
of the kind. It is no small satisfaction to know,
therefore, that books which are necessary to possess
have never been cheaper than they are now, andthat the more celebrated the work the less it costs to
procure. A good and useful library may be formed
for a comparatively small sum ; for vastly less than a good collection of pictures, prints, or coins. But
the book-lover to whom money is of some account,
and who regards literature as the primary object
of his desires, must make up his mind to do without such rarities as the quartos of Elizabethan
dramatists, and to read what they have written in
another and more modern form.
Part of the " stock in trade," so to speak, of
every collector of the present day, is an intimate
knowledge of the value of books, apart altogether
from any considerations of intrinsic merit, so that
he will be able to follow the fluctuations which
are continually taking place, and make sure that
those he buys are acquired at a reasonable
cost. Of course a knowledge of the details of old
168
AUCTION SALES
sales, like those of the seventeenth century of
which we have spoken, will be of no assistance to
him, but rather the reverse. He needs something
precise, accurate, and up-to-date for the difference
in the value of a book at various periods is often
immense. We reproduce a page from the Catalogue of the Duke of Roxburghe's sale in 1812,
with the prices marked. Such sums for such
books would now be regarded as ridiculously small.
Should the collector think therefore of buying any
particular volume he should be in a position to
ascertain what a similar copy has sold for by
auction during the last twelve months or at some
earlier, yet near period, so as to be not altogether
at the mercy of those who are ready to sell it to
him. This information can be got from " Book
Prices Current," an annual record of the prices at
which books have been sold, founded in 1887 by
the writer of this short treatise, and still in progress. Every book of importance which has been
sold by auction in London and the provinces
from 1887 to the present time will be found duly
recorded in this work, year by year, with a state- ment of its condition and binding and the name
of the person who bought it. In America a similar
publication has been issued annually for about ten
years under the title of " American Book Prices
Current." It deals with American sales only, just as
" Book Prices Current
" proper, deals with English
sales, and the two works together cover such a wide field that there is no longer any excuse for
serious mistakes such as were at one time a fre- quent source of annoyance and loss to the collector. Quite recently a rsum of these two
works, together with reports of earlier sales than
169
Dramatic Poetry*
3809 Shakspeare's Much a-doc about Nothing," 1st. Ed. 4to. 1600 J
3810 by Kcmble, 8vo. *
A- 1799 f 6811
-
Midtoinmer NightV Dreame, 1st. Ed. 4to.
iA. 1600 o 3812 by Col roan, 8vo. /
ib. 1768
4
3813 - Merchant of Venice, 1st. Ed. 4to. r
tA. T. *%, 1600 <X
3814
-4to. ib. J. Roberts, 1600 . 38J5 jew of Venice, by Ld.Landsdowne, 4to. ib. 1701 J 38 16 Merchant of Venice, by Kemble, 8vo.
i A. 1797 k&
3317
-altered, 8yo. Jl/</. 1802 1 3 3818
-All's Well ibat Ends Well, by Kemble, 8*0, Land. 1793 Is. 3819 Catherine and Petruchio. by Garrick, 8vo. . , iA. 1755 7
s 3820 --Florizel and Perditta,-by Garrick, 8vo. ib. 1758 7&
3821
-
Sheep Shearing, 8vo. - it. 1777 L>t 3822
-Winter's Tale, by Kemble; Svo. ib. 1 802 5s
3823
-
Comedy of Errors, Cy Thos. Hull, Svo. ib. 1793 / s 3824
-
Macb<?th, by Sir W. D'Avenant, 4to.
ib. 1674
&OZH -
Ofi<7/V _.
AUCTION SALES
are noticed in either, has been published by
Messrs. Dodd, Mead and Co., of New York.
There is, however, an historical side to this
question of money value, and it is more often in
evidence than might be supposed even in matters
of practical application. It is quite a common
practice, for example, for the cataloguer of some
contemporary sale to refer to another sale long past
as evidence of the value of some book he enters on
his list. He will very frequently say : " A fine
copy of this scarce book realized ^150 at the
Daniel sale," or
" the only other copy on vellum
known was sold at the Perkins' sale for 60,"
and so on and so on. Both these sales and many
others of first class importance were held before
" Book Prices Current " was established, and in
this dilemma no other course is open, if it is wished to check the statement, but to consult the
catalogues of the sales themselves. The cataloguer
has them in his working library, all priced, and not
infrequently indexed, and knows exactly where to put his finger upon any entry he may require. The
ordinary collector has no such facilities ; he may
not even know when such and such a sale took
place, or indeed anything about it. He will, of
course, turn up the volume he wishes to know
something about in Lowndes' " Bibliographer's
Manual," and may find there a reference to one or more prices that have been realized for it in times
past, or if it is a foreign printed book he may turn
to Brunei's " Manuel du Libraire" with the same
object, though neither one book nor the other
supplies him with the same details as to condition
and binding which are confidently expected from
a properly drawn catalogue, and which frequently
171
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
make an immense difference in the market value
of two copies of the same work.
The catalogues of nearly all important book
sales held during the last fifty years or more can be seen at the British Museum Library, but in
order to procure them without unnecessary delay
the dates when the sales were held, and the namesof the auctioneers, should be known, and it is just
this information which is most troublesome to
acquire. It is not of much use knowing that a
certain book was in the Sunderland collection,
and that it realized a certain sum when that fine
collection was disposed of, without at the sametime being able to say in what year the sale took
place. A great deal depends upon that. Booksrise and fall in the market, not with the spasmodic
energy of stocks and shares, but still they fluctuate,
and the same book which realized i forty years
ago, might bring much more or much less to-day.
In practice, sales held prior to that of the Duke of
Roxburghe in 1812 are not quoted by the cataloguers, indeed they do not as a rule go so far
back as that. Still, for purposes of ready refer- ence we give a list comprising the principal sales
by auction held since the commencement of the
nineteenth century to the present time, with the
year of sale, and the name of the auctioneer; the
approximate sum realized in each instance is also
given. The names within brackets are those of
the auctioneers.
Ashburnham (Earl of), Part I 1897 (Sotheby) 30,150
Ashburnham (Earl of), Part II 1897 (Sotheby) 18,650
Ashburnham (Earl of), Part III 1898 (Sotheby) 13,900
Ashburton (Lord) 1900 (Sotheby) 6,200
Astle (Edward) 1816 (Evans) 2,360
172
AUCTION SALES
Auchinleck Library, The
Aylesford (Earl of) Bateman (W. & T.)
Beckford (William)
Beckford (William), Parts I & II Beckford (William), Parts III &
IV
Berri (Duchesse de)
Berwick (Lord)
Bindley (Jas.), Part I Bindley (Jas.), Parts II & III Bindley (Jas.), Part IV
Blake (William), Works by. See Crewe, Earl of Blenheim Library, The. See Sunderland Library, The
Brand (Rev. J.), Part I Brand (Rev. J.), Part II Bright (B. H.)
Broadley (John), Part I Broadley (John), Part II Brodie (Sir T. D.)
Buckingham (Duke of). See Stowe Library, The
Buckley (Rev. W. E.), Part I Buckley (Rev. W. E.), Part II Burra (J. S.) Cambridge (Duke of) Carmichael (Sir T. D. G.)
Chalmers (Geo.), Part I Chalmers (Geo.), Parts II & III Comerford (James)
Corfield (Dr. W. H.). Consisted
almost exclusively of rare bindings Corser (Rev. T.), Parts I-VIII Crawford (Earl of) Crawford (W. H.). See Lakeland's Library
Crewe (Earl of)
Crossley (James), Parts I & II
Currer (Miss R.)
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
Daniel (George)
Dent (John)
Dillon (John)
Edwardes (Sir H. H.)
Edwards (Jas.), Part I Edwards (Jas.), Part II
Ellis (G. Hold)
Fielding (General)
Fonthill Library. See Beckford
(W.)
Fountaine (Sir A.) Fraser (Sir W. A.)
Gaisford (Thos.)
Gardner (C. Dunn)
Gennadius (Jno.)
Gibson (Craig), Parts I-III Gosford (Earl of) Gough (Richard)
Guilford (Earl of), Parts I-VI
Hailstone (Edw.), Part I Hailstone (Edw.), Part II
Halliwell-Phillipps (J. O.)
Hamilton (Duke of) Hanrott (P. A.)
Hardwicke (Lord Chancellor)
Hartley (L. L.), Parts I-III Haslewood (Joseph)
Heber (Richard), Parts I-XIII
Hibbert (Lieut.-Col.)
Hibbert (Geo.)
Hoare (Sir R. Colt)
Hope (Adrian)
Hopetoun (Earl of) Hurd (Philip)
Inglis (J. B.)
Jersey (Earl of). See Osterley
Park Library, The
Laing (Dr. D.), Parts I-IV
Lakeland's Library, The
Lansdowne (Marquis of)
Larpent (Baron)
Libri (Gulielmo)
174
AUCTION SALES
Mackenzie (J. M.)
Macready (W. C.)
Makellar (Rev. W.)
Malone (Edw.)
Merly Library, The. See Willett. Mexborough (Earl of) Morris (Wm.)
Nicholl (J. B.), Parts I & II North (John), Parts I-III Osterley Park Library, The
Ouvry (Jas.) Perkins (F.) Perkins (Henry)
Pickering (William)
Person (Richard)
Reed (Isaac)
Roscoe (Wm.)
Roxburghe (Duke of) Scott (John)
Seilliere (Baron)
Sneyd (Rev. Walter)
Stanley (E. J.) Steevens (George)
Stourhead Library, The. See Hoare (Sir R. Colt)
Stowe Library, The
Strawberry Hill Library, The
Sullivan (Sir E.), Parts I & II Sunderland Library, The, Part I Sunderland Library, The, Part
II Sunderland Library, The, Parts III-IV Sunderland Library, The, Part V
Sussex (Duke of)
Sykes (Sir Mark)
Syston Park Library, The
Talleyrand (Prince)
Taylor (Geo. W.), Parts I & II Thorold (Sir J. H.). See Syston
Park Library, The
Thorold (Sir J. H.)
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
The (Sir W.) 1874
Towneley (John), Part I 1814
Towneley (John), Part II 1815
Towneley Hall Library, The 1883
Townshend (Marquis) 1812
Turner (Dawson) l &53
Turner (R. S.), Parts I & II 1888
Utterson (E. V.) 1851
Walpole (Horace). See Strawberry Hill. Walton Hall Library. See Hail- stone (Edward)
Weaver (H. B.), Part I 1897
Weaver (H. B.), Part II 1898
White (Henry) 1902
Wilbraham (R. W.) 1898
Willett (Ralph) 1813
Wodhull (M.) 1886
Wright (William) 1899
York (Duke of) 1827
Young (Arthur) 1896
(Sotheby) 20,000
(Evans) 5,800
(Evans) 2,700
(Sotheby) 8,700
(Sotheby) 5,700
(Sotheby) 4,500
(Sotheby) 16,200
(Sotheby) 5,500
(Sotheby)
(Christie)
(Sotheby)
(Sotheby)
(Sotheby)
(Sotheby)
(Sotheby)
(Sotheby)
(Sotheby)
1,050
5,5
1 8, 100
3,200
13.50 11,900
8,700
5.7oo 4,800
That this list will be found useful on occasion
there can be no doubt. As to the sales held duringthe seventeenth century reference should be madeto " Book Auctions in England" (1676-1700), byMr. John Lawler, Sotheby's chief cataloguer, whilea great deal of information can be gathered fromMr. H. B. Wheatley's
" Prices of Books," publishedin 1898. This last-named work, which like Mr.Lawler's book is practically indispensable, contains a short chapter on auction sales of the eighteenth century, a period generally neglected. Someof the more important sales named in the abovelist have also been dealt with in detail by Dibdinin his " Bibliomania."
It must not be supposed, however, that old booksales afford any practical evidence of the present
value of any of the works disposed of. They are 176
AUCTION SALES
useful to consult from an historical standpoint but answer no other purpose, for the catalogues are
not, as a rule, drawn in the elaborate manner now
usual, while the market value of the books themselves has long since changed. Books are valued
with reference to the demand there is for them,
and that demand varies, as we have seen, from
time to time. Fluctuations are frequent and always
have been. So long ago as 1465 a vellum copy of
the " Catholicon," printed, probably by Gutenberg,
in 1460, was priced at forty silver crowns. By 1475
the value had fallen to thirteen silver crowns. This
is, of course, ancient history, but the very same
forces are in operation now. The extent of the
demand rules the price, and in order to ascertain
what that demand is, the records of recent auction
sales must be searched and, if necessary, tabulated.
The amateur book-hunter will, after a time, learn
to value any volume he may see with at least
some accuracy by assigning it to a particular
class, which is precisely the method adopted by
the booksellers themselves. There are millions of
different books in the world, and it is impossible
for any one to be acquainted with more than a
small proportion of them.
It would seem, therefore, that from a practical
standpoint the extent of any one's knowledge of the
value of books would be confined to those which,
during the course of a life more or less prolonged,
he had happened to fall across and could remember. The greater his experience the less likely
he would be to make a mistake, and experience
is, therefore, a very great factor in these matters.
It enables one to speak off-hand and with certainty
in very many cases, but not in all, and so we come
177 N
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
back to the main principle which underlies everyestimate of the market value of a book, viz., thata man must, unless he happen to know by recentexperience, assign it to some particular class hehas mapped out in his mind, and judge from thatand from the general circumstances of condition,
binding, and so forth, whether it is likely to be ofimportance, or can safely be relegated to that immense variety which is of no special interest orvalue. This is the first step and the greatest. Thesecond is concerned with degrees of rarity, importance, and value, and a knowledge of that canonly be obtained from a close study of cataloguesand sales by auction. To this there is no royalroad.
It must also be remembered that the prices
of the earliest editions of books, though constituting a very small part of a great subject, arevaluable as a test of intrinsic merit in many cases,
though, of course, other factors, as that of rarity,
have to be taken into consideration as well. Thecelebrity of an author materially affects the valueof the book he has written, but nevertheless suchbook must be difficult to acquire or that value will
be small. One other point remains to be mentioned. The beginner must not think that becausea given book is sold for a certain sum at a particular sale that it will necessarily bring the sameamount, or even near it, at another sale in whichit may happen to appear immediately afterwards.We put an extreme case of the same copy beingsold on two separate occasions at an interval ofonly a month or two. A book is apt to realize
more if it is sold in company with other books ofgood quality. When first-rate libraries are dis178
AUCTION SALES
parsed prices generally rule high, and the reason
is not far to seek; we must not conclude, therefore, that a book which realized say ^50 at the
Sunderland sale would bring as much if it were
sold again to-morrow. That sale attracted buyers
from all over Europe, and enthusiasm was as keen
as the competition. Cautious buyers avoid such
sales. They prefer to angle in less troubled waters,
and are wise.
It may be mentioned that to buy books and
keep them as an investment is seldom or never
profitable, for the interest on the money expended,
which is as effectually sunk as the principal, has
of necessity to be taken into the calculation. If money be the primary consideration, to buy anything which cannot be sold within a reasonable
time at a profit, or which does not return an
annual income, is to court a loss which becomes
greater day by day.
179
CHAPTER XII
EARLY EDITIONS AND STRANGE BOOKS
Why early editions are preferred The quality of illustrations Author's personal supervision Classes of books Tiny
volumes Examples Books printed from engraved plates
On coloured papers Books cut from paper Books on lead and palm leaves Chained books Condemned books Curi- ously written books Lord Dexter's masterpiece Macaronic
poetry Books bound in human skin Twin bindings First books on given subjects.
IT
has been mentioned, though only incidentally,
that collectors of books devote much of their
attention to early or special editions of the worksof those authors in whom they are interested.
That is emphatically the case; and one of thereasons is, that some editions, or even issues ofthe same edition, furnish grounds of preference in
respect of the paper upon which they are printed,
the printing itself, or the size. The first edition
exhibits the original thoughts of the author ; later ones the maturity of those thoughts, the difference
in language being often most marked. Should abook be illustrated, the plates in the earliest issue
will be found sharper and altogether superior to
those which appear in subsequent editions. Thus,the fine edition of the works of Moliere, printedat Paris, in six vols, 1773, is accounted all thebetter if Vol. I has the star (double) leaves ofpages Ixvi, Ixvii, and Ixxxi. In many copies of1 80
EARLY EDITIONS
Hakluyt's
" Principal Navigations," 1598-1600, the
Voyage to Cadiz, forming pp. 607-619 of the first volume is supplied by a reprint. The original has
eight paragraphs on page 607 and ends on page
619, whereas the reprint has seven paragraphs on page 607 and ends on page 620. Copies containing the original
" Voyage
" are, of course, much
superior. Many of the novels of Ainsworth were
illustrated by George Cruikshank, H. K. Browne,
John Franklin, and Gilbert, while those of Dickens,
Thackeray, Lever, and many more also contain
illustrations by the same or other artists of great
eminence in their profession. Plates which are
continually being printed from naturally become
worn in process of time, or at least that was the
case before the comparatively modern process of
" steeling
" was invented, and there is frequently
no comparison between the quality of the illustra- tions in the first edition of a book and those
which do duty in subsequent ones. All alike may
be from the same plates, but the latter have become worn, and are, in that case, no longer capable of giving off impressions of the same sharp- ness and quality. This, in itself, is a very good
reason why early editions of illustrated books
are usually preferred to later ones, and it should
be observed that in this connection the age of the
book does not affect the matter at all. Should it be three or four centuries old instead of comparatively modern, the same principle applies.
Some copies must have been printed before others,
and it is from the earliest that the best results are
expected. The reasons obtaining, in these in- stances, are eminently practical, but there is an- other side to the question, even more powerful in
181
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
its operation. It may be assumed that the author
has in the vast majority of cases seen and handled
the book for which he was himself responsible;
the very copy we hold in our hand may have belonged to him, and this personal connection invests
it with a great deal of sentimental interest, altogether apart from any practical question of excellence of production. Five editions of " The Compleat Angler" were published in Walton's life- time ; Milton supervised two editions of " Paradise
Lost," and Bunyan ten if not eleven editions of
" The Pilgrim's Progress." All these are of in- finitely more importance than the numerous later
editions, for they contain alterations in the text
made by the authors themselves, and are, therefore, of great literary value. It is possible to
trace, to some extent, the working of the author's
mind by a comparison of the wording of one edition with that of another, to understand why hemade the alterations, to enter into his thoughts,
and perhaps to appreciate his feelings.
To sum up the position it may be said that a
reference to first editions is often necessary for
the purpose of restoring an incorrect reading, andthat later editions, provided they appeared during
the lifetime of the author, are frequently as important as the first, for they may contain corrections and additions of the greatest interest andvalue. This is particularly the case with Tennyson's" Poems," which indeed illustrates thequestion
very forcibly. The edition of 1842 contains a number of selections from his " Poems, chiefly
Lyrical," of 1830 and the "Poems" of 1833, the
latter very much altered from their original form.
The second edition of the issue of 1842, published
182
EARLY EDITIONS
in 1843, contains further alterations, and the third
edition, which appeared in 1 845 , many other emendations, so that each of these books is of the greatest
importance.
It is hardly necessary to enlarge upon so obvious a position, and the collector may be sure
that when he acquires a first or indeed an early
edition of the work of some celebrated author, he
is not following a mere fashion. The thing may,
of course, be overdone, like everything else, but
that will depend entirely upon the position held
by the author in the literary world, and in the
esteem of those who read his books. It depends
only incidentally upon the number of copies
that were issued, for many a book which is very
scarce indeed, in the sense that it would be most
difficult to meet with were it for any purpose
particularly wanted, may nevertheless be worthless, or only of slight value from any standpoint.
The collector will, therefore, exercise his discretion in these matters. He should pin his faith
to the author even more than to the book, and
when he has done that, seek for the best editions
procurable, namely, those which the author has
himself sanctioned, or which, though published
after his death, are annotated, or otherwise com- mented upon by some other author who was in
touch with him, or by reason of close study
has rendered himself competent to explain his
meaning.
Collectors have at all times preferred early
editions of books, and their choice has to a very
great extent been dominated by fashion. The
English Classics ; those books which time has sanctified and placed upon the topmost pinnacle of
183
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
literary excellence, have always been favourites.
Their cost has certainly fluctuated, but no question
has ever been raised as to their importance ; their
position is assured, and they form the backbone,
so to speak, of every good general library. Thesame remarks apply to the earliest editions of the
foreign Classics, even to those in Greek and Latin,
for though these two languages seem to have lost
much of their former hold, the editiones principes
have not done so, except as to their price in the
market, as Mr. Ruskin might say, which is less
than it used to be. These classes of books are secure enough. So firmly are they established
that the principle of selection has been extended
to other books modelled upon them, and it is with
regard to these that so much uncertainty prevails.
It is not necessary to say much of those modern
books which for a time realize high prices, and
then, when fashion changes, fall away till they can be got for a fraction of their former cost. Theyhave not, as a rule, sufficient intrinsic merit to
invest them with permanent value. Books extensively advertised as being issued in limited
editions should be avoided, for no publisher
would appeal to a small audience if he were sure of a large one. Enough has been said to show the paramount
importance of early editions of really good books,
and we now proceed to point to some others of a very special kind that not infrequently attract the
attention of collectors those strange books satirized by Brandt in the " Ship of Fools," which,
though often of little importance in themselves,
attract by reason of their peculiarities. These are
for the most part curiosities, and as such may be
184
STRANGE BOOKS
thought unworthy of the sober bookman's fancy,
though some of them have been written about
before now, as for instance by Hallervord. Many
of them possess other features of more sterling
merit, and as this branch of bibliography, for such
it really is, is not often alluded to, it will be as
well perhaps to treat it rather at length.
Discussions have arisen from time to time as
to which is the smallest sized book in the world.
There are collectors of tiny books, some of them
the size of a postage stamp or less, but the most
their owners have so far been able to say about
them is that such and such a book is the smallest
they have seen. This, of course, proves nothing,
for they might at any moment be confronted with
something smaller still. Even M. Salomon of
Paris, who has or had more than 200 examples of
these microscopical curiosities, might find that he
had one too little, as indeed he did on one occasion.
It is, in fact, impossible to say with certainty which
is the smallest book, and it must be remembered
that any argument would involve a close distinction between books of the kind printed from
type in the ordinary way and those printed from
engraved plates, or produced by photographic
process.
The art of the minute has attained such perfection in all ages that a written copy of the Iliad
has been inclosed before now in a nutshell as Pliny relates, and a Mr. Toppan of New York
engraved 12,000 letters on a plate one-eighth of an inch square. To cast type of sufficiently small
size to achieve the same results is however another
and a very different matter. Thus, the well known
diminutive volumes of Schloss's " English Bijou
185
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
Almanac" were printed from engraved plates.
These small books measure about three-quarters
of an inch in height by half an inch in width
(fig. i), and consist of some thirty-seven leaves,
inclusive of several pages of music and some
portraits, one of James Fenimore Cooper the
novelist. The earlier almanacs of the series were
produced under the direction of Letitia Elizabeth
Landon, a forgotten poetess, whose sad marriage
and untimely death are known to only a few
students of Victorian literature. Some of her
poems were printed in the " Bijou Almanac " for
the first and only time, so that these tiny volumes
are of some literary importance. " The Mite "
is, on the contrary, printed from
movable type and measures f in. by f in. (fig. 2).
The "Alarm Almanac" which appeared at Paris
in 1781 is also from type and measures 18 by 14
millimetres, 25*4 of which go to the inch (fig. 3),
and then there is the " Bloem Hofje door," or
" The Court of Flowers," by C. van L., printed byB. Schmidt in Holland in 1674, which contains
49 pages, and is just one-fourth the size of an
English penny postage stamp (fig. 4).
In 1850 the historian Cesare Cantu in conjunction with the publisher Gnocchi of Milan undertook
to issue an edition of the " Divina Commedia" of
Dante, in the smallest known characters, but they
were unsuccessful. In 1870 Salmin of Padua took over the work and produced a book of 500 pages,
measuring 37 by 22 millimetres (fig. 5), a perfect
giant compared with the others we have mentioned,
but still less in size than the celebrated edition of
the " Officiolum," printed at Venice in 1510, which
measures 49 by 33 millimetres, or the " De Tran186
I
ACTUAL SIZES OF SOME OF THE SMALLEST BOOKS WITHIN A l6\IO BORDER
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
quillitate" of Seneca, printed at Leyden in 1601,
42 millimetres by 32. M. Salomon was of opinionthat he had the smallest book in the world,
" TheCourt of Flowers " aforesaid, but he was wrong,for there is one of 208 pages, each page with nine
lines and about a hundred letters, which is 9^millimetres by 6, and therefore much smaller(fig. 6). This book was printed by Salmin abouteight years ago, and contains an unpublishedletter of Galileo to Madame Cristine of Lorraine.
The very smallest Bible is, so far as we know,that printed by Messrs. David Bryce and Son ofGlasgow in 1896. It is a reduced facsimile of theOxford Nonpareil, i6mo edition, and contains 28illustrations. It has 936 pages printed on thethinnest India paper, and measures if by i^- in. Their Midget NewTestament measures very muchless, namely J in. by J- in. Among the many othersmall books which might be mentioned are Daniel's" Confession and Prayer," Bristol, n.d., " Le Petit
Bijou des Dames," printed at Paris about 1760(fig. 7), and Vind's " La Morale de 1'Enfance,"
Schmidt's " Quelques Contes," and Fe"nelon's " Fables et Allegories," all published at Paris in
1896. We also have " Small Rain upon the Tender Herb," by R. T. S. (about 1850), and "Bijouillustrations of Christ Life," both ijin. by I in.
Tilt's " Miniature Almanacs," the " London Almanack " for 1838, and the "Victoria Miniature Almanack," all 2^- in. by i^ in., Leighton's
" Rules for aHoly Life," 1833, and "The Pilgrim's Progress,"published by Frowde in 1896, of about the samesize.
Many books, large and small alike, have beenengraved throughout, instead of being set from1 88
STRANGE BOOKS
type, as, for instance, Justice's rendering of the
works of Virgil, printed at Brussels in 1757, 8vo,
Sturt's Common Prayer Book of 1 7
1 7, often met
with;
" Calliope, or English Harmony," published
in 1739, 2 vols., 8vo;
" Clio and Euterpe," 3 vols.,
8vo, 1762; and " Chants et Chansons Populaires
de la France," 3 vols., 1843. Books of this class are curious, as also are those printed on different
coloured papers, or which have whole pages
blacked out, like the Dublin edition of " Tristram
Shandy," 3 vols., 1761, which has pages 32 and
33 completely obliterated, and a curious coloured
device on page 203. The great Aldus sometimes
used azure paper for his books, and other instances are also known, as, for example, Sterne's " Sentimental Journey," printed at Paris in 1802, several
copies of which were struck off on rose-coloured
paper, and Voltaire's works, printed at Kehl in
1784-9. Twenty-five sets of the 70 volumes
which comprise this edition were printed on blue
paper. Home mentions many similar books in
his " Introduction to Bibliography," but this is, of course, a different thing from using paper of
various colours in the same volume, as seen in
Tregear's edition of " Seymour's Sketches."
Joshua Sylvester's
" Lachrymse Lachrymarum"
of 1612, the Spirit of Teares distilled for the un- timely death of the incomparable Prince Panaretus
(Henry, son of James I), is printed on one side of
the leaf only, the reverse being black. A book
printed at Paris in 1665, under the title " Nouvelle
Methode pour apprendre avec facilite les principes
de la langue Latine," is printed in black, red, green,
and brown, and Caraccioli's " Le Livre a la mode,"
a small 8vo book, dated 1 759, is printed in green.
189
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
Another, more curious still, was in the SneydLibrary. That singular volume was neither writtennor printed. Each letter had been cut out separatelyfrom a leaf of white paper in lines, but not detachedfrom the leaf, and laid on marble paper, thus ren- dering each letter distinctly legible. The spacesand margins were crowded with ornamental designs, all produced in the same way. The bookwas known as the " Passio Jesu Christi," and contained thirty-one leaves, bound in morocco withclasps of gold. It realized 7 7jr., a poor recompense for so much labour, but perhaps this was alabour of love.
Of course every book which does not conform in
appearance to the ordinary rules of book-makingis peculiar to the extent of its departure from them.We should hesitate, however, to place vellumprinted books in this category, for that materialhas been used for hundreds of years. The first book ever printed the so-called Mazarin Bible
is found on vellum as well as on paper, and theDuke of Marlborough's library had many booksprinted on vellum, all of them earlier in date than1496. Vellum is, if anything, a more legitimatematerial than paper, for it was used for manuscriptslong before paper, of the kind we now employ, wasthought of. Between 1550 and the close of theeighteenth century very few books were printedon vellum. The practice was revived in Franceby Didot, who printed some copies of his celebratedfolio Horace of 1799 on vellum, and the vellumcopies of the Aldine, Verard, and Giunta presses, as well as those of the early English craftsmen, arewell known. One book in the British MuseumLibrary is printed on leaden leaves, and has hinges190
STRANGE BOOKS
and a clasp. That certainly is a curiosity, as also are some other works in existence there and elsewhere, printed on palm and other leaves, and even upon oyster shells. An exhibition of books of this
class is on view at the time of writing in the King's
Library at the British Museum.
Books fitted with staples and chains, though
once commonly met with, are now looked upon as "strange." The chained library in Hereford Cathedral is one of the most extensive and interesting
in England. It is a genuine monastic library of
some 2,000 volumes, of which about 1,500 are in
fetters. There is another chained library at All
Saints' Parish Church, Hereford, and yet another
at Wimborne Minster in Dorsetshire. Isolated
specimens of books with chains attached are sometimes met with, and many exist in the parish
churches throughout England. Mr. William Blades
made and published a list of all he could meet with
in his well-known work, " Books in Chains," published in 1892, and other discoveries have been
made since his day, as, for instance, in the vestry
of Sleaford Church, where a small library of this
kind was unearthed a few years ago.
At one time it was the custom to suppress and
even destroy books which for any reason proved
distasteful to the authorities, and more or less ex- tensive collections of these have been made before now. No matter what precautions were taken
to prevent works of this class from reaching the
people, a few copies invariably did so, and as Mr.
J. A. Farrer observes in the introduction to his
" Books condemned to be Burnt," there is a sort
of attraction that belongs to all forbidden fruit in
books which some public authority has condemned
191
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
to the flames. A collection of works which hadmet that fate, or rather, of copies which hadescaped the common disaster, or of books writtenin prison would be of very considerable interestand importance, for the reasons of their condemnation are not infrequently intimately connectedwith the history of the country. This will beapparent after only a superficial study of suchbooks as Peignot's
" Dictionnaire Critique . . . des principaux Livres condamn^s au feu," Paris,1806, and Hart's "Index Expurgatorius Anglicanus," printed at London in 1872 and later. Thelatter book deals only with English literature, andit was on the Continent that the greatest energywas displayed in the prohibition and frequent destruction of books. A list of prohibited books is found in a decree of the Council of Rome promulgated so far back as A.D. 494. The first Indexof the Court of Rome did not appear till 1558,and the first regular Index, the foundation of theones now existing, not till 1564. In that year the"Index Tridentinus" of Pius IV appeared, asto which see the " De Papistarum Indicibus,"printed at Leipzig in 1684, where the whole matteris fully explained. The papal Indices have at onetime or another contained the names of almostevery author and scientist who has risen abovethe common level. Fire has been spoken of asthe blue ribbon of literature ; at one time no authorwho had not had at least one of his books burnedby the hangman was quite satisfied with the suc-cess he had achieved. To be ignored was and is worse than to be condemned. The first occasionon which books were burned in this country is said to have been in response to the Pope's sen-192
STRANGE BOOKS
tence against Luther, when Wolsey went in state
to St. Paul's and witnessed the destruction of
many copies of works written by the rebellious
friar. That, however, was a holocaust carried out
upon general principles rather than a distinct act
of destruction such as befell " A Supplicacyon for
the Beggars," by Simon Fyshe, condemned by a
proclamation of June, 1530. An account of the
author, and the uneasiness he caused to Cardinal
Wolsey, will be found in Wood's " Athenae Oxonienses." This seems to have been the first book burned in this country on its merits, as Provost Hely Hutchinson's " Commercial Restraints of Ireland," published in 1779, was probably the last. Between these two extremes lies an immense field, which many book collectors have
in their time successfully explored, though, perhaps, never completely traversed.
Some books are also very remarkable, not only
from the circumstances surrounding them, but
from the peculiar way in which they are written.
One of the most extraordinary works ever published in the English, or indeed in any other
language, is referred to in " Book Lore " for
October, 1886, under the title "Lord Dexter's
Masterpiece." Timothy Dexter, its author, was
born in 1743. Having amassed great wealth, he
filled his gardens with wooden statues, dressed himself like a Roman senator, and wrote several books
in defiance of every law of etymology and syntax.
One of these is known as "A Pickle for the
knowing ones, or Plain Truths in a homespun
dress." The first edition of this book is not
punctuated ; the second has some scores of lines
consisting of nothing but rows of commas, semi193 o
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
colons, colons, and notes of interrogation to beused by those readers who wish to " peper andsolt" the text for themselves. Timothy Dextercalled himself Lord Dexter, for, as he observes," Ime the first Lord in the younited States of Amercary Now of Newbury port it is the voise ofthe peopel and I can't Help it and so Let it gone." This quotation gives a good idea of theauthor's method of spelling and his disregard ofgrammar. The book may have been published asa diversion, but it is curious, nevertheless, as alsoare works containing macaronic poetry, a kindof burlesque composition in which the vernacularwords of a modern language are mixed withgenuine Latin words or with hybrids formed byadding Latin terminations. The word " macaronic"is probably derived from the Italian maccherone,meaning a blockhead. A number of works of thischaracter are catalogued in De Bure's " BellesLettres," and partly reproduced by Home in his" Introduction to Bibliography." There are notmany English macaronic works. Examples arefound in the " Bardomachia " and in the " Epistola Macaronica," both by Mr. Geddes.
Mr. Andrew Lang mentions in " The Library," abook in the possession of the celebrated astronomer,M. Flammarion, which is bound in human skin,and this brings us to a phase of the subject which,though perhaps not of widespread interest, is yetof sufficient importance to warrant a passing notice.Books bound in human skin are not so scarce asmight be supposed, though they are naturally byno means easy to acquire. Furthermore, a greatdeal of discretion has to be exercised before abinding of this kind can be accepted for what it 194
STRANGE BOOKS
purports to be, as there is very little difference
between human skin and calf skin, when both are tanned. No doubt many of the books said to be
bound in human skin are really in calf, and would
prove to be so if examined under the microscope.
Still, some are genuine, as, for instance, that volume
in the Athenaeum Library, Bury St. Edmunds,
bound in the skin of Corder, the Red Barn murderer, and the two volumes at Marlborough House
bound in leather prepared from the skin of Mary
Patman, a Yorkshire witch, who was hanged for
murder many years ago, and the volume bound in
the skin of George Cudmore, who was hanged in
1830. M. Flammarion's book is also genuine ; he
had admired the skin of a beautiful countess, who
bequeathed it to him when she died. This he used
for binding a copy of his own work, the " Ciel et Terre," according to the directions accompanying
the gift. A curious legacy this. It is also narrated
that Dr. Askew caused a book to be bound in human skin for the payment of which he was sued
at law.
There are indeed many curious books which are
attractive by reason of their peculiarities, and these
are perhaps more properly regarded as
" freak
" books, than as volumes of literary interest. Many
of them, however, possess literary value also,
and a great deal of discrimination has to be exercised in any case, since many excessively scarce works are also curious in no small degree curi- ous in themselves, in the way they are bound,
or in some other respect. Some of the copies of
Fox's " History of the Early Part of the Reign of
James the Second" were sold by Jeffrey the bookseller in covers made of fox-skin, while the 1611
195
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
edition of George Turbervile's " Booke of Faulconrie or Hawking" was bound, in part at least,
in the skin of the deer. Books purporting to bebound in wood, cut from the timber of celebrated
ships, e.g., the Royal George, or the produce ofsome tree famous in history, come within the samecategory, and sometimes the form of the binding,
apart altogether from the material used, is calculated to arrest attention. Only the other day wesaw a Testament and Prayer Book bound togetherA TWIN BINDING, OR BINDING DOS A. DOS
with their positions reversed, showing what the
owner termed a "twin binding"; a style difficult
to describe, and not very usual. A sketch of the
binding is here given, and will afford a clearer idea
of what is meant than any explanation in wordscan possibly do.
It must not be supposed that we have exhausted-what may be called the vagaries of collectors, or pointed to more than a small number of the directions in which they may choose to take their steps.
Many others lie open or await discovery. There196
STRANGE BOOKS
are, as we all know, many collectors of editions of
some particular work, while those who have accu- mulated "first books" on given subjects, or of a
certain class, are not by any means few in number.
The latter affect such works as Butler's " Feminine
Monarchic," disclosing, so far as is known, the
earliest attempt to introduce phonetic spelling, the
" Polygraphia
" of Trithemius, 1518, the first work
on secret writing; Christopher Saxton's "Maps of
England and Wales," 1579, our earliest collection
of maps; Sir Thomas Elyot's
" Dictionary," 1538,
distinguished as being the first Latin and English
dictionary published in England; Jonathan Hulls'
" Description and Draught of a new invented
machine for carrying vessels out of or into Harbour," 1 73 7, containing the first practical suggestion
for a steamboat which ever appeared in print, and
the " Belli Catilinarii et Jugurthini Historise" of Sallust, printed at Edinburgh in 1 739 by William Ged,
a goldsmith of that city, celebrated as the inventor
of stereotype printing which he here employed for
the first time. To pursue the subject, it may be
mentioned that the first book containing a preface
is supposed to be the " Aulus Gellius
" printed by
Sweynheym and Pannartz in 1469, the same year
in which their " Apuleius" appeared the earliest
book containing marginal notes. Hebrew characters were first used at Soncino in 1482 and at Naples five years later. Titles to chapters were
first used in Cicero's " Epistolae ad Familiares,"
printed by Valdarfer at Venice in 1470, and in
the same year Arnold ther Hoernen awoke, as we have seen, to the advantage of numbering the
leaves of the books he printed, and in the year
following began to use headlines. To form a 197
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
collection of books of this class, or having such
peculiarities, would be no light task, while the
knowledge necessary for the purpose would be of
a most varied and unusual character. There are many, no doubt, who will think that it might beemployed to better advantage, but that is not a
question either for them or for us. The collector
of books who prefers to stray from the ordinary
and beaten tracks and to wander where he will,
led by his own fancy and unfettered by rule, mustof necessity be possessed of originality and self- confidence not likely to desert him in whateverdirection his steps may turn.
198
INDEX
The entries in italics relate to books of reference mentioned in the text. ACHARD,C. F., Cours Elementaire de Bibliographic, 4. Aldus Manutius, in, 138. American Book Prices Current, \ 169. Ames, J., Typographical Antiquities, 123. Andrews, W. L., Roger Payne
and his Art, 143.
Ariosto, L., The "Orlando
Furioso" of 1584, 27. Arundel, The Earl of, 1 6 1 , 1 64. Ashendene Press, The, 126. Ashmole's Library, 163.
Astle, Thos., Origin and Progress of Writing, 43. Auchinleck Press, The, 125. Auction sales, 166, 172.
Australia, first book printed
in, 91.
Badier, Florimond, 139. Bagford, John, collection of
title-pages, etc., 68. Bamberg Bible, The, 85. Baskerville, John, 124. "Bay Psalm Book," The, 91. Bercula, Thomas, 122.
Berthelet, Printer and Binder,
140, 141. Bewick, Thomas, 101, 102. Bible: Collation of MS., 48;
the first dated, 86.
Bibliography, two main
branches, 2. Bilfred of Durham, a Binder,
136- Binders: Early English, 138,
140; modern English, 142. Binding: boards, 131, 134;
buckram, 134; Byzantine
style, 136; cloth, 131; Cottage style, 140; embroidered,
143; Etruscan style, 141;
Fanfare style, 138; Greek
and Roman methods, 135;
half-calf, 134; Harleian and
Roxburghe styles, 141; hu- man skin, 194; leather, 131,
134; leatherette, 135; monastic, 137; original, 9; parts or numbers, 10; Pointille
style, 139; Saracenic style, 137; strap design, 137;
"Trial" bindings, 10, 132;
velvet, silk, and brocade,
137, 161; Winchester, 140. Bindings: Armorial, 145; Corfield Collection, 133; re- storation of, 32 ; strange,
194, 195- Blades, ^.-.Biography of Caxton, 123; Books in Chains,
85, 191. Blake, William, 103. Block Books, 81. 199
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
Blount, T. P., Centura cele- brium Authorum\ 48. Bodleian Library, The, 163.
Bonelli, Cardinal, 150. Bonnardot, Essai sur Part de
Restaurer, 32. Bookbinding, on, 129. Book : earliest dated, 86 ; earli- est printed, 85; illustration in England, 89, 99; judging
the age of a, 92. Book Prices Current, 169. Books and Manuscripts, relat- ive cost of, 79. Books: chained, 191; "cut"
and "uncut," 8, 29; dealing
in, 13, 167; defective, 15;
degrees of rarity of, 8; di- vision into volumes, 86;
different kinds of collections
of, 3; extra illustrated, 105;
first illustrated, 95; first on
given subjects, 197; from
engraved plates, 189; Greek
and Roman, 135; headlines
to, 27; illustrated, chiefly in demand, 104; imperfect
copies and sets of, 14; in- scriptions in, 13; large and
small paper copies, u;
modern illustrated, 105;
number of, printed prior to 1500 A.D., 78; different coloured papers, 189; lead,
wood, etc., 191 ; painting the
fore-edges, 144; pedigree of, 12, 1 48; preservation of, 28;
prices of, 6; printed on vel- lum, 190; privately printed,
127; rebound, 10, 130,
132; restoration of, 29; sizes
of, 17, 26; smallest, 185;
strange, 180, 189, 193; suppressed, 191; value of, 167,
168, 178. Borders, Ornamental, 63. Bradshaw, Henry, 12. Brassington, W. S., Art of
Bookbinding, 136. "Brothers of the Common
Life," Printers at Brussels,
88. Broughton, Hugh, "A Concent of Scripture," 100. Brunet, J. C., Manuel du
Libraire, 4, 27, 171. Burton, J. H., The Bookhunter, 13. Bury, Richard de, 160; Philobiblon, 13. Byron, Lord, "English Bards
and Scotch Reviewers," 52.
Cambridge, printing at, 90. Canevari, Demetrio, 150. Cape of Good Hope, first book
printed at, 91. Cards, playing, 80. Cassano Library, The, 158. Catalogues, book, 166. Catchwords first used, 93. Catho, 83. Caxton, William, 88, 89.
Civil War Tracts, The Thomason collection of, 68. Classics : Greek and Latin, 5, 184; lost, 40.
Classification, Systems of, 4. Clement, David, Bibliotheque
Curieuse, 8. Coburger, Anthony, printer at Nuremberg, 87. Colbert, Jean Baptiste, 157.
Collation, method of, 26, 46. Collections of books, different kinds of, 3. 2OO
INDEX
Collector, the modern, i. Collectors: specialist, no;
the English kings, 161, 162. Colophon: definition of, 63;
the earliest, 63, 86. Columna, F., " Hypnerotomachia," 98, 104. Copinger, Dr., Supplement to Hain, 79, 122. Copperplate Illustrations, the
earliest, 100, 104. Coster, Laurenz, the Inventor (?) of Printing, 84. Cotin, L'Abbe, 157. Cotton, Dr., Typographical
Gazetteer, 70. Crane, W. J. E., Bookbinding
for Amateurs, 145. Cranmer's Library, 162. Cranz, Gering, and Friburger,
printers at Paris, 88. Cruikshanks, The, 105.
Dagaeus, a Binder, 136. Damp stains, 28. Daniel Press, The, 126. Darlington Press, The, 125. Dates, Roman letters, 76. Davenport, Cyril, English
Embroidered Bookbindings,
143- Davidson, Thomas, Printer at Edinburgh, 91. Daye, John, 123, 141. Defective books, 15. De Medicis: Catherine, 154;
Marie, 154. De Thou, styles of his bindings, i55- Deseuil, L'Abbe", 159. De Valois, Marguerite, 154. Diane de Poitiers, 154. Dibdin, T. F.: BibliotJieca
Spenceriana, 66 ; The Biblio- graphical JDecameron, 44 ; Greek and Latin Classics, 113- Dickson and Edmunds, Annals of Scottish Printing,
123. Digby, Sir Kenelm, library of, 164. Donatus, what is a, 83. Doves Press, The, 126. " Drawing Room Books," 105. Duseuil, L'Abbe, 159.
Early editions, 180. Editions de Luxe, 1 1. Edwards, E., Memoirs of Libraries, 8. Edwards of Halifax, 144.
Eliot's Bible, 91. Elzevir Presses, The, 117. England, book illustration in, 99- English Language, first book
in the, 89. Essex House Press, The, 126. Estiennes, The, 120. Eve, Nicolas and Clovis, 138, 156- Extra Illustrated Books, 105.
Fanfare Style, The, 138.
Farrer, J. A., Books Condemned
to be Burnt, 191. Fashion, changes in, 4, 5. Ferrar, Nicholas, 106. Forgeries, detection of by
reference to the paper
5
1
; Foulis, Robert and Andrew,
125. Fouquet, Charles Louis, 158. Francis I, 153. 2OI
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
French Language, first book
printed in the, 89. " Game and Playe of the Chesse," 97. Gauffering, 144. Gesner, Conrad, Bibliotheca
Universalis, 4. "
Glaire," what is, 33. Gothic Type, 93. Grangerizing, 106. Grease marks, 29. Greek Type, 113.
Grolier, Jean, 152. Guigard, J., Armorial du
Bibliophile, 146. Gutenberg, John, inventor (?) of Printing, 84, 86. Hafod Press, The, 125. Hain, H., Repertorium Biblio- graphicum, 79, 122. Half-binding, 134.
Half-titles, 66. Hannett, Jno., Bibliopegia, 32. Harley Collection, The, 163. Hart, W. H., Index Expurgatorius Anglicanus, 192. Harwood, Dr., Greek and
Roman Classics, 113. Headlines, use of, 27. Henri II, 154. Henri III, 156. Herring, C, Paper and Paper
Making, 61. Hessels, J. H., The Haarlem
Legend, 84. Hoernen, Arnold ther, 27. Holbein, Hans, 100.
Hollis, Thomas, his library, 164. Home, T. H., Introduction to Bibliography, 4, 189.
Humphreys, H. N., Illumin- ated Books of the Middle
Ages, 43. " Hyperotomachia," The, 98, 104.
Illustrations: early impressions,
181; woodcut, 95, 96. "Images of Piety," single
printed sheets, 89. Imitatio Christi, The, 128. Imperfect Books, 14. Incunabula, 78, 80, 104.
Initials, hand painted, 95. Ink, removing stains, 30, 32. Ireland, printing in, 91. Ireland, W. H., Shakespeare
forgeries, 5
1 . Ironmould, removal of, 32.
Italic type, 112.
Janin, M., L'amour des Livres, *5 2 - Jensen, Nicholas, printer at Venice, 88. Junot, General, 159.
Keffer and Sensenschmidt,
printers at Nuremberg, 87. Kelmscott Press, The, 126. Ketelaer, Nicholas, printer at Utrecht, 87. " Label " title-pages, 66. Lang, Andrew, The Library,
46. Large and small paper copies, u.
Latinized place-names, 70. Lawler, John, Book Auctions
in England, 176. Lead stains, removal of, 32. Leaves, numbering of, 27, 93. 2O2
INDEX
Leempt, Gerard de, printer at Utrecht, 87. Lee Priory Press, The, 125. Leeu, Gerard, printer at Gouda,
88. Le Gascon, 139.
Leicester, The Earl of, 161,
164. Leo X, Pope, 150. Le Roy, Guillaume, printer at Lyons, 89. Lettou and Machlinia, printers
at London, 90. Lewine, J., Eighteenth Century
Illustrated Books, 104. " Liber Studiorum," The, 103. " Liber Veritatis," The, 104.
Libraries: destruction of, 37,
39; some ancient, 39. Line engravings, 105. Literary value, 182.
Little Gidding, nuns of, 144. Longepierre and the Golden
Fleece, 159. Lorenzo the Magnificent, 150. Louis XIV, 156. Louis XV, daughters of, 157. Lowndes, W. T., Bibliographer's Manual, 123, 171. Macaronic Poetry, 194. Madan, F., Books in Manuscript, 44. Magliabecchi, Antonio, 151.
Maioli, Thomasso, 150.
Maittaire, M., Annales Typographici, 149. Mansion, Colard, printer at Bruges, 88. Manuscripts, 34; collation of, 46; collections of, in libraries, 49; imitation of, 47; judging the age of, 43, 44;
modern literary, 41; Latin and Greek, 37; monastic,
41, 45; oldest illuminated,
38. Martens, Thierry, printer at Alost, 87. Maunsell, Andrew, Catalogue
of Books, 38. Mazarin, Cardinal, 156. Mazarin Bible, The, 62, 85, 86. Mentz Psalter, The, 64, 86,
94- Mexico, Printing in, 91. Middle Hill Press, The, 125. Moliere, Jean Bapt., 157. Myllar, Andro, printer at Edinburgh, 90, 108.
Napoleon I, 159. Naude, Gabriel, 156. Nicholas V, The "Indulgence"
of, 85. Nichols, John, Literary Anecdotes, 123. Nodier, Charles, 158. Numbers or Parts, Binding of, 10. Numerals, Roman, 76.
Oil stains, removal of, 32. Oldys, W., British Librarian,
149. Olympiads, dates calculated
by, 77- Oxford Press, The, 90.
Pages, numbering of, 27, 93,
197. Palmer, S., General History of
Printing, 92. Panzer, G. W., Annales Typographid, 122. Paper: books printed on half- 2O
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS
sheets, 24; early use of, 53;
India and Japan, 55; laid and wove, 55 ; machine
made, 55; marks, 50, 56;
sizes of sheets of, 19. Papyrus, use of, 52. Papyrus Prisse, The, 37. Parchment, use of, 52. Parts or numbers, binding of, 10. " Parvus Catho," 98. Payne, Roger, 142.
Pfister's Bible, 85.
Pixe're'court, Guilbert de, 159.
Places, Latin names of, 70. Plantin Press, The, 121. Playing Cards, 80. Polidori Private Press, The,
126.
Pollard, A. W.: Early Illus- trated Books, 95 ; Last
Words on the Title Page,
65. Pointille style, The, 139. Pompadour, Madame de, 157. Presses: celebrated, no; the
earliest, 87.
Printers' marks, 108, 114-7.
Printing, the inventor of, 84. Privately printed books, 127. Private Presses, 125. Proctor, R. G. C, Index to Early Printed Books, 122. Punctuation, The semicolon,
112.
Quebec, first book printed in, 91.
Ratdolt, Erhard, 121. Raynald, Thomas, " Byrth of Mankynde," 100. Rebinding books, 10, 130, 132.
Redgrave, G. R., Ratdolt and
his Work at Venice, 122. Reed, T. B., English Letter Foundries, 125. Rees, J. Rogers, Diversions of
a Book- Worm, 147. Renouard, A. A.: Annales de rimprimerie des Aide, 113;
Annales de rimprimerie des Estienne, 121. Richelieu, Cardinal, 157. Roberts, W., Printers' Marks,
109. Rodt, Berthold, printer at Basle, 87. Rogers's
"
Italy "and " Poems,"
103. Roman type: introduction of, 93; introduction into Scotland, 91. Rood and Hunte, printers at Oxford, 90. Rooses, Max, Christophe Plantin, 121. Royal collectors, 161, 162. Roxburghe library, The, 3, 169. Rubricators, The, 62, 94.
St. Albans, printing at, 90. Sainte Maure, Louis de, 153. Sales by auction, list of, 172. " Schoolmaster of St. Albans,"
The, 90. Seaman, Dr. Lazarus, sale of
his books, 166. "Signatures," what are, 22. Sizes of books, table of, 26. Sneyd, Rev. Walter, his collec- tion of MSS., 36. Sotheby, S. L.: Principia Typographica, 8 1 ; Typography of
the Fifteenth Century, 61. 204
INDEX
Sphere, The Elzevir, 119.
Spire, Jean de, printer at Venice, 88. Stereotype printing, inventor
of, 197. Strawberry Hill Press, The,
I2 5- Sunderland Library, The, 1 64. Surface stains, removing, 31. Sweynheym and Pannartz,
printers at Rome, 88.
Tasmania, first book printed
in, 91. Thuanus. See De Thou.
" Thymage or Myrrour of the World," 96, 98. Title-page, the first, 65. Title-pages: early English, 67;
Milton's "Paradise Lost,"
69; merits of the old, 67. " Titus Andronicus," recent
discovery, 35. Tooling : blind, 137, 138; gold,
138, 141. Towns, Latin names of, 70. " Trial" bindings, 10. Type : Greek, 113; Hebrew,
197; Italic, 112; wooden,
82.
Uncial writing, 42. " Uncut," meaning of the ex- pression, 8.
United States, first printer in
the, 91.
Valdarfer, Christopher, printer
at Venice, 88. Veldener, John, printer at Louvain, 87. Vale Press, The, 126. Valuation, principles of, 178. Vellum printed books, 190. Verrue, Comtesse de, 157.
Virgil of 1636, The, 158.
Walpole Press, The, 126. Water marks on paper, 50, 56. Wheatley, H. B., Prices of Books, 176. Willems, M., LesElzevier, 117. Wood engraving, 101. Wooden type, 82. Worde, Wynkyn de, 99. Wordsworth, C., and Little- hales, H., Old Service Books,
48.
Xylography, what is, 80.
York, printing at, 90.
Zainer, Giinther, printer at Augsburg, 87, 95.
Zell, Ulric, printer at Cologne,
84, 87.
205
CHISWICK PRESS: CHARLES WHITTINGHAM AND CO. TOOKS COURT, CHANCERY LANE, LONDON.
Bell's Handbooks of the
Great Masters
IN PAINTING AND SCULPTURE
EDITED BY G. C. WILLIAMSON, Litt.D.
Post 8vo. With 40 Illustrations and a Photogravure Frontispiece, Price S.T. net each.
The following Volumes have been issued : BOTTICELLI. By A. STREETER. BRUNELLESCHI. By LEADER SCOTT. CORREGGIO. By SELWYN BRINTON, M.A. CRIVELLI. By G. MCNEIL RUSHFORTH, M.A. BELLA ROBBIA. By the MARCHESA BURLAMACCHI. ANDREA DEL SARTO. By H. GUINNESS. DONATELLO. By HOPE REA. GERARD DOU. By W. MARTIN, Ph.D. GAUDENZIO FERRARI. By ETHEL HALSEY. FRANCIA. By GEORGE C. WILLIAMSON, Litt.D. GIORGIONE. By HERBERT COOK, M.A. GIOTTO. By F. MASON PERKINS. FRANS HALS. By G. S. DAVIES, M.A. LUINI. By GEORGE C. WILLIAMSON, Litt.D. MANTEGNA. By MAUD CRUTTWELL. MEMLINC. By W. H. JAMES WEALE. MICHAEL ANGELO. By LORD RONALD SUTHERLAND GOWER, M.A. PERUGINO. By G. C. WILLIAMSON, Litt.D. PIERO BELLA FRANCESCA. By W. G. WATERS, M.A. PINTORICCHIO. By E. MARCH PHILLIPPS. RAPHAEL. By H. STRACHEY. REMBRANDT. By MALCOLM BELL. LUCA SIGNORELLI. By MAUD CRUTTWELL. SODOMA. By the CONTESSA LORENZO PRIULI-BON. TINTORETTO. By J. B. STOUGHTON HOLBORN, M.A. VELASQUEZ. By R. A. M. STEVENSON. LEONARDO DA VINCI. By EDWARD M'CURDY, M.A. WATTEAU. By EDGCUMBE STALEY, B.A. WILKIE. By LORD RONALD SUTHERLAND GOWER, M.A., F.S.A.
Others to follow. LONDON: GEORGE BELL AND SONS.
Bell's Miniature Series of Painters.
' I "*HIS Series is designed mainly to help those who, without the oppor-
\_ tunity of going deeply into the study of art, yet wish to be able to take an intelligent interest in the works of Great Masters. Each volume
contains a short sketch of the artist's life, an essay on his art, a list of his chief pictures, etc. Pott &vo, dainty Cloth covers, with 8 Illustrations, is. net each, or in limp leather, with Photogravure Frontispiece, 2S. net. NOW READY. ALMA TADEMA. By HELEN ZIMMERN. ROSA BONHEUR. By FRANK HIRD. BURNE-JONES. By MALCOLM BELL. CONSTABLE. By ARTHUR B. CHAMBERLAIN. CORREGGIO. By LEADER SCOTT. FRA ANGELICO. By G. C. WILLIAMSON, Litt.D. GAINSBOROUGH. By MRS. A. G. BELL. GREUZE. By HAROLD ARMITAGE. HOGARTH. By G. ELLIOT ANSTRUTHER. HOLBEIN. By A. B. CHAMBERLAIN. HOLMAN HUNT. By G. C. WILLIAMSON, Litt.D. LANDSEER. By W. McDouGALL SCOTT. LEIGHTON. By G. C. WILLIAMSON, Litt.D. MICHAEL ANGELO. By EDWARD C. STRUTT. MILLAIS. By A. L. BALDRY. MILLET. By EDGCUMBE STALEY, B.A. MURILLO. By G. C. WILLIAMSON, Litt.D. RAPHAEL. By W. McDouGALL SCOTT. REMBRANDT. By HOPE REA. REYNOLDS. By ROWLEY CLEEVE. ROMNEY. By ROWLEY CLEEVE. TURNER. By ALBINIA WHERRY.
VELAZQUEZ. By G. C. WILLIAMSON, Litt.D. WATTEAU. By EDGCUMBE STALEY, B.A. WATTS. By C. T. BATEMAN. WHISTLER. By MRS. A. G. BELL. OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.
" Highly satisfactory from every point of view." Westminster Budget.
'These dainty little volumes are beautifully illustrated and produced at a price which
will place them within the means of all." Ladies' Field. "
All lovers of art will revel in these delightful little books." Churchwontan. "Each volume is delightfully written and got up, a wonderful shilling's worth."
Irish Times. " The illustrations are uniformly excellent. If art is to be made popular, this assuredly is the way to do it." Pall Mall Gazette. " Exceedingly handy and pretty." Outlook. "
Written by acknowledged authorities, and illustrated with reproductions of the great
painters' works, they should prove widely useful as well as interesting introductions to any study of the respective artists' works. 'Observer.
" They are exquisite little volumes, artistically bound, and each containing repro- ductions of eight of the most representative works of the artist written of. How the publisher can produce the works at a shilling each will puzzle most book-buyers. They
are marvels of cheapness, the binding, letterpress, illustrations, and general get-up being beyond praise." Black and White. "Nothing could be better in its way than the arrangement of these booklets, of which
the letterpress is brief without boldness, and concise without obscurity. They are small
yet comprehensive. They put everything into a nutshell, and the illustrations are judiciously selected. The general get-up is eminently tasteful." Globe. LONDON : GEORGE BELL & SONS, YORK HOUSE, PORTUGAL STREET, W.C.

