Harcourt, Brace and Company, Inc. Publishers,
383 Madison Avenue,
New York.
July 18, 1929.

Mrs. Virginia Woolf,
52 Tavistock Square,
London, W.C.L.

Dear Mrs. Woolf:
        Thank you for your letter of June 30th enclosing the 
signed copy of the agreement for A ROOM OF ONE'S OWN. I am
quite willing to have you retain the Canadian rights if you wish.
        In regard to serialization, I had been doing nothing 
because I thought it was your wish to abandon the idea. In
Mr. Woolf's letter on May 16th, he said: "We will not trouble about
about serialization, but go staright ahead with publication in
book form." And besides, the manuscript back from him yesterday,
and have delivered it to The Bookman (text underlined). I ams sorry if I have
misinterpreted your wishes, but no doubt there is still time
as far as The Bookman (text underlined) is concerned.
        Meanwhile, just after I received your letter, Curtis 
Brown's office telephoned to ask if they could get the manuscript,
saying that they had a message from you to get in touch with
us about it. I believe The Bookman had already been asking
Curtis Brown. If I get further inquiries from Curtis Brown, 
I shall tell them that we are dealing with the matter by your
instructions. Of course, if it appears that the business ought
to go through Curtis Brown and the ought to have a commission,
we whould be glad to stand aside as far as any commission is
concerned and continue to do what we can dispose of the
rights.
        Mr. Wells tells me that he has made you an offer in
respect to a limited edition. If there is to be a limited
edition, we shall gladly co-operate with Mr. Wells and with
you in regard to arranging dates of publication and protection
of copyright. I hope it maybe possible for you to send
soon finally corrected proofs, especiialy if there is to be a
limited edition. If you could arrange to send duplicate final
proofs so that Mr. Wells could have one set and we could have
the other, matters would be greatly expedited.
        There is one thing about the limited edition matter
which I think I ought to mention, though I do so with some
hesitation. When I recommend the publication of a limited 
edition of ORLANDO by Mr. Gaige, my recommendation was
based on long knowledge of him and completed certainty of his
reliability. As for his successors, I ahve not the same
knowledge or the same certainity, and I should have hesitated
to make similar recommendation. Of course, you are dealing
with (unintelligible text). Wells and Adams direct, and it is probably all
right for your to take whatever risk is involved. It is
simply that I really know next to nothing about them, and that
in succeeding Mr. Gaige, they do not succeed to the complete
confidence I have in him. Pleae don't take this any more
seriously than if it is intended. 
        With kindest regards to youself and Mr. Woolf,
                                Yours sincerely,
                                Donald C. Brace.