COPY

Harcourt, Brace and Company, Inc.
Publishers,
383 Madison Avenue,
New York.

August 1, 1929.

Leonard Woolf, Esq.
52 Tavistock Square
London, W.C.l.

Dear Mr. Woolf:

	I have just received your letter of July 23rd on the subject of the limited edition of Mrs. Woolf’s A ROOM OF ONE’S OWN. I hope my cable in reply to yours explained my view of the copyright question with reasonable clearness. When I gave the manuscript to Mr. Wells, I explained that we did not agree with his view of the copyright matter and that we were making a condition that the book should be printed in this country. We had some discussion of the matter at that time, and the next I heard about it was your cable. When Mr. Wells says that he can safeguard the copyright by depositing two copies in Washington, he is, it seems to me, rather curiously evading the point. It is, of course, true that we can obtain ad interim copyright for a book by a foreign author in the English language. This is a procedure we have followed with all of Mrs. Woolf’s books and which we regularly follow with all books by English authors unless it turns out that we are publishing simultaneously. But going through this formality or going through any of the formalities of copyright doesn’t mean that the copyright is sound if it is open to attack. Our view and the view of most publishers here as far as I know is that the publication of an edition in this country from imported sheets does invalidate the copyright when such publication is made with the consent of the author or the person who controls the rights. The first step in obtaining copyright in this country is publication, and the law requires that books published in this country must be printed here in order to obtain copyright. I regard the copyright as being of more importance to you than to us, at any rate of equal importance to you. Just how important it may be, one never knows. It is probably less important in the case of a book like A ROOM OF ONE’S OWN than it would be in the case of a book where dramatic and picture rights might be involved as well as book rights. The life of copyright under our law is 56 years, and it is, of course, impossible to tell how important the matter may turn out to be during that period. We can go through the formalities of making copyright registration after

over/

2.

the publication of an important edition, and if no one ever infringes no question will ever arise, but if there should be an infringement I think our case would be a poor one because we should come into court with the burden of having violated certainly the spirit, if not the letter of the law ourselves.

	I am sure you will understand that I am not trying to be an obstruction in the matter. I certainly cannot advise you that Wells’s publishing an important edition is correct from the point of view of copyright, and also certainly he cannot “safeguard” the copyright by following the procedure of deposit and registration. At the same time I quite realize that no question may ever arise, and I therefore told you in my cable that we should make no objection if you feel like taking the risk.

	I shall look forward to the corrected proofs, and we shall plan to publish simultaneously with you on November first or preferably somewhat earlier if we can both get ready in time. +

	I have shown the manuscript to the Bookman, and they have returned it with word that they find themselves unable to use it. Their reason is that they find it impractical to pick out one or two installments and there is no time to print the whole. We shall see whether something can be done in another quarter, though of course there is not much time now.

	With kind regards,
		Yours sincerely,

			Donald Brace.

DCB:CMc

	+ Since dictating the above, I have had a talk with Mr. Wells over the telephone. He appears now to think less highly of the idea of importing sheets from you and asks whether we might let him print the copies he might require for America from our type. This privilege I should, of course, be entirely willing to give him, so perhaps the matter will work out in that way to the better satisfaction of everyone concerned.

	In regard to the date of publication, we should very much prefer the limited edition to come out practically simultaneously with our edition, and Mr. Wells says he would prefer it, too. If his edition were to come out, say, 30 days before ours, the book would get reviewed from the limited edition in certain quarters, whereas if they are appearing at

Over/


3.

about the same time, the reviews will mention both editions. I expect you will agree with this. Immediately upon receipt of the corrected proofs, we shall go ahead with all possible speed, and if Mr. Wells has fixed up with you and wants to use our type, we will release it to him as early as we can.